UNIVERSITY  OF  PITTSBURGH 


Darlington  jM.eniorial  Ldbrary 


\''-->- 


"^ 


^/ 


PENNSYLVANIA  STUDENTS'  SERIES. 


THE 


PENNSYLVANIA 


STUDENTS'  SERIES. 


VOL.  I. 


PHILADELPHIA : 

The  Historical  Society  of  Pennsylvania. 

1889. 


THE 


Pennsylvania  Students'  Series, 


Under  the  above  title  it  is  proposed  to  issue  a  series  of 
volumes  containing  material  of  interest  to  the  students  of 
Pennsylvania  history,  but  not  suited  to  the  volumes  or  maga- 
zine printed  by  the  Trustees  of  the  Publication  Fund  of  The 
Historical  Society  of  Pennsylvania. 

The  means  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  first  of  the 
series  has  been  generously  contributed  by  a  few  members  of 
the  Historical  Society,  who  desire  that  the  entire  proceeds 
arising  from  its  sale  shall  be  devoted  to  the  production  of 
works  of  a  similar  character.  The  money  will  be  placed  in 
the  hands  of  the  Treasurer  of  the  Society,  subject  to  the 
order  of  the  undersigned,  who  will  select  the  material  to  be 
printed  and  act  as  a  committee  of  publication.  Changes  in 
the  committee  will  be  made,  when  necessary,  by  the  Council 
of  The  Historical  Society  of  Pennsylvania. 

The  edition  of  the  volumes  will  be  limited,  they  will  be 
sold  separately,  and  the  price  will  be  regulated  by  their  cost ; 
that  of  the  first  of  the  series,  "A  Lenape-English  Dictionary," 
is  $3  net.  Copies  can  be  purchased  by  addressing  the 
Librarian  of  the  Historical  Society,  1300  Locust  Street, 
Philadelphia.  Checks  should  be  drawn  to  the  order  of  The 
Historical  Society  of  Pennsylvania. 

Daniel  G.  Brinton, 
Frederick  D.  Stone. 


A    LENAPE-ENGLISH 
DICTIONARY. 


LENAPE-ENGLISH 
DICTIONARY. 

From   an  anonymous   MS.  in   the  Archives   of  the 
Moravian  Church  at  Bethlehem,  Pa. 


EDITED,  WITH  ADDITIONS, 


Z^^ 


DANIEL  G.  BRINTON,  A.M.,  M.D., 

PROFESSOR     OF    AMERICAN     ARCHEOLOGY    AND     LINGUISTICS    IN    THE    UNIVERSITY    OF 
PENNSYLVANIA, 


REV.  ALBERT  SEQAQKIND  ANTHONY, 

ASSISTANT    MISSIONARY    TO    THE    DELAWARBS    AND    SIX    NATIONS,    CANADA. 


philadelphia : 
The  Historical  Society  of  Pennsylvania. 

1888. 


i  .^ 


PRESS  OF  WM.  F.  FELL  &  CO.. 

1220-1224    SANSOM    STREET, 
PHILADELPHIA. 


PREFACE. 


For  about  a  century,  beginning  with  1740,  Mission- 
aries of  the  United  Brethren,  or  Moravians,  devoted 
themselves  to  the  conversion  and  civilization  of  portions 
of  the  Lenape  or  Delaware  Indians.  These  earnest 
Christian  men  studied  the  native  tongue,  reduced  it  to 
writing,  and  printed  in  it,  for  the  use  of  their  converts, 
a  number  of  works  of  a  religious  and  educational  char- 
acter. The  history  of  their  literary  activity  in  this  lan- 
guage has  been  recently  traced  elsewhere,  in  detail,*  and 
need  not  be  repeated  here.  While  some  of  the  results 
appeared  in  type,  much  of  it  remained  in  manuscript 
until  the  curiosity  of  scientific  students  led  to  its  publi- 
cation. Thus,  in  1827,  Peter  S.  Duponceau  edited  the 
Grammar  of  Zeisberger,f  and  sixty  years  later  his  English- 
German-Onondaga-Delaware  Dictionary  was  printed  by 
the  private  liberality  of  Professor  E.  N.  Horsford.| 

These  works  of  David  Zeisberger — whose  life  found 

*  The  Lenape  and  their  Legends  ;  by  D.  G.  Brinton.    pp.  74-109  (Phila- 
delphia, 1885). 

j-  A  Grammar  of  the  Language  of  the  Lenjii  Lenape,  in  the  Transac- 
tions of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,  1827. 

X  Zeisberger' s  Lndian  Dictionary,  4to,  Cambridge,  1887. 

iii 


IV  PREFACE. 

an  able  and  sympathetic  narrator  in  the  late  Right  Rev. 
Edmund  de  Schweinitz  * — together  with  his  printed 
"  Delaware  Spelling  Book,"  were  the  chief  sources  from 
which  the  later  missionaries  drew  their  knowledge  of  the 
Lenape  dialect ;  and  unquestionably  the  present  Lenape- 
English  Dictionary  was  founded  mainly  upon  the  lin- 
guistic work  of  this  proto-Lenapist.  So  far  as  the 
history  of  the  MS.  is  concerned,  I  can  add  nothing  to 
what  was  stated  in  "  The  Lenape  and  their  Legends," 
which  is  as  follows  : — 

"  It  is  probable  that  Mr.  Dencke  was  the  compiler  of 
the  Delaware  Dictionary  which  is  preserved  in  the  Mora- 
vian Archives  at  Bethlehem.  The  MS.  is  an  oblong 
octavo,  in  a  small,  but  beautifully  clear  hand,  and  com- 
prises about  3700  words.  The  handwriting  is  that  of  the 
late  Rev.  Mr.  Kampman,  who  was  missionary  to  the 
Delawares  on  the  Canada  Reservation  from  1840  to 
1842.  On  inquiring  the  circumstances  connected  with 
this  MS.,  he  stated  to  me  that  it  was  written  at  the 
period  named,  and  was  a  copy  of  some  older  work, 
probably  by  Mr.  Dencke;  but  of  this  he  was  not 
certain."  f 

*  Life  and  Times  of  David  Zeisberger  (Philadelphia,  1871).  This 
eminent  Bishop  of  the  Moravian  Church  died  suddenly  while  the  present 
work  was  passing  through  the  press — a  loss  keenly  felt  throughout  that 
respected  Christian  body  and  by  a  large  circle  of  personal  and  literary 
friends  beyond  its  limits. 

f  The  Lenipi  and  their  Legends,  pp.  84,  85. 


PREFACE.  V 

The  Rev.  C.  F.  Dencke,  here  alluded  to,  was  mission- 
ary to  the  Delawares  at  New  Fairfield,  Canada,  for  a 
number  of  years  after  the  war  of  1812.  He  was  the 
author  of  a  grammar  of  the  tongue,  now  apparently  lost,* 
and  translated  into  it  various  portions  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament.    His  death  took  place  in  1839. 

The  MS.  of  Mr.  Kampman  was  carefully  copied  and 
enlarged  by  the  addition  of  words  from  the  MSS.  and 
printed  works  of  Zeisberger,  Heckewelder  and  Ettwein. 
These  additions  have,  in  the  printed  copies,  been  indi- 
cated by  the  capital  letters,  Z.,  E.,  and  H.  In  this  con- 
dition the  MS.  was  submitted  to  the  Rev.  Albert  Seqaq- 
kind  Anthony,  a  born  Lenape,  and  perfectly  familiar 
with  the  language  of  his  nation  as  spoken  by  that  colony 
of  it  resident  on  the  Six  Nations  Reservation,  in  Ontario, 
Canada.  In  this  colony,  the  usual  dialect  is  the  Minsi, 
and,  as  its  members  belong  to  a  portion  of  the  nation 
who  were  converted  by  missionaries  of  the  English 
Church  (to  which  Mr.  Anthony  belongs),  the  theological 
terms  developed  usually  differ  widely  from  those  framed 
by  the  Moravians. 

Mr.  Anthony  kept  the  MS.  by  him  for  some  months, 
giving  its  contents  careful  attention,  and  subsequently 
the  two  editors  met  and  passed  in  review  every  word  in 
the  Dictionary.  The  numerous  notes  and  corrections 
in  brackets,  with  an  appended  capital  A.,  are  the  emenda- 

*  A  small  portion  of  it  is  contained  in  some  MSS.  now  in  the  possession 
of  the  Pennsylvania  Historical  Society. 


VI  PREFACE. 

tions  suggested  by  Mr.  Anthony  from  the  present  stand- 
point of  the  language  and  from  the  dialect  of  his  ances- 
tral sub-tribe.  The  latter  differs  somewhat  from  that 
employed  by  the  compiler  of  the  Dictionary.  The 
grammatical  forms  employed  indicate  that  this  was  the 
Unami  (Wonami). 

No  attempt  has  been  made  to  increase  the  lexicography 
by  the  insertion  of  words  or  forms  obtained  from  the 
Delaware  of  to-day.  All  such,  when  mentioned,  are  by 
way  of  comparison  only.  It  would  have  been  easy  to 
have  extended  the  vocabulary.  There  are  evidently 
some  Lenape  radicals  and  many  themes  which  do  not 
appear  in  this  work.  But  the  editors  confined  their 
efforts  to  presenting  this  work  as  exclusively  concerned 
with  the  dialect  as  employed  by  the  Moravian  Mission- 
aries ;  and  hence,  all  additions  to  the  vocabulary  have 
been  from  their  writings. 

As  is  well  known,  the  early  Moravians  were  exclu- 
sively Germans ;  and  in  reducing  the  Lenape  to  a 
written  idiom  they  made  use  of  the  German  alphabet, 
without  adding  to  it  any  phonetic  signs.  This  alphabet 
was  not  ill  adapted  for  the  purpose.  It  could  represent 
the  gutturals  and  the  vowel  sounds  of  the  Lenape  with 
sufficient  clearness.  But  there  were  a  few  sounds,  and 
these  frequent  and  important  ones,  which  their  Germanic 
ears  did  not  differentiate. 

The  most  prominent  of  these  is  the  soft  ///,  as  in  with. 
This  is  usually  represented  in  the  Dictionary  by  s.     The 


PREFACE.  VI 1 

true  sibilant  is,  in  reality,  very  rare ;  it  scarcely  exists. 
The  soft  th  again  appears  wherever  the  Dictionary  has  an 
X ;  this  is  properly  k'tli. 

The  h  is  not  a  true  aspirate,  as  in  German,  but  rather 
a  pause,  as  in  the  French  la  Hollande. 

The  terminal  -^  is  a  strong,  suddenly-checked  expira- 
tion, which  is,  by  some  writers,  not  inaptly  expressed 
by  q'  or  q!  Instead  of  the  k,  the  Dictionary  sometimes 
employs  que,  which  appears  to  be  identical  in  sound. 

The  labial  b  is  very  like  a  /,  and  probably  alternates 
with  it  in  the  dialects. 

The  g  is  always  hard,  like  the  English  k;  the  j  has 
the  value  of  the  English  y  ;  the  compound  ey  is  like  the 
long  i  in  pine ;  the  syllables  gan  and  quan  are  pro- 
nounced alike ;  and  the  diphthong  C7i  has,  at  least  in  the 
Minsi  of  to-day,  the  value  of  o  in  note. 

By  observing  these  points  and  giving  the  remainder  of 
the  alphabet  the  German  values,  I  had  no  difficulty  in 
reading  Dencke's  translation  of  the  Epistle  of  St.  John  to 
Mr.  Anthony  with  such  correctness  that  he  understood 
it  at  once. 

D.  G.  Brinton. 


A 


LENAPE-ENGLISH 

DICTIONARY. 


A,  indeed,  well. 

Aan,  to  go ;  {aal,  in  Minsi.     A) 

Abtschi,  always ; — likhiqui,  at  all  times. 

Abtschiechgochgihillen,  to  bleed  to  death. 

Abtschihillak,   the  whooping  cough;   {aabtschihillank. 

A.) 
Abtschihillen,  to  have  the  whooping  cough. 
Abtschinalan,  to  be  afflicted  to  death. 
Abtschinalittin,  Z.,  to  die  in  battle ;  (they  kill  each  other. 

A.) 
Abtschinaluxin,    to   be  afflicted,  to   be   tormented   to 

death. 
Acheweli,  Z.,  necessary  (dub..  A.). 
Achewen,  bushy ;  a  bush,  thicket  (dub.,  A.). 
B  9 


10  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Achewiecheu,  strong,  spirituous. 

Achewon,  strong,  spirituous  ;  (archaic,  A.) 

Achgachemawachtin,  to  share  with  each  other. 

Achgahamauwan,  to  distribute  to  somebody. 

Achgahikewagan,  distribution,  division. 

Achgameu,  broad,  wide. 

Achgegenummen,  to  choose. 

Achge'gim,  to  teach,  to  instruct. 

Achgegingen,  to  teach. 

Achgegingewagan,  teaching,  information. 

Achgeketum,  £.,  a  teacher;  [Aachgekinket,  A.) 

Achgelinquoam,  to  behold,  to  look ;  (arch.,  A.) 

Achgelunen,  to  lie. 

Achgeluneuch,  £.,  a  har. 

Achgenindewagan,  accusation,  bad  report. 

Achgenindin,  to  blame  one  another. 

Achgepchoau,  to  be  deaf. 

Achgepinqueu,  to  be  blind ;  (to  be  blindfolded,  A.) 

Achgepinquot,  blind. 

Achgetaktschehellau,  to  jump  over  the  fence;  {/it.,  to 

brace  one's  self  for  a  jump,  A.) 
Achgettemagelo,  merciful. 
Achgettemakinaquot,  poorly  looking. 
Achgigihawan,  to  mock  or  laugh  at  somebody ;  (arch., 

A.) 
Achgigulan,  to  sleet. 
Achgiguwen,  to  play,  to  be  noisy,  to  be  lively,  to  be 

jocular. 


DICTIONARY.  11 

Achgiguwewagan,  sport,  pastime. 

Achgiiki,  mocking,  jesting. 

Achgikbi,  elm,  the  elm  tree. 

Achginchen,  to  be  quick  of  hearing. 

Achgindamen,  Z.,  to  count  (also,  to  read.  A.). 

Achgiuchsowagan,  drunkenness. 

Achgiwalan,  to  deceive  somebody;  (arch.,  A.) 

Achgiwalittewagan,  deceit,  fraud. 

Achgiwalittin,  to  deceive,  to  cheat. 

Achgonican,  or  Achquanican,  Z.,  a  fish  dam. 

Achgook,  snake. 

Achgiikbi,  Z.,  an  elm  tree. 

Achgumen,  dull,  cloudy. 

Achgumhok,  cloud. 

Achgumhokquot,  cloudy ;  (Ji^.,  to  be  still,  B.) 

Achgunnan,  to  clothe  somebody  ;  {achgiinha,  A.) 

Achgussin,  to  burn  the  kettle ;  (dub..  A.) 

Achibis,  to  bind  up  or  dress  a  wound ;  (dub.,  perhaps 
from  gachtun,  to  bind,  A^ 

Achkindiken,  to  read;  (achkinsmk,  to  read,  A) 

Achkiwelendam,  to  be  disquieted,  to  be  troubled  in 
mind ;  (alludes  to  harsh  occurrences,  A.) 

Achkiwitehewagan,  irresolution. 

Achochwen,  to  have  bad  travelling. 

Achowalogen,  to  labor  hard,  to  toil. 

Achowat,  hard,  difficult,  dangerous,  painful,  trouble- 
some ;  {achwat,  A.) 

Achowelendam,  to  think  difficult. 


12  lenApe-english 

Achpa'mi,  about,  thereabouts. 

Achpamsin,  to  walk,  to  walk  about, 

Achpanschi,  beam,  log  for  a  house. 

Achpateuny,  E.,  the  east  wind. 

Achpekok,  wound;  (arch.,  A)) 

Achpequot,  wounded ;  achpeqiiat,  Z.,  full  of  holes,  from 

pguihilleu,  it  has  a  hole. 
Achpin,  to  be  there,  to  be  at  home. 
Achpineen,  abode,  residence;  Z.  epienk,  where  we  are. 
Achpiney,  place  to  sleep  on ;  achpinink,  a  bed,  Z. 
Achpi'que,  flea. 

Achpiquon,  flute,  fiddle  (any  musical  instrument,  A)j. 
Achpitawan,  to  be  or  abide  in  somebody. 
Achpitpannik,  ancestors,  Z.  {lit.,  old  residents,  A^. 
Achpitschiechen,  to  stop,  to  prevent. 
Achpi'xu,  full  of  fleas. 

Achpoaliman,  to  mock  somebody,  to  laugh  at  some  one. 
Achpoan,  bread;  n'dapponhe,\  make  bread;  achpotihe- 

zvak,  they  make  bread. 
Achpoantit,  piece  of  bread,  small  loaf. 
Achpoem,  roasted  corn. 
Achpoques,  mouse  ;  {achpiques,  A) 
Achpussin,  to  roast,  to  broil. 
Achquaneman,  //".,  a  bushnet  for  fishing. 
Achquanxowagan,  lasciviousness,  whoredom. 
Achquetahen,  to  shoot  at  a  mark. 
Achquetschiechgugsin,  to  be  tempted. 
Achquetschiechtowagan,  temptation. 


DICTIONARY.  13 

Achquidhakamike,  upon  earth. 

Achquin,  to  put  on  clothes ;  {ehquink,  clothing,  A) 

Achquindowagan,  accusation,  charge. 

Achquipelawon,  hoe. 

Achquiwanis,  blanket;  (black  or  broad  cloth,  A) 

Achquoaici'lennees,  Z,  blackberries. 

Achquoanan,  to  catch  something  with  a  net. 

Achquoanemen,  to  fish  with  a  bushnet. 

Achquoani'kan,  bushnet. 

Achquoanquigeu,  long  timber. 

Achschiechey,  Z.,  a  nest. 

Achschikiminschi,  fern. 

Achsehhellen,  to  scatter,  to  disperse ;  {sek'ellen,  A) 

Achsin,  stone ;  pi.,  chotacJisin,  Z.  (an  archaic  plural ;  now 

achsinall,  A.). 
Achsinemhoan,  pewter  spoon. 
Achsinhittehikan,  steel  trap. 
Achsinn'aminschi,  sugar  maple. 
Achsinnigeu,  stony. 
Achtschingi,  scarcely,  hardly. 
Achtschingiochwen,  to  venture  to  go. 
Achtschinkhalan,    to   persuade    somebody;    to    force 

somebody. 

Achtschinkhewagan,     disobedience ;    {achtscheyinkgeu- 
sink,  A) 

Achtschipaptonen,  to  talk  strangely,  to  speak  roughly. 
Achtschipilissin,  to  act  strangely,  to   behave  wonder- 
fully. 


14  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Achtu,  deer;  {achto' .     A.) 

Achtuchwiecheken,  deer's  hair. 

Achtuchwiminschi,  red  root. 

Achtuhhu,  plenty  of  deer. 

Achwamallsin,  to  feel  great  pain ;  (to  suffer  in  sickness. 

A.) 
Achwangundowagan,  lasting  peace. 
Achwangundowi,  very  peaceable. 
Achwilek,  hard,  troublesome  time ;  achwileu,  {A')  it  is  a 

troublesome  time. 
Achwipisgeu,  pitch  dark. 

Achwon,  strong,  spirituous  ;  (forcible,  violent.     A}\ 
Achwowangeu,  steep,  high  bank  of  a  river. 
Ahanhokqui,  descended  from,  sprung  from. 
Abas,  a  crow;  {ahasso.     A.) 
Ahhino,  a  rich  man ;  (dub..  A.) 
Ahiktek,  a  strowd. 

Ahoalan,  to  love  somebody ;  ahoaltie'que,  E.,  if  you  love. 

Ahoalgussit,  the  beloved. 

Ahoaltin,  to  love  one  another. 

Ahoaltowagan,  love. 

Ahoaltowaganit,  he  that  is  love. 

Ahoaltuwamallsin,  to  feel  love. 

Ahoaltuwi,  loving. 

Ahoatam,  to  esteem,  to  value. 

Ahochvvalquot,  hard  going,  difficult  travelling. 

Ahotasu,  Z.,  dear,  beloved  {ahoatasu  ;  does  not  apply  to 
persons,  but  to  things.     A^. 


DICTIONARY.  15 

Ahoweli,  willful. 

Ahowoapewi,  strong  ;  (power  of  endurance.     A.) 

Ajandamalquot,  it  is  to  be  wished ;  it  is  desirable. 

Ajandamoagan,  desire. 

Ajandamuwi,  desired,  wished  for. 

Ajanhelendam,  to  be  indifferent,  to  be  unconcerned. 

Ajanhelendamoagan,  indifference. 

Ajanhissowagan,  indifference,  calmness  of  mind. 

Ajapeu,  buck. 

Ajappawe,  early  in  the  morning. 

Ajaskemi,  for  good  and  all. 

Aje'ma,  if,  if  only,  if  but ;  be  so  good,  please. 

Aji',  take  it. 

Ajummen,  to  buy,  to  purchase. 

Akquiwan,    blanket;    (black    cloth.     A.     See    achqui- 

wanis.) 
Alaaptonen,  to  break  off  in  speaking. 
Alachimoagan,  rest ;  (the  prefix  alack  is  used  to  signify 

incapacity  or  inability.     A) 
Alachimoatenamin,  to  rest  happy. 
Alachimuin,  to  rest. 
Alagendowenke,  after  Sunday. 
Alagischgu,  day  is  spent. 
Alahikan,  a  mark  (to  shoot  at). 
Alakqui,  'tis  a  pity ! 
Alakschachan,  the  wind  ceases. 
Alalechen,  to  cease  breathing,  to  die;  (dub.,  see  equi- 

lechlejeu.     A.) 


16  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Alalechet,  the  dying. 

Alamachtagen,  to  stop  fighting. 

Alamikemossen,  to  stop  working, 

Alapenauwelendam,  to  leave  off,  to  quit,  to  give  up. 

Alappa,  to-morrow  ;  {ajappa.     A.) 

Alappaje,  early  in  the  morning. 

Alappiechsin,  to  speak  fast. 

Alasohen,  to  separate;  (more  exactly,  to  go  asunder. 

A.) 
Alawossin,  to  be  unable  to  perform  ;  to  be  incapable  of 

doing. 
Alemoagan,  fear,  apprehension ;  (arch.,  A.) 
Alende,  some. 
Alett,  rotten. 

Alhakquot,  stormy,  rainy ;  land  rain. 
Alike,  yet,  still,  nevertheless,  however  ;  for ;  already. 
Allacquelendam,  to  be  repentant. 
Allamachtey,  womb;  {/it,  and   generally,   the    inward 

parts.    A.) 
AUamawunke,  Z.,  under  the  hill. 
AUamhakink,  in  the  earth. 
Allami,  in  there,  therein,  within. 
AUamijey,  in  there,  therein,  within. 
Allamuin,  Z.,  the  war  whoop  (arch.    See  Kowamo.    A.), 
AUamunk,  in  there,  therein,  within. 
Allamunque,  in  there,  therein,  within. 
AUanque,  star. 
Allapehhellan,  to  rock  somebody. 


DICTIONARY.  I7 

AUapi,  E.,  listen  !  here  !  (dub.,  A) 

Allapijeyjuwagan,  activity,  quickness. 

Allauwin,  to  hunt. 

Allemakewunk,  on  the  north  side  of  a  hill. 

Allemewachton,  to  carry  abroad. 

Allemi  apuawachto,—  tangawachto,—  tatchatvachto,— 
— tepawachto,  falls  in  price  ; — tatchittm,  to  decrease. 

Allemih'hillen,  to  pass  by,  to  fly ;  {ellameh' hilan.     A.) 

Allemiminschik,  sarsaparilla. 

Allemitschellachton,  to  roll  along. 

Allewussowagan,  majesty ;  (/it.,  greater  power ;  a  com- 
parative form.     A.) 

Allogalan,  to  send  somebody. 

Allogalgussin,  to  be  sent. 

Allogagan,  servant. 

Allogaganin,  to  keep  a  servant. 

Alloge'wagan,  work. 

Allohak,  strong,  powerful ;  more  powerful ;  (a  compara- 
tive form.     A.) 

Allohakasin,  to  teach,  to  instruct ;  (lit,  to  have  power 
over  another.     A.) 

Allohumasin,  to  show. 

Alloku,  lean;  poor;  (probably  for  alloqueu, — it  is  too 
bad,  it  is  inferior.     ^4.) 

AUokuwagan,  leanness. 

Alloquepi,  hat;  cap. 

Allouchsit,  strong,  mighty. 

Allouchsoagan,  strength. 


18  LEN  APE-ENGLISH 

AUowat,  strong,  mighty. 

Allowelemuwi,  valuable. 

AUowelendam,  to  esteem  highly ;  to  prize  above  every- 
thing. 

Allowelendamoagan,  great  esteem,  high  estimation. 

Allowigamen,  to  overcome,  to  subdue. 

Allowihillen,  to  leave  over. 

AUowilek,  that  which  is  above  everything,  most  weighty. 

Allowiwi,  more,  yet  more,  much  more;  rather; — mehek, 
greater. 

Allum,  dog;  (more  exactly,  any  domesticated  animal. 
A?)     (Compare  moekaneu  and  Imchum) 

AUumaptonen,  to  say  on. 

AUumes,  little  dog,  pup ;  (young  of  any  domestic  ani- 
mal.    A) 

AUumhammochwen,  to  set  off  by  water. 

AUummahen,  to  throw. 

Allummeuchtummen,  to  go  away  weeping. 

Allummochachton,  to  carry  away. 

AUummochwalan,  to  bring  somebody  away. 

AUum'sin,  to  go  away. 

AUumtoonhen,  to  say  on. 

Alluns,  arrow,  bullet ;  (especially  and  originally,  arrow. 
A) 

Allunshikan,  bullet  mould. 

AUunsinutey,  shot  bag. 

Alod,  for,  yet. 

Am,  well,  indeed. 


DICTIONARY.  19 

Amakquitehemen,  to  cut  off;  {amank'itshen,  to  knock 
off     A) 

Amamchachwelendamen,  to  suffer. 

Aman,  fishing  line,  rope;  n'dapiaman,  H.,  I   come  from 

fishing  with  a  hook  and  Hne ;  {aman,  properly,  cord, 

string.     A) 
Amanatak,  fishing  line. 
Amandamen,  to  feel. 
Amandamoagan,  feeling. 
Amandamuwi,  sensitive. 

Amangachgenimgussowagan,    the    being    elated    by 
praise. 

Amangachpoques,  rat. 
Amangamek,  large  fish. 
Amanganachquiminschi,  Spanish  oak. 
Amanghattachcat,  coarse  linen. 
Amangi,  big,  great,  large. 
Amangiechsin,  to  speak  loud,  to  cry  out. 
Amatschiechsin,  to  speak  brokenly. 
Amatschipuis,  turkey  buzzard. 
Amatschisowapasigan,  the  herb  "colt's  foot." 
Ambeson,  Z.,  an  Indian  cradle. 
Amechachwilawechtowagan,  chastisement. 
A'mel,  Z.,  a  hammer. 
Amemens,  child. 
Amemensuwi,  childlike,  childish. 
Amementit,  babe. 
Amemi,  pigeon ;  {memi.    A) 


20  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Amendchewagan,  disobedience,  stubbornness. 

Amentschinsin,  to  praise,  to  give  honor. 

Ametschimi,  often  ; — ne  leep,  there  was  more  done. 

Amiga,  long,  a  long  time. 

Amimi,  Z.,  a  dove.     See  Amemi. 

Amintschindewagan,  praise. 

Amintschiuchsin,  to  disobey. 

Amintschiuchsowagan,  disobedience. 

Amochol,  canoe,  boat. 

Amocholes,  little  canoe. 

Amocholhe,  poplar ;  (the  buttonwood  or  sycamore  ;  lit., 

the  boat  wood,  as  canoes  were  made  from  it.     A}) 
Amoe,  bee  ;  wasp ;  (a  generic  term  for  the  kind,    y^.) 
Amoewiwikwam,  bee  hive. 
Amoquigachschechin,  to  bruise  the  finger  nail. 
Amoschimoe,  spike  buck  ;  yearling. 
Amueen,  Z,  to  angle. 
Amuigenan,  to  raise  somebody  up. 

Amuin,  to  arise. 

Amuiwagan,  resurrection. 

Anakan,  pi.,  all,  mat  made  of  rushes. 

Anatschihuwewagan,  care,  cautiousness. 

Anatschiton,  to  take  care. 

Andhanni,  bullfrog. 

Anechwunaltey,  bark  canoe. 

Anehku,  bark  ;  {anecJmin.    A.) 

Anena,  by  little  and  little;    by  do^grees  \—ikalissi,  the 
more,  more  and  more. 


DICTIONARY.  21 

Anenawi,  by  little  and  little,  by  degrees  •,—mcheli,  the 
more,  more  and  more. 

Anetassoagan,  Z.,  helplessness. 

Aney,  road,  walking  road,  path. 

Angellen,  to  die ;  {lit.,  going  to  decay,  may  be  applied  to 
animate  objects  during  life.     A) 

Angellowagan,  death. 

Angellowi,  mortal,  deadly. 

Anhoktonhen,  to  interpret. 

Anicus,  Z,  a  mouse,  a  ground  squirrel ;  pi.,  anixak. 

Aninsihhillen,  the  young  of  a  bird  or  fowl. 

Anischik,  thank'e;  thanks. 

Anixi  gischuch,  (the  month  in  which  the  ground  squir- 
rels begin  to  run)  January. 

Ankhittasowagan,  loss, 

Ankhitton,  to  lose. 

Anoschi,  shoe-string. 

Anschiwi,  more  by  degrees. 

Ansenummen,  to  take  together. 

Ansiptikin,  to  bind  up  into  sheaves. 

Apachgilentschachsin,  to  warm  the  hands. 

Apachtoquepi,  crown. 

Apachtschiechton,  to  display,  to  set  something  up;  to 
attach  one's  self  to,  to  fix  upon, 

Apagihen,  to  come  from  planting. 

Apaligen,  to  tread  upon ;  {achpaligen.    A.) 

Apallauwin,  to  come  from  hunting. 

Apalogen,  to  come  from  work. 


22  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Apami,  in  vain. 

Apanachen,  to  come  from  cutting  wood. 

Apatschin,  to  come  back,  to  return. 

Apel,  apple. 

Apemikemossin,  to  stop  working. 

Apendamen,  to  enjoy,  to  make  use  of. 

Apendelluxin,  to  be  made  partaker. 

Apendelluxowagan,  the  being  made  partaker. 

Apensoagan,  Z.,  enjoyment,  fruition. 

Apensu-wi,  useful,  enjoyable. 

Apipachgihhillen,  to  bud,  to  shoot  forth. 

Apit,  by  the  way. 

Apitchanehhellen,  contrary  mind. 

Apitschi,  after  a  little  while,  by  and  bye. 

Apittehikan,  anvil ;  (///.,  where  one  thing  is  struck  upon 

another.     A.) 
Aptatschin,  to  freeze  to  death. 
Aptelendam,  to  grieve  to  death. 
Aptonagan,  word;  chapter;  (strictly,  a  word.    A.) 
Aptonaltin,  to  speak  with  each  other. 
Aptonen,  to  speak. 
Aptuppeu,  drowned. 

Apuangellen,  to  die  easily;  to  die  quickly. 
Apuat,  easy,  easily. 
Apuawachto,  cheap. 
Apuelendam,  to  think  easy. 
Apuichton,  to  make  easy,  to  make  light. 
Aputschiechton,  to  turn  the  wrong  side  out. 


DICTIONARY.  23 

Ascaletschi,  unripe. 

Aschanquussin,  to  be  cast  away ;  to  be  rejected. 

Aschite,  then. 

Aschowin,  to  swim ;  aschowill,  n'daschwul,  I  swim. 

Aschowitchan,  raft. 

Aschtehhellen,  to  go  or  cross  over  one  another. 

Aschtetehasik,  Z.,  the  cross  f;  [aschtetehican,  A.     The 

former  refers  to  the  stick,  the  latter  to  the  symbol.) 
Aschukiso ,  poor,  worth  nothing,  beggar. 
Asgask,  green;  askcu,  Z.  (this  means  "raw;"  askasqueu, 

it  is  green,  for  a  leaf,  etc.     A) 
Asgaskachgook,  green  snake. 
Asgelendam,  to  wait  with  impatience. 
Aski,  must,  necessitated,  obliged. 
Askiquall,  grass,  herbs. 
Askiwi,  raw,  green. 
Aspenummen,  to  lift  up. 
Aspenuxin,  to  be  lifted  up. 
Aspin,  to  ascend;  {ispin.    A.) 
Aspinachken,  to  lift  up  the  hand. 
Aspochwen,  to  go  up,  to  ascend. 
Aspoquen,  to  raise  the  eye. 
Assisku,  mud,  clay. 
Assiskuju,  muddy,  dirty,  marshy. 
Assisquahoos,  earthen  pot;  assiskequahoSy  E. 
Assisquohasu,  daubed  with  clay. 
Assisquohen,  to  mix  clay. 
Atenkpatton,  to  quench  fire. 


24  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Atschimolehan,  to  relate  to  somebody. 

Atschimolsin,  to  consult,  to  hold  counsel. 

Atschimolsoagan,  counsel,  advice. 

Atta,  no,  not ; — am,  not  at  all ; — auwen,  nobody ; — hasch, 
no,  never ; — ihaschi,  never,  nevermore ;  at  no  time ; — 
iilewi,  not  at  all  true ; — kocku,  nothing ; — tani,  by  no 
means. 

Attach,  moreover,  beyond,  above. 

Attago,  no,  by  no  means. 

Auchsin,  to  be  hard  to  deal  with. 

Auchsu,  (of  beasts)  wild,  untractable ;  (of  men)  avari- 
cious, difficult  to  deal  with. 

Auchsuwagan,  Z.,  fury,  anger. 

Awechemos,  creature,  cattle. 

Awe'hellea,  Z.,  a  bird  (this  is  the  generic  term  now  in  use. 
It  means  self-suspended,  referring  to  the  flight  of  birds. 
A.) 

Awehhelleu,  bird,  fowl ;  (applied  to  large  fowls,  etc. 
A) 

Auweken,  to  make  use  of. 

Auwen,  who,  somebody,  which; — ha?  who  then?  ma, 
who  is  there  ? 

Auweni  ?  who  is  it  ? 

Auwih  !  oh  !  (exclamation  of  pain.) 

Auwijewi,  yet,  however. 

Awelemukunees,  young  buck. 

Awelendam,  to  be  certain,  to  be  sure. 

Awendam,  to  suffer  pain. 


DICTIONARY.  25 

Awendamoagan,  suffering. 

Awendamowanglowagan,  painful  death. 

Awendamuwi,  painful. 

Awessis,  beast. 

Awonn,  fog,  mist. 

Awossachtenne,  over  or  beyond  the  hill. 

Awossagame,  heaven;  {lit.,  the  place  beyond  or  out  of 

sight.     A) 
Awossake,  behind  the  house. 
Awossakihakan,  that  side  of  the  plantation. 
Awosschakque,  over  the  log  or  tree. 
Awosseki,  over  the  leaf;  (dub.,  ^.) 
Awossenachk,  over  the  fence,  behind  the  fence. 
Awossenuppeque,  over  the  lake. 
Awossi,   over,  over  there,  beyond,  on  the  other  side, 

behind. 
Awossijey,  over,  over  there,  beyond,  on  the  other  side, 

behind. 
Awossin,  to  warm  one's  self. 
AwuUakenim,  to  laud,  to  praise. 
Awullakeniman,  to  praise  somebody. 
AwuUakenimoagan,  praise. 
Awullsittamen,  to  obey. 
Awullsittamsewagan,  obedience. 
AwuUsittamuwi,  obedient. 
Awullsu,  good,  fine,  pretty;   (animate,  pi.  miwiilsuak ; 

inanimate,  auwultu,  pi.  auwultol^  (from  ividissu).     A. 


26  LENAPE-ENGLISH 


Bambil,  (pi.  ak)  book,  letter ;  (applied  to  any  writing  or 

writing  material.     A^ 
Bambilenutey,  pocket  book. 
Beson,  medicine,  physic;  (out  of  use.     A.    '^qq  chappik ; 

it  is  for  inbesoii,  q.  v.) 
Bihilewen,  to  be  hoarse. 
Biminaten,  to  spin  ;  (see  under  P.) 
Bingtschwanak,  E.,  the  pupil  of  the  eye. 
Bischi,  yes,  indeed,  to  be  sure ;  {biesch,  H.  ibid.) 
Bischik,  yes,  indeed,  to  be  sure. 
Bischuwi,  wilderness  ;  (arch.,  A) 
Blaknik,  flying  squirrel. 
Blenhotik,  black  snakeroot. 

Bloeu,Z,  a  turkey  cock.    (P/^?^//,  turkey  of  either  sex.    A) 
Bochwejesik,  Z.,  joint  of  the  foot. 
Bochwinan,  to  skin  an  animal. 
Bohhuhachqua,  basket  wood. 
Bohhuhan,  to  peal  off  the  rind  of  a  tree. 
Bokandpechin,  to  bruise  the  hand. 
Bonihen,  to  lay  on  (wood  on  a  fire). 


C. 


Ceppitsch,  Z.,  a  conspiracy. 

Chaasch,  eight. 

Chaasch  tcha  pachki,  eight  hundred. 


DICTIONARY.  27 

Chaaschtchenachke,  eighty. 

Chaihoak,  Z.,  clothes-lice. 

Challanunschi,  sumach. 

Chammap,  Z.,  fed  (he  or  it  was  fed.     A)^. 

Chans,  elder  brother. 

Chanson,  bedstead. 

Chasquem,  Indian  corn. 

Chauchschisis,  old  woman. 

Chauwalanne,  fork -tailed  eagle. 

Chawachto,  dear,  high  priced. 

Cheiho,  Z.,  the  body  (means  that  which  is  whole,  entire. 

A). 
Cheinutey,  saddle  bag. 
Cheli,  much. 
Chelit,  a  great  deal. 
Ches,  pi.  ak,  skin ;  leather ;  machtschilokees,  Z.,  a  leather 

string.     [Choi,  a  pelt.     A) 
Chesimus,  younger  brother  or  sister. 
Chessachgutakan,  leather  breeches. 
Cheweleleney,  manifold. 
Cheyjantup,  Z.,  a  scalp. 
Chinqualippa,  great  buck. 
Chiquasu,  patched,  mended. 
Chitquen,  deep  water,  high  water. 
Choanschikan,  Virginian  (virginity  ?). 
Chokquinen,  to  cough. 

Chokquineu,  A.,  he  has  a"^disease  with  coughing. 
Chokquinewagan,  cough. 


28  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Chottschinschu,  big  trough,  large  bowl;  chotachsun,  Z., 

a  large  stone. 
Chowasquall,  old  dry  grass. 

Chumm,  daughter-in-law;  (/zV.,  my  daughter-in-law.   A?) 
Chuppecat,  deep,  high  water. 
Chw^elensowagan,  pride. 
Chwelhammook,  great  many  deer  tracks. 
Chweli,  much,  many ;  chweltol,  as  many ;  cJiivclopannik, 

there  were  many. 
Chwelokunak,  many  nights. 

Clagacheu,  H.,  it  is  aground,  or,  rests  on  something. 
Clahican,  Z.,  a  steel  trap. 

Clamachpin,  Z.,  to  sit  still;  clamachphil !  H.,  sit  still! 
Clamhattenmoagan,  Z.,  steadiness. 
Clammieche,  Z.,  to  lie  still. 
Clampeechen,  Z.,  still  or  standing  water. 
Colassu,  Z.,  sweat  by  a  bath. 
Combach  (quail),  Z.,  leaf,  leaves  of  a  tree ;  cumbachquiwi, 

it  is  full  of  leaves ;  compare  wunissak  (arch..  A}). 
Commoot,  or,  Commootgeen,  Z.,  stolen. 
Cub'bachcan,  thick  \cubbacJica7i packchack,2i\h.\c]<.  board  ; 

cubbachcan  schackeef,  a  thick  skin. 
Cuwe,  Z.,  pine  tree;    atzvenchac,  pine  wood  (properly 

p'kozveu,  it  is  sticky,  alluding  to  the  resin.     A.). 


DICTIONARY.  29 

D. 

Dachiquamen,  to  patch,  to  mend. 

Dachiquoagan,  a  patch. 

Dajasgelendam,   to   desire  ardently,  to  wait   for   with 

much  concern. 
Dalakihillen,  to  tear,  rend  in  two. 
Dalaktschetechen,  to  fall  and  burst  open. 
Dallumens,  tame  creature;  (any  domestic  animal,  see 

alhnns.     A.) 
Damachgigamen,  to  tread  under  foot. 
Damaskhikan,  a  scythe. 
Damaskhiken,  to  mow. 

Damaskus,  muskrat;  (dub.  mod.  cJmaskquis.     A.) 
Dawamhican,  Z.,  the  jaw  bone. 
Delachgapachgunk,  in  the  cleft  of  a  rock. 
Dellemangan,  the  thick  part  of  the  arm;   (thy,  etc.     A.) 
Dellsoagan,  manner,  custom,  habit ;  (thy  habit.     A.) 
Demasxalo,  a  file. 
Despehhellan,  to  have  the  smallpox. 
Despehhellewagan,  smallpox  (dub.,  A.). 
Dulheu,  Z.,  the  bosom,  breast  (with  possessives). 


E. 


E— e,  H.,  Yes  (lazily). 
Echgoquijeque,  ye  serpents. 
Eemhoanis,  spoon. 


30  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Eenhawachtin,    to  pay  one   another,   to   satisfy  each 

other. 
Eenhawachtowagan,  payment,  reward. 
Eenhen,  to  pay. 

Eenhiken,  to  pay;  {enhe'ken.     A.) 
Eesgans,  Z.,  a  needle  (arch..  A.). 
Eat,  perhaps,  may  be. 
Egohan,  H.,  yes,  indeed  ! 
Eh  !  Eh  !  exclamation  of  approbation. 
Ehachgahiket,  distributer,  divider. 
Ehachpink,  place;  ehaclipit,  Z.,  his  place. 
Ehachpit,  his  place,  his  habitation, 
Ehachpussitunk,  gridiron, 
Ehachquink,  clothing. 
Ehachquit,  etc.,  his  cloth,  etc, 
Ehachtubuwing,  Z.,  a  cup. 
Ehalluchsit,  the  mighty  and  powerful. 
Ehamhittehukuk,  battery  of  a  gun  lock. 
Ehangelikgik,  the  dead ;  (arch.,  ^.) 
Ehasgitamank,  watermelon. 
Ehelamek,  ribbon. 
Ehelandawink,  ladder. 
Ehelekhigetonk,  ink. 
Ehelikhique,  at  which  time. 
Ehelilamank,    well,    spring,   fountain;    (a    running   or 

flowing  spring.     A}) 
Ehelinguatek,  stove  pipe. 
Ehendachpuink,  a  table. 


DICTIONARY.  31 

Ehenendhaken,  to  speak  a  parable. 
Ehes,  muscle;  clam. 
Eheschandek,  window. 

Eheschapamuk,  Z.,  a  bottle;  (anything  of  glass.     A?) 
Ehoalan — (pi.  Ehoalachgik),  beloved,  dear. 
Ehoalgussit,  the  beloved. 
Ehoalid,  my  lover, 

Ejaja,  etc.,  where,  wherever  or  whither  I  go,  etc. 
Ekajah  !  aye  !  aye !  exclamation  of  surprise. 
Ekamejek,  broadness. 
Ekamhasik,  broad. 
Ekee  !  ay  !  exclamation  of  surprise. 
Ekesa  !  H.,  for  shame! 
Ekhokiike,  at  the  end  of  the  world. 
Ekih  !  O  my  !  exclamation  of  pain. 
Ekisah  !  exclamation  of  indignant  surprise. 
Ekoqualis,  raspberry. 

Eksasamallsin,  to  feel  less  pain,  to  feel  better. 
Eksaselendam,  to  diminish,  to  disesteem. 
Eksaselendamoagan,  restraint,  abridgment. 
Eksasi,  less. 
Elachpaje,  this  morning. 
Elachtoniket,  he  that  searcheth,  seeker. 
Elalogen,  what  to  do. 
Elamallsin,  how  to  feel,  to  feel  as. 

Elangellen,  to  be  leprous;  (///.,  to  perish  miserably.     A)) 
Elangomat,   friend,  relation ;    {lit.,  a  member  of  one's 
family.     A}j 


32  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Elangomellan,  my  friend. 

Elauwit,  hunter;  [ehalowit.     A.) 

Elawachtik,  so  dear. 

Elek,  as  it  is,  as  it  happens. 

Elekhammajenk,  our  debts. 

Elekhasik,  as  is  written. 

Elelemukquenk,  what  we  are  destined  for. 

Elemamek,  everywhere;  (/^V.,  as  it  lies;  the  sense  " every- 
where "  not  now  known.     A.) 

Elemamekhaki,  all  over  the  country;  (///.,"  the  way  the 
land  lies."     A.) 

Elemi,  to-day  once,  sometime  to-day; — gendowewa- 
gan,\\\\s  week; — kechokiinak,  in  a  few  days; — nipink, 
this  summer  ; — sigidn,  this  spring  ; — lozvank,  this 
winter. 

Elemiechen,  along  the  road. 

Elemiechink,  by  the  way. 

Elemokunak,  one  of  these  days. 

Elemukulek,  in  the  bend  of  the  river. 

Elemussit,  he  that  is  going  away. 

Elenapewian,  thou  Indian ! 

Elewunsit,  as  he  is  called,  so  he  is  named;  {cliwin- 
sit.     A.) 

Elgigui,  as,  like  as,  in  like  manner,  like  that ;  so,  so  as, 
so  very;  as  much  so,  as  well  as;  (after  compar.)  than ; 
— ametschimi,  as  often  as,  so  often  ; — inchcli,  as  much 
as. 

Elgigunk,  as  big,  as  wide  as. 


DICTIONARY.  33 

Elgigunkhaki,  as  big  and  wide  as  the  world  is ;  all  the 

world  round. 
Elgilen,  as  tall  as,  as  big  as. 
Elgixin,  to  be  worthy. 
Elhokquechink,  at  his  head. 

Eli,  because ;  (in  questions)  then ;  (in  compos.)  as,  so,  what, 
Eligischquik,  to-day  ;  (sometime  during  to-day.     A.) 
Elikhikqui,  at  this  time. 
Elikus,  ant,  pismire;  {eli'ques.     A.) 
Elilenin,  as  is  usual  with  one,  as  is  customary. 
Elinaquo,  as  this,  as  that,  as  the  other. 
Elinaquot,  so,  so  as,  also,  likewise. 
Elinaxit,  as  he  appears ;  his  appearance,  figure,  look, 
Elinquechink,  before,  in  presence  of. 
Elitehat,  as  he  thinks, 

Elitton'henk,  sermon  ;  (concerning  a  sermon.     A.) 
Eliwi,  both, 
Elke  !  !/.,  wonderful ! 
Elogalintschik,  messengers. 
Elogamgussit,  messenger. 
Elsija,  etc.,  as  I  am,  as  I  do,  etc, 
Elsit,  as  he  is  minded,  as  he  does, 
Eluet,  as  he  saith,  his  saying, 
Eluwak,  most  powerful, 
Eluwantowit,  God  above  all, 
Eluwi,  most, 
Eluwiahoalgussit,  the  beloved  above  all  things  ;  best 

beloved. 


34  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Eluwikschiechsit,  the  most  holy,  hohest. 
Eluwilissit,  the  most  gracious  one. 
Eluwitakauwussit,  the  best,  the  supremely  good. 
Eluwitschitanessit,  the  strongest. 
Eluwiwulik,  the  very  best,  the  supremely  good. 
Eluwussit,  the  Almighty,  the  most  powerful,  the  most 

majestic. 
Enapandikan,  the  hind  sight  of  a  gun. 
Enda,  where,  whither. 
Endchappin,  as  many  as  are  here. 
Endchekhamman,  as  much  as  one  owes. 
Endchen,  as  often  as. 
Endchi,  as  much  as,  as  many  as. 
Enendhaken,  to  speak  a  parable. 
Enendhakewagan,  parable. 
Epia,  etc.,  where  I  am,  etc. 
Epigachink,  foundation. 
Epit,  he  who  is  there ;  inhabitant. 
Equiwi,  under;  beneath. 
Equohellen,  to  depart  this  life,  to  die. 
Es,  yet. 

Eschauwessit,  side. 
Eschiwi,  through. 
Eschochwalan,  to  help    somebody   through,  to  carry 

some  one  through. 
Eschochwen,  to  go  through,  to  drive  through. 
Eschoochwejupetschundchenk,  it  penetrates  my  heart 
Espan,  Z.,  a  raccoon. 


DICTIONARY.  35 

Espenni,  lift  it  up. 

Esquande,  door;   entrance  (threshold  or   place  of  en- 
trance ;  not  a  door.     A.). 
Esquo,  not  yet. 
Esquota,  not  yet. 

Esseni,  stony,  flinty ;  (from  ac/isin.) 
Etachgilowank,  last  winter. 
Etachginipink,  last  summer. 
Etek,  where  it  is. 

Etschigapawin,  to  step  between,  to  stand  between. 
Etschihillat,  mediator. 
E waken,  to  make  use  of;  {eweheri .     A.) 
Ewenikia,  etc.,  who  I  am,  etc. 
Ewochgehikan,  stirring  ladle. 


G. 


Gachene,  if,  whether. 

Gachgamun,  roasted  corn ;  (alludes  to  the  noise  made 

in  eating  by  crunching  the  grains.     A.) 
Gachgamuniminschi,  hoop-ash. 
Gachgenummen,  to  break  off. 
Gachhachgik,  wild  bay. 
Gachkappawi,  soon,  early. 
Gachpallan,  to  pull  somebody  out  of  the  water;  {goch- 

penna.     A.) 


36  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Gachpattejeu,  southeast;  (there  are  now  no  expressions 
for  such  divisions  of  the  compass.     A.) 

Gachpattejewink,  toward  the  southeast. 

Gachpees,  twin. 

Gachpilgussowagan,  binding,  tying. 

Gachsasu,  dried. 

Gachsummen,  to  dry. 

Gachtalquot,  it  is  to  be  wished,  it  is  desirable. 

Gachtelawossin,  to  be  dry  for  thirst;  (gac/ifoseu.     A.) 

Gachten,  dry. 

Gachti,  almost  nearly ;  close  by ;  tvsami,  almost  too 
much. 

Gachtin,  year. 

Gachtingetsch,  next  year ;  {gachtvige' .    A.) 

Gachtonalen,  to  persecute,  to  seek  to  kill;  {^gachto  sig- 
nifies wish  or  desire.     Like  gatotamen.     A.) 

Gachtonquoam,  to  be  sleepy  ;  (radical  is — quoam,  refer- 
ring to  sleep.     A?) 

Gachto'tam,  to  desire,  to  lust. 

Gadhammawachtowagan,  last  will,  testament, 

Gagachgelunen,  Z.,  to  tell  lies. 

Gagachti,  almost,  very  near. 

Gagiuhokewagan,  deceit. 

Gagiwanantpehellan,  to  be  dizzy;  to  be  giddy  in  the 
head. 

Gagun,  stocking  ;  (legging.     A) 

Gahan,  shallow;  low  water  (not  in  use.     A"). 

Gahowes,  mother ;  [g'ichk,  my  mother.    A.) 


DICTIONARY.  37 

Gakelunenhen,  to  make  to  a  liar. 
Gakloltowagan,  quarrel,  dispute. 
Gakpitschehellat,  Z.,  a  madman,  a  fool  (a  fool.     A^. 
Gamenowinenk,  on  the  other  side  of  the  great  sea. 
Gamunk,  over  there,  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  over 

the  water;  {gamifik.     A.) 
Gandhatton,  to  hide,  to  conceal ;  n' danthallen  hackcy ,  Z., 

I  hide  myself  in  the  earth. 
Gandhikan,  setting  pole  ;  (a  pole  with  which  to  push  a 

boat.     A) 
Gangamattok,  bad   action,  bad  behavior;  (out  of  use. 

a:) 

Ganschala'muin,  to  cry  out. 
Ganschapuchk,  big  rock  ;  (a  boulder.     A?^ 
Ganschapuchken,  rocky,  full  of  rocks. 
Ganschelalogen,  to  do  great  wonders. 
Ganschelalogewagan,  wonderful  work. 
Ganschelendam,  to  wonder,  to  be  surprised. 
Ganschewen,  to  roar,  to  make  a  great  noise  ;  [guansche- 

zuell.     A.) 
Ganschhittaquot,  it  makes  a  terrible  noise. 
Ganschilallogen,  to  perform  a  miracle. 
Ganschinaquot,  it  is  surprising. 

Gashikan,  dishclout;  (a  skin  or  cloth  for  rubbing.   A.) 
Gasihhillen,  to  decay,  to  fade. 
Gaskhamen,  Z.,  to  notch. 

Gatatam,  to  want,  to  desire ;  gatotamen,  Z.,  to  long  for. 
Galon,  to  hide,  to  conceal. 


38  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Gatschiechtowagan,  mystery,  secret, 
Gattamen,  to  desire,  to  long  for. 
Gattati,  come  !  be  willing  !  well ! 
Gatti,  near,  almost. 

Gattonachsin,  to  persecute,  to  seek  to  kill. 
Gattopuin,  to  hunger,  to  be  hungry. 
Gattosomuin,  to  thirst,  to  be  thirsty. 
Gattungwam,  Z,  sleepy,  drowsy  (arch.,  A.). 
Gauwin,  to  sleep. 
Gauwoheen,  to  lie  down  to  sleep. 
Gawi,  Z.,  the  hedgehog ;  pi.,  gawiak. 
Gawunsch,  Z.,  briars  {gaivinsch.     A.). 
Gawunschuwitschik,  gooseberries. 
Gebtschaat,  foolish  fellow,  clown. 
Gechgauwiwink,  Z.,  a  bed. 
Gechgelandamink,  bridle-bit. 
Gechkschutteek,  Z.,  an  oven  (a  stone.     A). 
Gechpilgussowoagan,  Z.,  a  knot. 
Geeschtek,  hot. 

Gegachxis,  lizard  (not  in  use.     See  tncchque.    A\ 
Gegau'wink,  bed. 
Gegekhoat,  thy'chosen,  thy  elect. 
Gegekhuntschik,  the  elect,  the  chosen. 
Gegepchoat,  the  deaf;  a  deaf  person. 
Gegepinquot,  blind  ;  a  blind  person. 
Gegeyjumhen,  to  rule,  to  reign. 
Gegeyjumhet,  ruler,  governor,  head  chief. 
Gegeyjumhewagan,  rule,  government. 


DICTIONARY.  39 

Gegochbisik,  Z,  a  belt,  a  girdle ;  {gochbisink.    A.) 

Gekschiechtigehend,  washing  tub. 

Gektemagelemuwi,  merciful. 

Gektemagelowagan,  mercy. 

Gelackelendam,  Z.,  levity. 

Gelantpepisit,  tied  about  the  head. 

Gelelendamen,  to  be  of  opinion. 

Gelen'nin,  to  take  hold;  (or,  to  hold  in  the  hand.     A.) 

Geliechhammen,  to  sow,  to  stitch. 

Gellenummen,  to  take  along. 

Gelohittamen,  to  disbelieve. 

Genachgihan,  to  take  care  of  somebody;  {^genachgelia. 

A.) 
Genachgihat,  overseer;  preserver. 
Genachgiton,  to  take  care  of 
Genam,  to  thank. 
Genamoagan,  thank. 
Genamuwi,  thankful,  grateful. 
Gendachgussin,  to  climb  up ;  {gelachgusi.     A.) 
Gendatehundin,  to  drive  in  a'nail. 
Gendelemuxin,  to  be  condemned. 
Gendelemuxowagan,  condemnation,  damnation. 
Gendelendam,  to  condemn. 
Gendelinget,  he  that  condemneth. 
Gendowen,  Sunday;  {/it.,  a  day  of  worship.     A.) 
Gendowewagan,  week. 
Gendowewuniwi  gischquik,  Sunday. 
Gendsitaja,  ball  of  the  foot ;  (hollow  of  the  foot.     A.) 


40  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Gendsitat,  ball  of  the  foot;  (as  above.     A.) 

Gentgeen,  Z.,  to  dance  {^gintkaan.     A.). 

Gentsch,  a  little  while  ago; — linitti,  just  now,  not  long 

ago. 
Geptschat,  H.,  a  fool ;  pi.,  schik. 
Geschiechek,  pure,  holy  ;  (///.,  washed  ;  not  used  now  in 

a  moral  sense,     y^.) 
Geschiechsit,  pure,  holy ;  (as  above.     A)) 
Geschiechton,  to  wash. 
Geschtek,  ripe,  done,  cooked. 
Geskundhak,  pumpkin;  (out  of  use.     A?) 
Getaam,  Z.,  the  hazel  nut. 
Getanittowit,   Great  Creator,  God ;    (rather,  the    great 

spirit,     y^.) 
Getisgamen,  to  drive  out;  {ge'tsche'gamen.     A) 
Getschachgenummen,  to  loosen,  to  untie. 
Getschihillalan,  to  betray  somebody;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
Getschihillalittin,  to  betray  each  other. 
Getschihillalowet,  traitor. 
Gettemageleman,  to  help  somebody,  to  relieve  some 

one,  to  compassionate  some  person. 
Gettemagelemuxowagan,    the    being    shown    mercy, 

favor,  tenderness. 
Gettemagelensin,  to  be  humble. 
Gettemagelensit,  one  that  is  humble. 
Gettemagelensitawan,    to    humble    one's   self   before 

somebody. 
Gettemagelensuwi,  humble. 


DICTIONARY.  41 

Gettemagelentin,  to  be  kind  to  each  other,  to  be  mer- 
ciful toward  one  another. 

Gettemagelin,  to  be  merciful. 

Gettemagelowagan,  mercy. 

Gettemagelowaganit,  he  who  is  merciful. 

Gettemageluwi,  merciful. 

Gettemaki,  poor,  miserable. 

Gettemakitschitanengussin,  to  be  a  miserable  slave. 

Gettemaxin,  to  be  poor,  to  be  miserable. 

Getteminak,  fortunate,  happy ;  (not  in  use.     A.) 

Getteminakuwagan,  felicity,  happiness,  gladness. 

Gewit,  sleeper. 

Gichgehhelleu,  a  fowl  with  young  ones. 

Gichtamen,  Z.,  to  be  lazy;  {^gichtdineneu,  he  is  lazy.     A) 

Giechgi,  near  by,  close  by,  toward. 

Giechgigawachtowagan,  nearness. 

Gigauwinasu,  Z.,  borrowed  (not  in  use.     A^. 

Gigischquik,  this  day  past. 

Gigitowalan,  to  speak  with  somebody,  to  talk  to  some 
one. 

Gigitschimuis,  summer  duck. 

Gihim,  to  encourage,  to  admonish. 

Gihiman,  to  admonish  somebody,  to  exhort  some  one. 

Gilkissin,  to  laugh;  [achgilkissin.     A.) 

Ginanikamen,  to  have  good,  sharp  teeth. 

Gintsch,  a  little  while  ago,  if;  (after  negat.)  unless, 
except ; — linitti,  a  little  while  ago,  directly,  presently. 

Gintschglennin,  to  push. 

D 


42  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Gintschimuin,  to  sound,  to  crow. 
Gintschtschingussit,  messenger. 
Gintschtschinman,    to   send   somebody;    (to    appoint 

somebody.     A.) 
Gischachgeniman,  to  judge  somebody. 
Gischachgenindewagan,  impeachment,  accusation. 
Gischachgenutasu,  concluded,  settled,  determined, 
Gischachgenutemen,  to  conclude. 
Gischachpoanhe,  the  bread  is  done  baking. 
Gischachsoagan,  enlightening,  shining. 
Gischachsummen,  to  enlighten. 
Gischachtek,  clear,  light. 
Gischachteu,  it  is  clear,  light. 
Gischalo'gen,  to  finish  a  work. 
Gischambeso,  bound,  tied. 
Gischamocholheu,  the  canoe  is  finished. 
Gischapan,  daylight,  daybreak. 

Gischatschimolsin,  to  have  resolved,  to  have  decreed. 
Gischeleman,  to  create  with  the  mind. 
Gischelemuxit,  creature. 
Gischelendam,  to  hatch  or  meditate  something  good  or 

bad  ;  to  lie. 
Gischelendamen,  to  make,  to  cause. 
Gischenachk,  the  fence  is  finished. 
Gischenaxin,  to  be  ready,  to  be  prepared. 
Gischgu,  day. 

Gischguniwi,  by  day,  in  the  daytime. 
Gischhakihen,  to  be  done  planting. 


DICTIONARY.  43 

Gischhatteu,  ready. 

Gischhittelawan,  to  hit  somebody. 

Gischiechen,  to  be  ready,  to  be  done,  to  be  finished. 

Gischigachink,  grounded. 

Gischigin,  to  be  born ;  (to  ripen,  to  mature.     A.) 

Gischigu,  born. 

Gischihan,  to  create  with  the  hands,  to  make  something. 

Gischikenammen,  to  increase,  to  produce  fruit. 

Gischikewagan,  Z.,  procreation,  reproduction. 

Gischikheu,  to  finish  a  house,  to  make  a  house  ready, 

to  put  a  house  in  order. 
Gischileu,  it  has  proved  true. 
Gischipenauwelendam,  to  have   considered,  to   have 

made  up  one's  mind,  to  be  ready. 
Gischitehen,  to  be  determined. 
Gischiton,  to  make  ready,  to  prepare,  to  finish. 
Gischkschagokan,  saw. 
Gischkschagotamen,  to  saw. 
Gischkschasgokan,  scythe,  sickle. 
Gischkschummen,  to  cut  with  a  knife. 
Gischquik,  day. 
Gischquike,  by  day. 
Gischuch,  sun,  month. 

Gischuchwipall,  sunbeams,  rays  of  the  sun. 
Gischuteu,  warm,  lukewarm. 
Gischuwalheu,  ready  packed,  ready  laden. 
Gischuweu,  warm. 
Gischuwewick'wam,  warm  house. 


44  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Gischuwikwamikat,  warm  house. 

Giskhammen,  to  chop. 

Giskhaquen,  to  cut  with  an  axe,  to  chop. 

Gispuin,  to  be  satisfied,  to  have  eaten  enough, 

Gissa  !  exclamation  of  indignation. 

Gissai !  exclamation  of  indignation. 

Glakelendam,  to  be  merry,  to  make  sport;  (to  be 
excited.     A.) 

Glatten,  frozen. 

Glelendam,  to  be  of  opinion. 

Glikatepi,  hobble;  (girth  of  a  saddle.     A.) 

Glikatepiso,  hobbled. 

Glikenikan,  sumach. 

Glistam,  to  hearken,  to  listen. 

Glittonepi,  bridle;  (//>.,  tied  in  the  mouth.     A.) 

Gloltowalan,  to  maltreat  somebody;  to  use  some  one 
ill ;  (out  of  use.     A.) 

Gluphokquen,  to  look  back ;  (from  root  ghipky  back 
(adverb).     A) 

Gluppiechton,  to  turn  about. 

Gluppihilleu,  turned  about. 

Gluxu,  Z.,  he  laughs ;  gliiksozuak,  they  laugh. 

Gochgachgaschowin,  to  swim  over. 

Gochgahhellen,  to  overset. 

Gochpelolakan,  canoe  rope,  boat  line. 

Gochpiwi,  from  the  water. 

Gochquoapetechin,  the  pulse ;  {k'hokpetechm,  the  re- 
bounding, the  pulsation.     A}j 


DICTIONARY.  45 

Gock,  wampum,  money ;  {keekq\   A.) 

Gohan  !  yes,  exclamation  of  approval ! 

Gojachti,  for  the  most  part,  mostly,  nearly;  (arch.,  A.) 

Gokhos,  owl ;  (generic  for  any  owl.     A.) 

Gokhotit,  little  owl. 

Gomuus,  Z.,  the  neck  (arch.,  now  use  ochquecanggan.  A.). 

Gopens,  about,  thereabouts. 

Gophammen,  H.,  to  shut  close. 

Goppachtenemen,  to  take  out  of  the  water. 

Goquehemen,    to    reject,    repel,   push    back,    repulse ; 

refuse,  avert. 
Goschgosch,  hog. 
Goschgoschigawan,  hog  sty. 
Goschgotit,  little  pig. 
Guhn,  snow. 

Guka,  Z.,  mamma,  mother. 
Gulaqueen,    good   evening;    {anixit  gulaqueen,   I     am 

glad  that  you  have  lived  till  evening,     y^.) 
Gull,  shilling;  [kquill.     A.) 
Gulukochsiin,  Z.,  a  turkey  cock  (refers  to  the  upright 

position  taken  by  the  fowl,  but  not  now  in  use.     A.). 
Gulukquihillan,  to  be  lame  ;  (out  of  joint.     A.) 
Gulukquot,  lame ;  (with  a  joint,  or  jointed.     A.) 
Gunagen,  to  stay  out  long. 
Gunalachgat,  deep. 
Gunammochk,  otter. 

Gunaquot,  long,  tall,  high  ;  (especially,  high.     A.) 
Gunaweke,  yet,  awhile. 


46  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Gunaxin,  to  be  long,  to  be  tall,  to  be  high. 

Gunaxit,  long,  tall,  high. 

Gundakan,  throat. 

Gundaschees,  watersnake. 

Gundassisku,  deep  mire,  deep  mud, 

Gundassiskuju,  deeply  marshy. 

Gunelendam,  to  think  it  a  long  time;  to  think  a  thing 

long. 
Guneu,  long. 
Gunigischuk,  daily. 
Gunih,  a  long  while. 
Guninschu,  trough. 

Gunitpoquik,  mighty  ;  (not  in  use.     A.) 
Guntam,  to  swallow. 

Guntschitangen,  to  exhort,  to  admonish. 

Guntschitangewagan,  admonition,  exhortation. 

Gutginquechin,  to  look  back. 

Gutgisgamen,  to  drive  back. 

Gutgu,  knee. 

Guthattachgat,  single  thread,  untwisted. 

Guttandamen,  to  taste. 

Guttapachki,  one  hundred. 

Guttasch,  six. 

Guttasch  tcha  pachki,  six  hundred. 

Guttasch  tche  nachke,  sixty. 

Giittenummen,  to  take  off,  to  pull  off. 

Guttgennemen,  to  return  something,  to  give  back. 

Ganschiechsin,  to  cry  aloud. 


DICTIONARY.  47 

H. 

Ha,  ha !  exclamation  of  laughter. 

Hackialachgat,  Z,  a  cellar. 

Hagiach,  Z.,  beans,  earth-beans. 

Haken,  coal ;  (not  in  use.     A.) 

Hakey,  body,  self;  {w'hakey,  his  body;  always  with  pos- 
sessive pron.     A^ 

Hakeyiwi,  bodily,  corporeal. 

Haki,  earth,  ground. 

Hakiachxit,  bean. 

Hakihakan,  field,  plantation. 

Hakihen,  to  plant,  to  farm. 

Hakihet,  planter,  farmer  ;  {ek'hakihet.     A.) 

Hakink,  under; — untschi,  from  below. 

Hallachpis,  Z,  wild  hemp. 

Hallemiwi,  eternal,  eternally. 

Hallepangel,  barrel,  cask     (not  a  native  word.     A') 

Haniqus,  ground  squirrel ;  (any  kind  of  squirrel.     A) 

Hapichque,  Z,  a  rib  {ppichque,  a  rib;  opochquan,  all 
the  ribs.     A). 

Happa,  yet  a  little  while ;  a  little  longer. 

Happachpoon,  chair;  saddle;  bench;  seat. 

Happenikan,  pincers. 

Happi,  with  it,  in  the  bargain. 

Happis,  a  band  for  carrying  burdens. 

Haschawije,  square;  {lit.,  many  corners;  schaweje,  one 
corner,  a  square  corner.     A.) 


48  lenIp^-english 

Haschi,  ever.^at  any  time. 

Hattape,  bow. 

Hattawaniminschi,  dogwood;    (not   now   used.      See 

taquachhakaniminslii.     A.) 
Hattees,  sinew. 
Hattelii,  having. 
Hatten,  he  has,  it  is  there. 

Hatton,  to  put,  to  place,  to  fix;  (to  put  in  a  place.     A.) 
He,  he  !  exclamation  of  laughter. 
Helleniechsin,  to  speak   the   Indian  language ;   (from 

lenno,  man.     A^ 
Hempsigawan,  Z.,  a  tent. 

Hickachquon,  shin  ;  {w'ichkachqiwtt,  his  shin  bone.  A.) 
Higihhillen,  the  water  falls,  abates. 
Hikan,  ebb  tide ;  (at  the  ending  of  the  flow.     A.) 
Hikpesemen,  to  boil  water  in  till  dry. 
Hilleu,  commonly. 
Hitguttit,  little  tree. 
Hittandelitewagan,  instruction. 
Hittuk,  tree;  (the  prefix  M'  is  necessary.     See  Meliit- 

tuk.     A) 
Ho,  exclamation  of  vociferation. 

Hobbenis,  turnip  ;  {lit,  a  small  tuber,  potato,  etc.     A.) 
Hob'bin,  A.,  a  potato. 
Hoh,  exclamation  of  surprise. 
Hoh,  exclamation  of  joy. 
Hohoh,  exclamation  of  joy. 


DICTIONARY.  49 

Hokes,  bark  of  a  tree;  (some  particular  bark  not  now 

known.     The  usual  word  is  anschuin.     A.) 
Hokeyall,  himself. 
Hokquoan,  pothook;  a  chain. 
Hokunk,  above,  above  the  earth  ; — //,  upward  ; — untschi, 

from  above. 
Hogs,  kettle,  pot. 
Hopexu,   kidney;   hope'xuac,  pi.,  Z.  (not  in   use.     See 

toteloos.     A.) 
Hopikan,  rib;  {ppichqiiai.     A.     S^q  hapichque) 
Hopiquon,  foreshoulder. 
Hopoakan,  a  pipe  for  smoking  ;  (arch..  A) 
Hopochquan,  side. 
Huh  !  exclamation  of  vociferation. 
Hukqui,  chin  ;  {w'ikqui,  his  chin,     yi.) 
Hukquomilan,  hail ;  {mukquomelan.     A.) 
Hummak,  Z.,  head  lice. 
Huppeechk,  rain  worm. 
Husca,  very; — mcheli,  very  much ;  {husca,  wisca,  properly 

means  new ;  kange,  is  very,  as  kange  wiilit,  very  good.  A.) 
Huscateek^  very  much,  very  much  so. 


I. 

Ichauweleman,  to  let  somebody  have  the  preference. 
Ichauwelendam,  to  prefer;  {tachaiiwelendain,\.o  desire 
to  give  one  an  advantage.     A}j 


50  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Ichauwi,  rather. 

Ihiabtschi,  still,  to  this  time. 

Ihih  !  exclamation  of  grief. 

Ijabtschi,  yet,  still,  nevertheless,  however. 

Ika,   there,   yonder; — talli,  there,   over   there; — untschi, 

from  there,  thence;  {nellak,  is    used   locatively  with 

these  terminations,  not  ika.     A) 
Ikali,  thither;  {nellakli' .     A.) 
Ikalissi,  further,  still  further;  still  more. 
Ikalitti,  a  little  further. 
Ikih  !  exclamation  of  grief 
Ilau,  //.,  a  war  chief;  (properly,  a  man  of  valor,  one 

experienced  in  war,  not  necessarily  a  chief     A.) 
Hi,  however,  nevertheless,  still,  yet,  though; — matta,  not 

even,  allowi  matta,  let  alone  ; — wsanii,  quite  too. 
Ink  (suffix),  in,  in  the,  on,  out  of 
Iwi !  exclamation  of  grief 


J. 

Jagatamoewi  Gischuch,  July  ;  (from  amoe — honey  bee 

month.     A) 
Jaga'wan,  hut,  house;  (not  in  use.     A}j 
Jahellaap,  net  of  yarn  ;  (not  now  known.     A}) 
Janewi,  always,  at  all  times. 
Japeechen,  along  shore,  along  the  bank,  on  the  river 

side. 


DICTIONARY.  51 

Japewi,  on  the  bank,  at  the  edge ;  a  high  bank. 

Jawi,  on  one  side. 

Jechauwelendam,  to  love  better,  to  prefer;  (see  Ichau- 

welendam)) 
Ju,  exclamation  of  joy. 
Ju,  well ! 
Ju,  here,  hither; — endalauchsit,  man; — shaki,  so  far  as 

here; — talli,  just  here ; — undack,  this  side ; — jmdachqui, 

here,  hither,  this  way ; — wuntschi,  from  hence,  for  that 

reason,  therefore. 
Juch,  well ! 
Juchnall,  hither. 
Juchnook,  well ! 

Juchta,  now  (used  in  petitioning  or  interrogating). 
Juhuh  !  exclamation  used  in  calling. 
Juk,  these. 
Juke,  now,   ^xts^n\\y \—gischquik,  to-day; — likhiqui,  at 

this  time,  about  the  present  Wm^^—petschi,  till  now, 

hither; — untschi,  henceforth. 
Jukella  !  ah  !  oh  that !  would  that ! 
Juketeek  !  oh  that ! 
Jukik,  these. 
Julak,  there. 
Jullik,  these. 

Jun,  here;  through  here;  there;  this  one; — talli,  here. 
Juque,  now. 


52  LENAPfe-ENGLISII 

K. 

Kaak,  wild  goose ;  {kaag'.     A.) 

Kajah  !  wonderful !  exclamation  of  wonder. 

Kakey,  thyself. 

Katschi,  don't,  let  it  alone  !  (doubtful.     A) 

Katschiwoak,  besides,  further,  again. 

Keecha  ?  how  much? 

Keechen,  a  few  times. 

Keechi  ?  how  much  ?  (how  many?     A) 

Keechitti,  a  little. 

Keechoguni  ?  how  long  ? 

Kehella  !  yes  !  exclamation  of  approval ! 

Kekschittek,  a  stove. 

Kepe,  thou  also,  thou  too. 

Kepene,  we  also;  {ki  lonawitsch,  the  form  ke  in  these 

words  is  not  in  use.     A}) 
Kepewo,  ye  also,  you  too. 
Kepoak,  they  also. 
Ki,  thou. 

Kichgematgeu,  Z.,  a  thief. 
Kichkinet,  Z.,  a  guide  (from  kichkican,  a  mark  or  sign  ; 

kichkinet,  one  who  understands  the  marks.     -<4.). 
Kigin'amen,  to  know,  to  be  acquainted  with. 
Kiginolewagan,  sign,  token. 
Kigischgotum,  green  grasshopper. 
Kih  !  exclamation  of  pain. 


DICTIONARY.  53 

Kihhican,  Z.,  a  boundary  (a  line,  a  mark.     A}). 
Kihneu,  sharp,  biting,   harsh,  jealous;    (means    sharp, 

only.     A) 
Kihnhammen,  to  sharpen,  to  grind. 
Kihnhanschikan,   grindstone ;  {kihnhican,  a  sharpener. 

A.) 

Kihnsu,  sharp,  biting,  harsh,  jealous, 

Kikape,  a  single  man  ;  a  bachelor, 

Kikechum,  the  mother  (of  beasts) ;  (properly,  a  female 

animal  without  a  mate.     A) 
Kikehuwet,  physician. 
Kiken,  to  mend  in  health,  to  grow  better. 
Kikewagan,  cure,  life ;  (///.,  the  means  of  getting  better 

in  health.     A) 
Kikey,  old,  aged  ;  {kikes,  adults,  older  people.     A.) 
Kikeyihen,  to  lend  ;  kigaihil,  Z.  (not  in  use.     y^.) 
Kikeyin,  to  be  old,  to  be  aged. 
Kikeyjumhet,  elder,  chief  man. 
Kikeyochqueu,  elderly  woman. 
Kikochques,  a  single  woman, 
Kiluna,  we  (including  the  party  speaking  and  the  party 

spoken  to). 
Kiluwa,  ye  or  you, 
Kimi,  secretly. 

Kiminachsin,  to  murder  secretly. 
Kiminachsoagan,  murder,  assassination. 
Kiminachsu,  a  secret  murderer. 
Kiminalitten,  to  assassinate. 


54  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Kimiwipengeen,  Z.,  to  commit  adultery  {lit,  to  sleep 
secretly  together,     y^.), 

Kimixin,  to  go  from  some  place  secretly. 

Kimochwen,  to  steal  away  privately. 

Kinhican,  Z.,  a  grindstone. 

Kinhochkus,  pike  fish. 

Kipachgiminschi,  upland  hickory;  (species  of  oak. 
A) 

Kitschganinaquot,  convenient. 

Kitschgansowagan,  convenience,  commodiousness. 

Kitschii,  verily,  truly ;  (great,  very.     A') 

Kitschikele,  yes,  it  is  true;  (incorrect;  ele  is  a  superla- 
tive form,  and  could  not  be  used  with  kitschi.     A.) 

Kitschinipen,  summer,  June. 

Kitschitachquoak,  autumn  month,  September. 

Kitschi^vi,  certainly,  truly,  verily. 

Kittachpanschi,  spar,  rafter;  (any  large  piece  of  timber ; 
from  pantschiy  timber.     A^ 

Kittahikan,  great  sea,  ocean. 

Kittakima,  great  king  ;  (the  word  sakima,  of  which  this 
is  a  compound,  is  no  longer  used.     A.) 

Kittan,  great  river  ;  (arch.,  kitseepu  would  be  used  now. 
A) 

Kittapachki,  thousand. 

Kittaptonen,  to  affirm,  to  assure. 

Kittelendam,  to  be  in  earnest. 

Kittelendamwagan,  earnest. 

Kittelinsch,  thumb. 


DICTIONARY.  55 

Kitthukquewulinschawon,  thumb. 

Kittoaltewall,  great  ships, 

Kittuteney,  great  city. 

Kiwikaman,  to  visit  somebody, 

Kiwiken,  to  visit;  (/zV.,  thy-house-going;  not  now  used. 

A.) 
Klahikan,  trap, 

Klakaptonaganall,  Z.,  an  amusing  tale, 
Klakauchso\vagan,     divertisement,    light-mindedness ; 

(from  gluxsu,  he  laughs.) 
Klakelendam,   to  be  rakish,  to  be  extravagant,  to  be 

dissolute,  to  be  a  good-for-nothing  fellow, 
Klamachpin,  to  be  quiet,  to  sit  still, 
Klamhattenamin,  to  be  of  a  calm  mind. 
Klamhattenamoagan,  calmness  of  mind, 
Klammiechen,  to  be  still,  not  to  progress, 
Klampeechen,  still  water. 
Kloltin,  to  quarrel,  to  contend  ;  (to  use  bad  words  to  each 

other,     A}j 
Kloltowagan,  quarrel,  dispute. 
Klunewagan,  Z.,  a  lie,  a  falsehood, 
Knattemihi,  Z.,  lend  me. 
Kolku,  what,  something;  what? — c^/, what  may  it  be? — 

tani?  what  then? — untschi,  for  what  reason,  why; — 

wuntschi,  vi\vy  \  {queq  /     A.) 
Kombachquall,  leaves,  foliage. 
Komelendam,  to  be  free  from  trouble  or  care ;  (not  in 

use.     A.) 


06  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Kommot,  to  steal. 

Kommotgen,  stolen. 

Kommothaken,  to  steal  something  out  of  a  field. 

Kopachkan,  thick. 

Kopachkisse,  thick. 

Kotschemunk,  out  of  doors,  out  of  this  place;  without; 

abroad  ;  {quotsch'  mink.     A.) 
Kpahasu,  locked  up,  shut  up,  caught. 
Kpahi,  shut  the  door ;  {kpali'hi' .     A.) 
Kpahikan,  stopper;  a  cover  or  lid. 
Kpahon,  door. 

Kpahotink,  prison  ;  [keli' pahotink.     A.) 
Kpaskhasu,  stopped. 
Kpatten,  frozen  over;  frozen  shut. 
Kpiktschehican,  Z.,  a  cover,  a  lid. 
Kpitschchikan,  breech  of  a  gun, 
Kpitscheu,  unruly,  foolish  behaved. 
Kpitschewagan,  foolishness. 
Ksakpatton,  to  make  wet. 
Kschachan,  the  wind  blows  hard. 
Kschahepakandamen,  to  beat  hard. 
Kschamamquo,  grievous,  troublesome. 
Kschamehhellan,  to  run  fast. 
Kschaptonalan,   to  use  somebody  ill,  to   abuse  some 

one. 
Kschatey,  tobacco ;  achzvan  Kschatey,  strong  tobacco. 
Kschatteechen,  beaten  road,  path. 
Kschiechanittowit,  Holy  God. 


DICTIONARY.  57 

Kschiechauchsowagan,  holiness,  innocence. 

Kschiechek,  clean. 

Kschiechelendam,  to  think  one's  self  from  stain ;  to 
think  one's  self  sinless  ;  to  think  that  one  is  holy. 

Kschiechelensin,  to  believe  to  be  blameless,  to  believe 
to  be  holy. 

Kschiechen,  to  wash. 

Kschiechen,  clean. 

Kschiechgochgihillen,  to  bleed  fast. 

Kschiechhensin,  to  wash  one's  self. 

Kschiechi,  clear. 

Kschiechihin,  to  make  clean. 

Kschiechpecat,  clear  water. 

Kschiechsin,  to  be  clean. 

Kschiechton,  to  wash,  to  cleanse. 

Kschihillen,  to  go  fast,  to  go  swiftly. 

Kschikan,  knife  ;  {pachschika?i.     A) 

Kschilan,  it  rains  hard. 

Kschilandeke,  summer. 

Kschilandeu,   very  hot  weather ;  (///.,  much  sunshine. 

.    A.) 

Kschipasques,  green  grasshopper. 

Kschippehellen,   the  water  flows  rapidly;  strong  cur- 
rent. 

Kschipsin,  to  have  the  itch. 
Kschipsit,  one  that  has  the  itch. 
Kschite,  broth  ;  [kschite,  the  i  long.     A.) 
Kschitten,  warm,  hot. 

E 


58  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Kschiwineu,  it  snows  very  thick. 

Kschochwen,  to  walk  fast. 

Kschuppan,  blunt,  dull. 

Ksinachpin,  to  be  at  leisure. 

Ksinelendam,  to  be  easy,  to  be  without  care. 

Ksinhattenamin,    to    be   of    an   indifferent   heart    and 

mind. 
Ksinhattenamoagan,  indifference,  calmness. 
Ksukquamallsin,  to  be  perplexed,  to  be  in  anguish  of 

mind  ;  {ksakquelendam,  thou  art  perplexed.     A.) 
Ksukquamallsoagan,  perplexity,  mental  anguish. 
Ksukquinaquot,  heavy  in  a  manner. 
Ksukquon,  heavy;  hard,  difficult;  hardly. 
Ktakan,  another;  otherwise,  in  another  manner. 
Ktemakauchsoagan,  poor,  miserable  life. 
Ktemaki,  poor,  miserable,  infirm. 
Ktemakiechin,  to  lie  sick  in  a  poor  condition. 
Ktemaque,  beaver  ;  {amochk.     Z.) 
Ktemaxin,  to  be  poor,  to  be  miserable;  to  be  poorly. 
Ktschihillalan,  to  betray  somebody. 
Ktschillachton,  to  make  known,  to  make  manifest,".to 

speak  the  truth. 
Ktschimine,  as  soon  as. 
Ktschin,  to  go  out ;  {acktschm,  impers.     A.) 
Ktschinquehhellen,  the  sun  rises. 
Ktschiqwagan,  gun  drawer. 
Ktscholtin,  to  come  out  of  church. 
Ktschukquihhilleu,  it  moves,  it  stirs. 


DICTIONARY.  59 

Ktschukquilques,  Z.,  grasshopper  (///.,  it  moves  in  the 

grass.     A}). 
Ktukin,  to  turn  back;  (probably  an  error  for  k'tokkin,  to 

wake  up.     A.) 
KuUuppi,  Z.,  to  convert  {lit,  to  turn.     A). 
Kunhaffun,  Z.,  to  polish,  to  grind,  to  sharpen. 
Kutschin,  to  come  out  of  the  house. 
Kuwe,  pine;  (see  Cuwe.) 
Kuweuchak,  pine  wood,  pine  logs. 
Kuwewanik,  red  squirrel. 


L. 

Lachauweleman,  to  be  concerned  for  somebody. 
Lachauwelendam,  to  be  concerned  for  something ;  to 

be  troubled  in  mind. 
Lachauwelendamen,  to  take  care  of,  to  be  concerned 

for. 
Lachauwelendamoagan,  concern. 
Lachauwiechen,  to  hinder. 
Lachenendowagan,  release,  loosening. 
Lachenummen,  to  untie,  to  loosen. 
Lachgalaan,  Z.,  to  anger. 
Lachgaman,  to  treat  somebody  ill. 
Lachkan,  sharp  tasted. 
Lachpiechsin,  to  speak  fast. 
Lachpihhilleu,  it  goes  fast,  it  moves  swiftly. 


60  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Lachpikin,  to  grow  fast. 

Lachwegegquoakan,  harrow. 

Lachxowi'lenno,  Z.,  captain  (one  experienced  in  war. 

a:). 

Lachxu,  Z.,  a  fishing  rod. 

Lachxuagan,  Z.,  anger. 

Lakenindewagan,  accusation. 

Laktschehellan,  to  jump  over,  to  leap  over. 

Lakusin,  to  climb  up  ;  n'gejidachgtisi,  I  cHmb  up. 

Lalchauchsitaja,  fork  of  the  toes;  {w'lhauchsitan.     A.) 

Lalchauwulinschaja,  fork  of  the  fingers. 

Lalenikan,  scour  grass  ;  {Eqiiisehan  hyemale.     B.) 

Lalhan,  to  scrape  something;  (to  rub,  to  polish.     A) 

Lalhaquoakan,  drawing  knife. 

Lalschin,  to  cut  smooth,  to  make  even. 

Lamowo,  downward,  slanting. 

Landawen,  it  runs  up,  it  climbs  up,  it  spins  up;  (not  in 

use.     A.) 
Langan,  easy,  light,  not  heavy. 
Langoma,  Z.,  kinsman. 
Langomuwinaxin,  to  look  friendly. 
Langundowagan,  peace. 
Langundowi,  peaceable,  peaceful;  (without  the  prefixed 

w  this  word  means  relationship.     A) 
Langundowits'chik,  Z.,  kindred,  relatives. 
Lapechikan,  plough. 
Lapeechton,  to  tune  an  instrument. 
Laphaken,  to  replant. 


DICTIONARY.  61 

Laphatton,  to  restore,  to  repair,  to  replace  ;  {lapachton, 

to  replace.     ^.) 
Lappi,  again,  once  moxQ\—tchen,  as  much  again. 
Lappiechsin,  to  repeat,  to  say  over. 
Lappilennin,   to  come  together  again,  to  be  together 

again. 

Laptonachgat,  meaning  of  the  word,  signification  of  the 
word. 

Laptonasu,  Z.,  commanded  (bridled,  held  by  the  mouth 
A). 

Laschimuin,  to  dream;  (not  in  use.  A.    Now  hmgamen) 
Laschinummen,  A.,  to  see  at  a  glance  or  for  a  moment. 
Latschachken,  to  treat. 
Latschessowagan,  goods,  merchandise. 
Latschessowen,  to  enjoy  riches  ;  to  possess. 
Lattoniken,  to  search,  to  examine. 
Lauchpoame,  middle  of  the  thigh. 
Lauchsin,  to  live,  to  walk;  (to  live  in  a  certain  manner; 

to  walk  morally  or  otherwise,  not  literally.     ^.) 
Lauchsohalid,  he  who  makes  me  live. 
Lauchsoheen,  to  make  live,  to  make  walk,  to  cause  to 

be  lively,  to  make  happy. 
Lauchsowagan,  behavior,  life. 
Lauhakamike,  middle  of  a  piece  of  ground. 
Lawachto,  worth,  value. 
Lawachtohen,  to  set  a  price. 
Lawachtowagan,  price,  value. 
Lawantpe,  crown  of  the  head. 


62  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Lawasgoteu,  Z.,  a  wide  plain  {lit.,  it  is  in  the  middle 
of  a  plain.     A)). 

Lawat,  long  ago  ;  {laxvata.     A.) 

Lawi,  A.,  the  middle,  midst. 

Lawilowan,  middle  of  winter;  {lawilowank.     A.) 

Lawitpikat,  midnight. 

Lawochgalauwe,  middle  of  the  forehead. 

Lawulinsch,  middle  finger. 

Lechakquihhillen,  it  slackens. 

Lechauhanne,  fork  of  a  river. 

Lechauwak,  fork  ;  division,  separation. 

Lechauwaquot,  a  tree  with  a  fork. 

Lechauwiechen,  fork  of  a  road. 

Lechewon,  breath,  air  (from  awon,  mist.     A.). 

Lehellechemhaluwet,  he  who  giveth  life. 

Lehellechen,  to  live,  to  breathe. 

Lehellechewagan,  breath,  life;  {lehellachemhalgiin,  Z., 
he  saved  my  life.) 

Lehellemattachpink,  chair,  stool,  bench. 

Lekau,  sand,  gravel. 

Lake,  true. 

Lekhammen,  to  write. 

Lekhammewagan,  debt ;  [lekhammawachtoagan,  an  ac- 
count.    Z)j 

Lekhasik,  written. 

Lekhasu,  written. 

Lekhikan,  letter,  epistle;  book. 

Lekhiken,  to  write. 


DICTIONARY.  63 

Lekhiket,  writer. 
Lelawi,  halfway,  in  the  middle. 
Lrclemin,  to  let,  to  suffer,  to  permit,  to  grant. 
Lelingen,  to  permit;  to  allow. 
Lemachdappit,  he  who  sits  here. 
Lemattachpin,  to  sit  down. 
Lenape,  Indian ;  man. 
Lenapeuhoxen,  Indian  shoes. 
Lfenhacki,  Z.,  upland  (barren  highlands.     ^.). 
Lennahawanink,  at  the  right  hand,  to  the  right. 
Lennamek,  chop  fish. 
Lenni,  Z.,  genuine,  pure,  real,  original. 
Lenni,  hand  it ;  [linachke,  Z.,  reach  your  hand.) 
Lenniga'wan,  Z.,  a  cabin  (a  common  house,  a  tempo- 
rary shelter,  a  store  room.     A). 
Lennikbi,  linden  tree  (  bark  of  the  bass-wood  tree.     A.). 
Lennitti,  a  little  while. 
Lenno,  man ;  pi.,  lennowak. 
Lennotit,  little  man. 
Lennowasquall,  fern  ;  {lit.,  male  fern.) 
Lennowechum,  male  of  beasts. 
Lennowehellen,  male  of  birds  and  fowls. 
Lennowinaquot,  manfully. 
Lepakgik,  those  who  weep,  weepers. 
Lepakuwagan,  weeping. 
Lepoatschik,  wise  men. 
Leppoewina,  cunning  man. 
Leu,  true;  it  is  so. 


64  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Lewehhelleu,  it  sounds. 

Li,  to ;  thither. 

Liechenan,  to  leave  out. 

Liechenummen,  to  take  off,  to  take  down. 

Liechin,  to  lie  down,  to  rest. 

Liechsowagan,  language. 

Lihan,  to  do  so  to  somebody. 

Likhikqui,  now,  about  that  time  ;  as  soon  as  ;  as,  so  as. 

Likhikquiechen,  so  as. 

Lilchpin,  to  be  willing;  to  be  diligent. 

Lileno,  A.,  an  office,  one  holding  an  office. 

Lilenowagan,   custom,  rule,  law;    (holding   an   office. 

A.) 
Limattachpanschi,  rafter  on  the  roof  of  a  house. 
Linachgechtin,  to  lay  hands  to  something. 
Linachken,  to  reach  forth  the  hand. 
Linalittin,  to  fight ;  (refers  to  the  extent  of  the  fight. 

A.) 
Linaquot,  like  unto ;  as  this,  that  or  the  other ;  so,  so 

as. 
Linaxu,  like  unto. 
Linchen,  west  wind. 
Lingihhillen,  it  thaws,  it  melts. 
Linhakamike,  upland  ;  (see  Lcnhacki^ 
Linkteu,  it  melts. 

Linnilenape,  Indians  of  the  same  nation,  Delawares. 
Linquechin,  to  look,  to  behold. 
Linschgan,  finger. 


DICTIONARY.  65 

Linxasu,  melted. 

Linxummen,  to  melt. 

Lippoe,  experienced ;  wise. 

Lissin,  to  be  so;  to  do  so;  to  be  so  situated,  to  be  so 

disposed ;  to  act  so. 
Litchen,  to  think  ;  to  think  so. 
Litchewagan,  thought,  sentiment,  opinion. 
Littin,  to  say  to  each  other,  to  say  among  themselves. 
Littonhen,  to  preach  in  such  a  manner. 
Liwamallsin,  to  mend,  to  grow  better  in  health. 
Liwasnosqueu,  overgrown  with  weeds. 
Liwasquall,    weeds ;    (any   kind    of    grass    or   weeds ; 

generic.     A.) 
Li\A^i,  toward. 
Lfiwiechen,  to  rest. 
Lo  !  see,  behold  ! 

Loaktschehellen,  Z.,  it  leaps,  it  jumps. 
Loamisso we,  lately ;  {lomisu.    Z.) 
Loamoe,  long  ago,  in  olden  times  ;  (not  now  used   in 

this  form.     A.) 
Lochlogannechwin,  to  destroy. 
Logahhellan,  to  be  discouraged,  to  give  up. 
Logahhellen,  discouraged  ;  (broken  up.     A.) 
Logahhellewagan,  discouragement. 
Loganechwin,  to  throw  down,  to  destroy. 
Logihilleu,  it  falls  in. 

Logillachton,  to  tear,  to  destroy,  to  stop,  to  cease. 
Lohikan,  forefinger;  (/zV.,  the  pointer.     A) 


66  LENAPfi-ENGLISII 

Lohumanwan,  to  show  somebody. 

Lokan,  hip,  thigh  joint;  {w'lokaii;  the  possessive  must 

be  used.     A^ 
Lokat,  flour;  (something  broken  into  bits;  loken,  flour. 

A.) 

Lokenummen,  to  tear  in  pieces,  to  pull  apart. 

Lokhammen,  bran,  shorts. 

Lokschummen,  to  cut  loose;  {^.xq\\.,  pachschtunmen,  is 

to  cut  loose ;  lokschannien,  to  cut  at  the  knot.     A.) 
Longachsiss,  cousin  ;  (error,  a  nephew.     A) 
Lonquamwagan,  a  dream;  [lungtvamen.    Z.) 
Loquel !  see ! 
Lowan,  winter. 
Lowanachen,  north  wind. 
LfOwaneu,   northward,    northerly,  north ;  {lowanewiink, 

in  the  north  ;  lowamie  Lenape,  Z.,  northern  Indians.) 
Lowanneunk,  northward. 
Lowilaan,  the  rain  is  over. 
Lowin,  to  pass  by. 

Lowunsuagan,  Z.,  a  name.     See  luwunsuagan. 
Lowulen,  it  burns  in  a  flame. 
Luchund,  he  is  said  to  have  said. 
Luejun,  said. 
Luen,   to  say;  (to   give  a  definite  sound  of  any  kind. 

A) 
Luewagan,  saying;  (the  giving  a  definite  sound.     A.) 
Lungwamen,  Z.,  to  dream. 
Lunk,  or,  Lunkus,  Z.,  a  cousin  (error,  a  nephew.     A). 


DICTIONARY.  67 

Luppoe,  wisely. 

Luppoewagan,  cunningness,  vvittiness. 

Lusasin,  to  burn. 

Lusasu,  burnt. 

Lussemen,  to  burn. 

Lussin,  to  burn. 

Luteu,  it  burns. 

Liiwunsu,  called,  named. 

Liiwunsuagan,  the  na.mQ ;  {ICocu  ktellihisi?   Z.     What 

is  thy  name?  Kocu  lowiinsu  wikimat ?     What  is  thy 

wife's  name  ?) 

M. 

Ma,  here  take  it,  there  it  is. 

Maag,  Z.,  female  genitals. 

Macheleman,  to  esteem  somebody,  to  value  some  one, 

to  honor  some  one,  to  praise  somebody. 
Machelemoachgeniman,  to  honor  and  praise  somebody, 

to  glorify  some  one. 
Machelemoachgenimgussowagan,    the    receiving    of 

honor  and  praise. 
Machelemoachgenindewagan,  praise,  glory, 
Machelemuwi,  honorable,  precious. 
Machelemuxit,  he  that  is  honored. 
Machelemuxowagan,  honor. 
Machelendam,  to  esteem,  to  value,  to  honor,  to  esteem 

it  an  honor. 


68  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Machelendamoagan,  esteem,  high  value. 
Machelensin,  to  be  high  minded,  to  be  proud. 
Machelensowagan,  pride. 
Macheli,  much,  many;  (or,  chcli.     A.) 
Macheu,  great,  large. 
Machgachk,  Z.,  a  pumpkin. 
Machgeuachgook,  Z.,  copper  snake. 
Machiechsin,  to  speak  loud. 
Machkachsin,  Z.,  copper. 
Machkachtawunge,  red  bank  of  a  river. 
Machkachten,  coal  of  fire. 

Machkajappan,  Z.,the  aurora,  dawn  (alludes  to  the  red- 
ness of  the  morning  sky.     A.). 

Machkalett,  rusty. 

Machkalingus,  sunfish. 

Machkametank,  stream  of  a  reddish  color. 

Machkanachkteu,  twilight. 

Machkasgachteyat,  red-bellied  snake. 

Machkassin,  brick. 

Machkelechen,  red  looking. 

Machkenummen,  to  pull  off,  to  take  off. 

Machkeu,  red  ;  {inachkipachgihilleu,  Z,  the  leaves  (of  the 
trees)  turn  red  (in  the  autumn).     See  Combach.) 

Machkewehhellachtikan,  flag,  banner. 

Machkhattachquall,  red  yarn,  red  thread. 

Machkigen,  Z.,  the  white  thorn. 

Machkikeniminschi,  thorn  bush. 

Machkipachgihhilleu,  the  leaves  grow  red. 


DICTIONARY.  69 

Machkten,  twilight;  (redness  of  sky.     A.) 

Machque,  bear. 

Machquigen,  plenty  of  bears. 

Machquin,  to  swell. 

Machquissin,  to  be  swelled. 

Machquissu,  swelled. 

Machtagen,  to  fight. 

Machtageoagan,  war,  fighting. 

Machtakeniman,  to  accuse  somebody,  to  speak  ill  of 

some  one. 
Machtakenimgussin,  to  be  ill  spoken  of. 
Machtakenindewagan,  bad  accusation. 
Machtalappajo,  bad  morning  weather. 
Machtalipachquall,  bad  shoes. 
Machtallogagan,  bad,  wicked  servant. 
Machtallogasowagan,  wicked  act ;  sinful  deed. 
Machtalohumauwan,  to  direct  somebody  the   wrong 

way. 
Machtamallsin,  to  be  sick. 
Machtamellessuwi,  indisposed,  sick. 
Machtando,   devil ;    {inachtan' to ,  a    shortened   form    of 

machti-manitto.     A?) 
Machtandowagan,  devilishness. 

Machtandowinenk,  Z.,  hell ;  {lit.,  among  the  devils,  y^.) 
Machtapamukquot,  dusky,  dark. 

Machtapan,  bad,  stormy  weather;  unpleasant  morning, 
Machtapeek,  bad  time,  war  time. 
Machtapequonitto,  evil  spirit. 


70  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Machtaptonen,  to  speak  uncivilly,  to  talk  roughly,  to 
use  bad  language. 

Machtatenamen,  lo  be  unfortunate,  to  be  unhappy,  to 
be  displeased  ;  to  be  discontented,  to  be  dissatisfied. 

Machtatenamoagan,  unhappiness,  discontent. 

Machtatenamohen,  to  make  unhappy,  to  make  dis- 
satisfied. 

Machtatenamuwi,  unhappy,  discontented, 

Machtatschahen,  to  u.se  somebody  ill,  to  treat  some 
one  badly. 

Machtauchsin,  to  sin;  {lit.,  bad  life.     A) 

Machtauchsowagan,  sin, 

Machtauchsuwi,  sinful. 

Machtenalittin,  to  fight,  to  fight  with  each  other,  to 
fight  a  battle. 

Machtississu,  bad,  ugly;  dirty  looking. 

Machtissu,  bad,  ugly. 

Machtit,  bad,  ill. 

Machtitso,  bad,  ill, 

Machtittonhen,  to  abuse,  to  scold. 

Machtiwitti,  very  little. 

Machtonquoan,  to  have  a  bad  dream. 

Machtschihillen,  spoiled,  corrupted. 

Machtschikamik,  hole,  grave. 

Machtschikamikunk,  Z.,  a  burial  place. 

Machtschikbiak,  papaw  tree  ;  {lit.,  red  fruit  tree,     ^.) 

Machtschileu,  bad  action,  troublesome  time. 


DICTIONARY.  71 

Machtschilissit,  sinner. 

Machtschilokes,  leather'string. 

Machtschiluppoat,  hypocrite. 

Machtschiluppoewagan,  hypocrisy. 

Machtschimaquot,  ill  flavored,  nasty  smelled. 

Machtschipak,  shoe ;  {machtsin,  whence  moccasin.     A) 

Machtschipoquot,  ill  tasted,  of  a  disagreeable  taste. 

Machtschitehewagan,  wickedness. 

Machtu,  bad. 

Machtumbink,  dung. 

Machxitachpoan,  bread  mixed  with  beans. 

Machxummen,  to  dye  red. 

Magami,  early  ;  {inajapowi.     A.) 

Mahallamagen,  to  sell. 

Mahellis,  flint;  {inaliales.     Z) 

Mahematschehellat,  cock  of  a  gun  lock. 

Mahonink,  H.,  at  the  deer-lick. 

Majauchsin,  to  be  of  one  mind. 

Majauchsohen,  to  make  of  one  mind. 

Majauchsowagan,  union,  unity,  agreement. 

Majauchsu,  one  person,  a  certain  one;  (one  alone.     A.) 

Majauchsuwi,  of  one  mind,  united. 

Majauchsuwin,  to  be  of  one  mind. 

Majawat,  one,  only  one. 

Majawi,  right,  straight,  proper;   alone,  simple; — wulit, 

best. 
Majawiechen,  it  is  right,  it  is  as  it  should  be  ;  it  agrees, 

it  suits,  it  harmonizes,  it  corresponds. 


72  LENAP6-ENGLISH 

Majawiechton,  to  do  orderly,  to  do  properly,  to  com- 
pare. 

Majawihillen,  it  is  right,  it  is  as  it  should  be. 
Majewelendam,  to  be  fixed  in  purpose,  to  be  settled  in 
mind. 

Makesinnan,  to  shoe  somebody;  (see  machtschipak) 

Makhaquoakan,  grubbing  hoe. 

Maksaweek,  Aaron  root  {Rhus  cotimis?     Z) 

Mallachsche,  as  if,  as  it  were,  like  unto. 

Mallachxit,  bean  ;  (the  ordinary  term.     A) 

Mallaluns,  iron  wood  (a  sort  of  beech). 

Malliku,  witchcraft;  (out  of  use  at  present;   machtanha, 

one  is  bewitched.     A) 
Mallikuwagan,  witchcraft. 
Mallsannuk,  arrow,  flint. 
Mamachtachaweju,  weakly. 
Mamachtapewi,  Z.,  naughty,  bad. 
Mamachtaptonagan,  wicked  language,  vile  talk;  rough 

speaking. 
Mamachtschiman,    to    revile   somebody,   to    reproach 

some  one,  to  insult  somebody. 
Mamachtschimgussowagan,  the  being  insulted. 
Mamalachgook,  striped  snake, 
Mamalekhikan,  writing,  letter,  book  ;  (///.,  in  crooked 

lines  or  stripes  ;  applied  to  handwriting.     A.) 
Mamalis,  fawn,  young  deer. 
Mamalunquan,  sort  of  stinging  fly. 
Mamawon,  eyebrow. 


DICTIONARY.  73 

Mamchachwelendam,  to  suffer,  to  endure  pain. 
Mamchachwelendamoagan,  suffering,  torment. 
Mamelandamen,  to  vomit. 
Mamguckcu,  Z.,  a  plain  without  trees,  a  prairie  (error; 

rather  a  plain  with  large  trees.     A}). 
Mamiechanessin,  to  be  ashamed. 
Mamintschim,  to  praise. 

Mamintschimgussowagan,  the  being  praised. 
Mamintschindewagan,  praise. 
Mamintschindin,  to  praise,  to  give  glory. 
Mamschalan,  to  remember  somebody. 
Mamschalgussowagan,  the  being  remembered,  remem- 
brance. 
Mamschaltin,  to  keep  each  other  in  remembrance. 
Mamtschitsch,  the  last  time,  lastly. 
Mamtschitschi,  the  last  time,  at  last. 
Mamukowagan,  destruction,  perdition;  (refers especially 

to  a  fatal  accident.     A}) 
Manachewagan,  the]cutting  of  fire  wood. 
Manask,  second  crop. 

Manasuagan,  Z.,  jealousy  (especially  sexual  jealousy.  A^). 
Mandoman,  to  blame  somebody. 
Mandomgussin,  to^be  blamed. 
Mandundewagan,  blame,  imputation. 
Manejeu,  it  profits  little,  it  contains  but  little. 
Maniton,  to  make ;  nm  mattineto,  Z.,  I  make ;  ki  k'malleii- 
ito,  thou  makest  (arch.,  nulitton,  I  make,  ktditton,  etc. 
A). 
p 


74  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Manitto,  maker,   Creator,    God ;    (properly,    spirit,  not 

maker.     A.) 
Manittowah'alaan,  Z.,  to  bewitch. 
Manittowihak,  steel. 
Mannachen,  to  chop  wood. 
Mannachet,  wood  cutter. 
Manoquen,  to  scalp. 
Manoquenasu,  scalped  {^nanoquala,  one  who  is  scalped. 

A). 
Manschasqueen,  to  mow,  to  reap. 
Manschasquoakan,  scythe. 
Manschawileu,  wonderful. 
Mantowagan,  spiritual  power  (from  manitto). 
Manungalan,  to  treat  somebody  badly. 
Manunxin,  to  be  cross,  to  be  angry. 
Manunxuagan,  Z.,  anger. 
Manuppekhasu,  skimmed. 
Maqueleman,    to   be  jealous  of  somebody  ;    to    ^wxy 

some  one. 
Maschapi,  bead. 
Maschilamek,  trout;  {lit.,  '.'like  a  fish,"  not  now  applied 

to  a  trout.     ^.) 
Masgichteu,  May  apple. 
Maskek,  swamp. 

Maskekhanne,  muddy  creek  in  a  swamp. 
Maskequimin,  swamp  huckleberry. 
Maskik,  grass,  herb  ;  {maskeqiiasq' .     A) 
Masktin,  Z.,  to  ease  one's  self. 


DICTIONARY.  '75 

Massipook,  the  river  drifts  ice. 

Matschachton,  to  carry  away. 

Matschalan,  to  bring  somebody  home. 

Matschilissowagan,  sinful  behavior. 

Matschin,  to  go  home. 

Matschinamen,  to  take  ill ;  to  be  ill  pleased. 

Matschiton,  to  spoil  something,  to  make  mischief. 

Matta,  no,  not; — ta,  nowhere; — tani,  in  noway. 

Matt  ago,  no. 

Mattalan,  to  come  up  with  somebody. 

Mattameechen,   cross   roads ;  (where  one   road   enters 

another,  not  a  cross  road.     A^ 
Mattaptonaltin,  to  speak  bad  to  one  another;  to  scold 

each  other,  to  abuse  each  other  by  words. 
Mattaptonen,  to  speak  uncivil,  to  talk  roughly,  to  scold. 

Matteleman,  to  despise  somebody. 

Mattelemuwi,  despicable,  contemptible. 

Mattelemuxin,  to  be  despised. 

Mattelemuxowagan,  the  being  despised. 

Mattelendam,  to  be  uneasy,  to  be  troubled  in  mind;  to 
despise. 

Mattemigalan,  to  let  somebody  in. 

Mattemigen,  to  enter  in. 

Mattochwen,  to  travel  badly. 

Mattonheen,  Z.,  to  curse  (to  give  bad  words.     A^. 

Mauchsu,  one  living  thing  ;  one. 

Mauwallauwin,  to  go  hunting. 

Mauwi,  go  and  tell. 


76  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Mauwikhattoak,  Z.,  camped,  encamped  (collected  to- 
gether.    A.). 

Mawachpo,  collector. 

Mawachpoagan,  tribute,  tax. 

Ma-wat,  one,  only  one, 

Mawemin,  to  meet,  to  assemble;  {;/iawru>t,Z.,  an  assem- 
bly.) 

Mawenemen,  to  gather,  to  collect,  to  bring  together. 

Mawewigawan,  meeting  house. 

Mawingewagan,  reconciliation. 

Mawinhaken,  to  go  to  war. 

Mawinsin,  to  gather,  to  pick  up. 

Mawottakan,  famine,  scarcity  of  provision. 

Mawunappin,  to  be  assembled. 

Mawuni,    assembled,  collectively. 

Mbeson,  Z.,  brandy  (spirits,  from  mdi.     A.). 

Mbi,  water. 

Mbiachgook,  water  snake. 

Mbiachk,  whale. 

Mbidhitehemen,  to  cut  one's  self 

Mbil,  Z.,  beer;  vibilheen,  to  brew  beer. 

Mbisis,  Z.,  a  lake. 

Mbison,  Z..  bait;  taniaqiiei  mbison,  beaver  bait. 

Mboagan,  death. 

Mboawikcham,  hiccough. 

Mboiwi,  mortal,  dead. 

Mbokquasquihillan,  to  break  in  the  ice. 

Mechakgilik,  great,  big. 


DICTIONARY.  77 

Mechakhokque,  the  month  when  cold  makes  the  trees 
crack,  December;  (dub.,  A.) 

Mechamek,  wild  rhubarb. 

Mechaquiechen,  high  water,  freshet. 

Mechasktschat,  thick  bellied. 

Mechateu,  deep  snow;  (arch..  A.) 

Mechawachto,  dear. 

Mechek,  great,  large. 

Mechelemuxit,  the  honored. 

Mechelgik,  great  many  ;  multitude. 

Mecheli,  much;  (a  great  many.     A.) 

Mechelit,  much. 

Mechen,  big,  large. 

Mechgilik,  the  great,  the  big. 

Mechhanneck,  large  creek,  large  river. 

Mechinkhakihakan,  large  field. 

Mechinkhakihen,  to  plant  a  large  piece  of  ground. 

Mechinqui,  great,  large,  big. 

Mechinquinaquot,  it  appears  large,  it  looks  great. 

Mechinquitehewagan,  self  pride. 

Mechitquek,  great  depth. 

Mechiwilawanit,  great  sarsaparilla, 

Mechmauwikenk,  Z.,  camp. 

Mechmenahikeak,  scum  ladle. 

Mechoak,  old  tree;  (the  me,  prefix,  in  these  and  the  fol- 
lowing words  would  be  omitted  at  present.     A.) 

Mechoammowi  gischuch,  shad  month,  March. 

Mechohakihan,  old  field. 


78  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Mechouteney,  old,  dilapidated  town. 

Mechowasquall,  old,  dry  grass. 

Mechowi,  old  (in  use);  {chowi.     A.) 

Mechowijeyju,  old  from  use. 

Medhake,  matter. 

Medhapahin,  to  surprise. 

Medhik,  bad,  wicked  ;  evil. 

Medsit,  bad,  wicked,  evil  one. 

Meechgalanne,  hawk. 

Meechgalhukquot,  red  hair. 

Meechgalowet,  fish  like  a  sucker ;  (red-finned  sucker. 

A.) 
Meechgapuek,  ipecacuanha. 
Meechxit,  the  red  one. 
Megucke,  Z.,  a  wide  plain. 
Megungi,  wholly,  entirely,  purely,  quite,  alone. 
Megutschi,  wholly,  entirely. 
Mehakachtey,  coal  of  fire, 
Mehallamagen,  to  sell  (error;  to  buy.     A.). 
Mehallamawachtowagan,  merchandise. 
Mehallamen,  to  buy,  to  purchase. 

Mehamentschit,  robber;  {(rom  amejitschiechten;  arch.,y^.) 
Mehemendowan,  to  entreat  somebody. 
Mehemendowen,  to  ask  pardon,  to  beg  on. 
Mehemetanglowagan,  agony  of  death. 
Mehihschiu,  barren. 
Mehittachpin,  to  be  born. 
Mehittachpit,  begotten. 


DICTIONARY.  79 

Mehittachpoagan,  birth. 

Mehittgus,  twig. 

Mehittschoak,  barren  tree. 

Mehittschohawi,  corporeal  material. 

Mehittuk,  tree. 

Mehokhokus,  red  cedar. 

Mehokquami,  ice. 

Mehokquamileno,  hail. 

Mehokquik,  bloody. 

Mehokquiman,  red  bird. 

Mehokquinewagan,  bloody  flux. 

Mehokquitamen,  to  bleed  at  the  nose. 

Mehowimi,  raspberry;  (wild  black  raspberry.     A.) 

Mehuk,  blood. 

Mehukachgook,  copper  snake. 

Mehukuwi,  bloody. 

Mejauchsit,  one,  a  certain  one. 

Mejauchsoagan,  Z.,  an  alliance,  confederation. 

Mejauchsu,  one  person. 

Mejauchsuwin,  Z.,  to  ally,  to  become  one. 

Meken,  to  give  away,  to  surrender. 

Mekeniechink,  the  end,  the  last  day. 

Mekih,    corruption,  matter ;    (error ;  giving    it    up ;    an 

error  of  the  copyist  for  meli/t.     A.) 
Mekis,  sheep;  {inemekis,  imitative  of  bleating.     A) 
Melandam,  to  vomit. 
Melanschpen,  to  take  a  vomit. 
Melanschpewagan,  vomiting. 


80  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Melichgawan,  pillow,  cushion. 

Melih,  corruption,  matter. 

Melihasu,  mattery,  putrid. 

Mellaam,  to  smell. 

Memachtakeniman,  to  speak  evil  of  somebody. 

Memachtschilan,  to  speak  evil  to  somebody. 

Memachtschilissit,  sinner ;  (of  evil  countenance.     A.) 

Memajauchsit,  each  one,  every  one. 

Memakochkus,  red-headed  woodpecker. 

Memanunxit,  Z.,  ill-natured,  surly. 

Memedhakemo,  turtle  dove;  {inowichlcu,  the  wild  dove. 

A) 
Memeechxiteu,  barefoot. 
Memeechxitin,  to  be  barefooted. 
Memekis,  sheep. 
Memekschachey,  sheep  skin. 
Memeu,  woodcock. 

Memgukek,  plain  ;  (not  in  use  ;  schingek,  level.     A) 
Memhallamund,  merchant,  trader. 
Memoschanigat,  toothless. 
Memsochet,  traveller;  (vagabond,  idler.     A.) 
Men'achk,  fence,  fort;  {inenachkhasu,  Z.,  fortified  place.) 
Menachkah,  fence  rail. 
Menachtin,  to  drink  with  each  other,  to  tipple  with  one 

another. 
Menachtin,  Z.,  to  get  drunk  (///.,  to  drink  together,  not 

necessarily  intoxicants.     A}j. 


DICTIONARY.  81 

Menantachk,  swamp;  (with  trees  meeting  above.     A.) 

Menantak,  pine  swamp. 

Menantschiwon,  left  hand ;  incna7itschiwo7iunk,  to  the 

left  hand. 
Menasowagan,  jealousy,  suspicion. 
Menatehe^vagan,  envy. 
Menatey,  island;  {iiienacW hen.     A.) 
Menen,  to  drink. 
Menenachkhasik,  garden. 
Menet,  drunkard. 
Meneton,  to  spend  in  drinking. 
Menewagan,  drinking. 

Menewi,  in  some  place;  (all  together  in  a  place.     A.) 
Mengiechsu,  a  swan. 

Mengwe,  //".,  an  Iroquois;  {\\t.,  gla7is penis.     A.) 
Menhakehhamat,  gardener. 
Menhasik,  skimmed  ;  (scum.     A?) 
Menichink,  congregation. 
Menniwi,  in  some  places,  not  everywhere. 
Menpekhasik,  skim  milk. 
Menuppek,    lake,    sea;  (any   enclosed   body    of  water, 

great  or  small.     A.) 
Menutes,  sack,  bag;  (generic.     A.) 
Mequik,  bloody. 
Mequit,  bloody. 

Mesak,  building  log ;  {tn'sagawon,  Z.,  a  log  house.) 
Mesaquem,  ear  of  corn. 
Meschagen,  to  sit  down  ;  (out  of  use.     A) 


82  LENAP]fe-ENGLISII 

Meschakan,  wound;  (out of  use;  ineschillawa,'wo\ind.  A.) 

Meschandamen,  to  taste. 

Meschatamen,  to  remember. 

Mescheki,  whole,  entire,  every  bit. 

Meschiechen,  to  slip,  to  fall. 

Meschikaan,  to  come  nigh  to  me,  to  draw  near  to  some- 
body. 

Meschuppalan,  to  sprinkle  somebody. 

Mesim,  hickory  nut. 

Mesink,  Z.,  an  idol. 

Mesissachowak,  large  stinging  flies. 

Mesissu,  whole;  (the  me  in  many  of  these  words  is 
not  in  use.     A) 

Mesittewall,  corn  boiled  whole;  (out  of  use.     A.) 

Mesittschejeu,  wholly,  altogether. 

Mesittschewi,  quite,  whole,  entirely. 

Messasquall,  straw. 

Messikanelan,  to  hail. 

Messipook,  the/iver  drifts  with  ice. 

Messixu,  naked. 

Mesukhoakan,  glue. 

Metachan,  firewood. 

Metachgelonen,  to  have  told  a  ready  lie. 

Metakhammen,  to  cover. 

Metakhan,  to  cover  somebody. 

Metapewit,  wicked  man;  (a  thievish  fellow.     A.) 

Metaptonen,  to  break  off  speaking  (he  has  said  all  he 
has  to  say.     A). 


DICTIONARY.  83 

Metekenis,  leather  string. 

Metelensit,  humble  being,  low-minded  person ;  (one 
who  despises  himself;  metaiielcnsit,  humble  person. 
A) 

Metellen,  ten. 

Metenaxin,  to  be  ready. 

Meteu,  doctor ;  (out  of  use ;  it  is  derived  from  meteohet, 
to  drum  on  a  hollow  body ;  a  turkey  cock  is  some- 
times called  meteu,  from  the  drumming  sound  of  his 
wings.     The  ancient  medicine  men  used  drums.     A^ 

Metimmeu,  wolf;  (arch.  The  word  at  present  is  wiech- 
cJieu;  lit.,  hairy  dung,  from  the  character  of  the  excre- 
ment.    A}) 

Metschi,  ready;  already. 

Metschiechgochgihillan,  to  bleed  to  death. 

Metschihillan,  to  fall  in  ;  to  vanish. 

Metschihilleu,  old,  worn  out. 

Metschimhammen,  to  lock. 

Metschimi,  soon,  presently. 

Metschipachgihhilleu,  fallen  off. 

Metschitehenemoalan,  to  design  evil  against  some- 
body. 

Metschitschank,  soul,  spirit. 

Metschitschi,  at  last,  the  last  time. 

Mettachquohhemen,  to  cover. 

Michalappotis,  spider. 

Michtquin'otees,  Z.,  a  basket. 

Miechakanak,  ash;  (white  ash.     A^) 


84  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Miechanatamen,  to  be  ashamed. 
Miechanelendam,  to  be  ashamed  of  one's  self. 
Miechanelendamoagan,  self  shame. 
Miechanessin,  to  be  ashamed. 
Miechanimgussin,  to  be  made  ashamed. 
Miechaninaquot,  shameful. 
Miechanissowagan,  shame. 
Miechasquigamik,  cabin  covered  with  grass. 
Miechbowe,   plume    of    fowls;    (the    down,    inner   soft 

feathers,     yl.) 
Miechhaquall,  moss  on  trees. 
Miechheken,  hair. 
Miechinquawon,  eyebrow. 
Miechponkthey,  light  white  ashes. 
Mietachsquall,  hay. 
Migihillan,  to  bow  one's  self  down. 
Migitamen,  to  bow  toward. 
Migomi,  put  me  in  mind. 
Migopoquoak,  taste. 

Migun,  quill;  {uiiquin,  a  quill,  miquimik,  feathers.     A) 
Miguntin,  to  remind  each  other. 
Mihillusin,  to  be  aged,  to  be  old. 
Mihillusis,  old  man;  {mih'hillosis.     A) 
Mihn,  huckleberry. 
Mihnachpoan,  huckleberry  bread. 
Mikemossin,  to  work,  to  labor;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
Mikemossit,  laborer. 
Mikemossowagan,  work,  labor. 


DICTIONARY.  85 

Mikindamen,  to  do,  to  make. 

Milach,  hair ;  pi.,  milchall ;  {achtiich  tviecheivall,  Z.,  deer's 

hairs;  alhim  miechcgenall,  dog's  hairs)  (t£///rt<r//,  etc.    A) 
Milan,   to   give  to  somebody  (not  expecting  a  return. 

A). 
Mileen,  H.,  the  giving. 

Milit,  he  who  gives  to  me  ;  (also,  the  thing  given.     A) 
Militak,    father-in-law    or  mother-in-law;    (error,    aunt. 

A) 
Miltin,  to  give;  (giving  each  other,  mutually.     A.) 
Miltowagan,  gift  (without  expectation  of  return.     A.). 
Minall,  Z.,  huckleberries,  pi. 
Mindawelendam,   to  be  discontented,  to  be  troubled; 

(expresses  the  feeling  of  discontent  from  unsatisfied 

hopes.     A?) 
Mindawewagan,  discontentment. 
Mingachsa,  better,  a  little  better. 
Minschu,  glad  ;  (out  of  use.     A) 
Minsi,  one  of  the  three  tribes  of  the  Linni  Lenape,  or 

Delawares;  (from  inin-achsin-ink,  where  the  stones  are 

gathered  together.     A) 
Miqui,  quite ;  far,  far  o^\—palliwi,  quite  different  \—pili. 

otherwise,  by  far  otherwise. 
Mis,  elder  sister;  yi'inis,  k'mis,  my,  thy,  etc. 
Mischenahan,  to  touch  somebody,  to  handle  some  one. 
Mischenummen,  to  receive,  to  get. 
Misseachpin,  to  be  always  abroad,  to  be  seldom  at  home, 

to  go  a  gadding. 


86  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Misseachpitschik,  those  who  live  scattered. 
Misshakeuchet,  frequent  traveler,  pilgrim. 
Missochwen,  to  walk  about,  to  travel  about. 
Mitachkaniechink,  manifest. 

Mitachkaniechton,  to  make  manifest,  to  be  revealed. 
Mitachpin,  Z.,  to  be  born  {lit.,  to  be  seen  in  existence, 

in  a  place.     A'). 
Mitsuagan,  Z.,  food,  aliment, 
Miwelendam,  to  forgive. 
Miwelendaman,  to  forgive  somebody. 
Miwelendamen,  to  forgive. 
Miwelendamoagan,  forgiveness. 
Mizewagan,  food,  victuals,  provision. 
Mizin,  to  eat. 
Mochgamen,  to  find. 
Mochomsunga,  Z.,  forefathers,  ancestors. 
Moekaneu,  dog;  (see  Allum) 
Mokdomus,  lizard. 

Mokum,  blood;  a  vein  {inocJi' kiim.     A). 
Monachgeu,  groundhog;  {{xovcv  monham.     //.) 
Monhacaniminshi,  Z.,  dog  wood  (error,  it  is  the  black 

haw  bush  or  tree.     A)). 
Monham,  to  dig;  {inunhagcen,  Z.,  to  dig  a  hole.) 
Moochwes,  worm  ;  caterpillar  (white  grub.     A'). 
Moochwetit,  little  worm. 

Mos,  elk,  cow;  (applied  only  to  deer  and  elk.     A) 
Moschachgeu,  bald,  bare ;  clear,  not  turbid. 
Moschakantpeu,  bald  headed. 


DICTIONARY.  87 

Moschanigeu,  toothless. 

Moschhakquat,  clear  weather. 

Moschiwi,     clear,     luminous,    bare,    naked ;      clearly, 

openly. 
Moschpekat,  clear  water. 
Mosigawan,  cow  stable. 
Moskdonamen,  to  kiss;  (from  word  for  mouth,  arch.,  at 

present  sissama  is  used.     //.) 
Moskimus,  Z.,  a  hare  (the  small  gray  rabbit.     A?j. 
Motit,  little  calf;  (dim.  of  nios.     A.) 
Muchigischgunemin,  to  keep  holy  day. 
Muchomes,  grandfather. 
Muchwoapingus,  opossum. 
Mui,  Z.,  dung,  excrement. 
Muiminschi,  wild  cherry. 
Muiui,  Z.,  to  beshit. 
Mukoos,  awl,  nail. 

Munhacke,  Z.,  a  badger  (see  monacque). 
Munschemen,  to  shave. 
Muschgingus,  rabbit. 
Machtschilissowagan,  sin. 


88  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

N. 

Na,  the,  that; — eet,  ^er\\d>.^s;—jupetscJii,  until  now,  till 
here; — shacki,  so  far; — tchi,  so  much;  untschijey,  from 
thence. 

Nacha,  three. 

Nachapachki,  three  hundred. 

Nachawikan,  three  fathoms. 

Nacheleney,  three-fold. 

Nacheleneyachgat,  three  different  sorts. 

Nachelii,  together  with. 

Nachen,  three  times,  thrice.  , 

Nachenachke,  thirty. 

Nacheneyit,  third. 

Nachenol,  three. 

Nachenum,  raccoon;  (usually  «/«//.     A) 

Nachgiechen,  contrary,  against. 

Nachgihhilleu,  it  stops. 

Nachgohuman,  to  sing. 

Nachgohumewagan,  hymn. 

Nachgoman,  to  answer  somebody. 

Nachgundin,  to  agree  with  one  another. 

Nachgundowagan,  agreement,  bargain  ;  covenant. 

Nachgutem,  to  answer. 

Nachk,  hand,  my  hand. 

Nachkala,  Z.,  my  forehead. 

Nachogunak,  three  nights. 

Nachohalemin,  to  be  alone. 


DICTIONARY.  89 

Nachohanneu,  alone  ;  {n'achoha,  I  am  alone.     A) 
Nachoheteu,  the  house  is  empty,  there  is  no  one  at 
home. 

Nachpangoman,  to  salute  somebody  with  a  present. 

Nachpauchsin,  to  possess,  to  have,  to  enjoy. 

Nachpauchsowagan,  conversation,  familiarity,  fellow- 
ship. 

Nachpi,  with,  together  with. 

Nachpikin,  to  be  by  nature. 

Nachquoawe,  anything. 

Nachwena,  thereupon,  after. 

Nachxummawan,  to  enlighten  somebody ;  to  kindle  a 
flame  within  one. 

Nachxummen,  to  kindle,  to  light. 

Nada,  yonder  to  thither  ;  toward  here. 

Nadan,  a  float;  7iadano amochol,  the  canoe  floats  {pithin, 
afloat.     A). 

Naga,  according  to, 

Nagajek,  by  and  bye,  in  a  little  while. 

Nag'atamen,  to  trust,  to  confide  in,  to  rely  upon. 

Nagelav/endewagan,  comfort. 

Nageuchsin,  to  hope. 

Nageuchsowagan,  confidence,  trust. 

Nagewitti,  in  a  little  while. 

Nagisgamen,  to  meet. 

Nagisgauwan,  to  meet  somebody. 

Nagisgawachtin,  to  meet  each  other. 

Nahanne,  so,  so  it  is. 

G 


90  LENAFE-ENGLISi: 

Nahih,  down  stream. 

Nahihillaan,  to  go  down  the  water. 

Nahimen,  to  sail  down  the  stream. 

Nahiwi,  down  the  water. 

Nahoochwen,  to  go  down  stream. 

Najuman,  to  carry  somebody. 

Najundam,  to  carry  a  load. 

Nakewi,  a  little  while. 

Nal,  fetch. 

Nalambeso,  to  gird. 

Nalauchsin,  to  be  fetched. 

Nalauwi,  heedless. 

Nail,  that,  at  last; — nan,  that  one  ;  nctchi,  it  is  so  much, 
that  is  all ; — tchcji,  that  is  all. 

Nallahhemen,  to  sail  up  the  water. 

Nallahih,  up  the  stream. 

Nallahiwi,  up  the  river. 

Nallahoochwen,  to  go  up  stream. 

Nallowauchsowagan,  heathenish  life. 

Names,  fish. 

Nan,  that,  that  one,  so; — zvtcnk,  finally,  at  last;  here- 
after. 

Nanachpauchsohen,  to  keep  in  fellowship. 

Nanachxotawan,  to  mock  somebody,  to  deride  some 
one. 

Nanatschitaquik,  those  that  have  the  care  of  some 
business. 

Nanhillowet,  the  one  who  takes  care  of  the  dead. 


DICTIONARY.  91 

Naninga,  a  double  plural  termination  denoting  deceased 
persons. 

Nanne,  this  one;  that;  so;  —  leu,  that  is  the  way  of 
it,  thus  the  matter  stands ;  it  is  certainly  true ; — talli, 
through  there,  that  way,  even  there; — imdachqui, 
thitherward  ;  toward  where  ? — 7intschi,  from  thence, 
therefore ; — zuentschi,  for  this  reason,  therefore,  because  ; 
— tvoak,  as  also. 

Nanni,  this,  that. 

Nanquon,  heel. 

Nanungihhillan,  to  tremble,  to  shake ;  {ning' gihilla.   A.) 

Napenallan,  to  seize  somebody,  to  take  some  one 
prisoner. 

Natachtu,  he  fetches  wood. 

Natasu,  fetched. 

Natchaquen,  to  fetch  wood  ;  (to  go  after  wood.     A.) 

Natchen,  it  is  all  gone. 

Naten,  to  fetch;  (properly,  to  go  after  something.     A.) 

Natenan,  to  take  somebody. 

Natenummen,  to  take,  to  accept,  to  receive,  to  perceive, 
to  discern,  to  know. 

Natenuxowagan,  fetching,  reception. 

Natenuxu,  received. 

Nathogen,  to  fetch  over. 

Natholan,  to  fetch  somebody  over  in  a  canoe. 

Natoochton,  to  inquire. 

Natschiton,  to  engage  in,  to  take  care  of,  to  be  of 
opinion ;  (out  of  use.     A.) 


92  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Natschuwallen,  to  fetch  a  load. 
Nattawoapandamen,  to  look  for,  to  seek. 
Nattawoapin,  to  look  for  something;  (to  look  around 
A.) 

Natto'namak,  son-in-law  (my). 
Nattonamen,  to  seek  for  somebody. 
Nauwaquepin,  to  hang  down  the  head;  (out  of  use; 
present  form,  niiniquoqiiepii.     A.) 

Nauweechinke,  afternoon;    (present  form, /auwauqueu. 

A.) 

Nawalan,  to  pursue  somebody,  to  follow  some  one. 

Nawalittin,  to  pursue  each  other. 

Nawehhelleu,  afternoon. 

Nawochgen,  to  follow. 

Nawotallauwin,  to  hunt  by  the  way. 

Ndappoanum,  my  bread. 

Ndauwat,  scarce,  rare;  rarely,  seldom. 

Ndelgiqui,  etc.,  so  as  I,  etc. 

Ndellan,  I  tell  somebody. 

Ndelli,  etc.,  that  I,  etc. 

Ndoniken,  to  seek. 

Ndoochtawachtin,  to  inquire  of  each  other. 

Ne,  (pi.,  nc/c)  the. 

Nechasin,  to  be  careful,  to  be  watchful. 

Nechink,  the  third  time. 

Nechit,  third. 

Nechnutschinget,  nurse. 

Nechoch^ven,  to  travel  alone,  to  walk  alone. 


DICTIONARY.  93 

Nechoha,  alone. 

Nechohalennin,  to  be  alone. 

Nechohanne,  to  be  alone. 

Nechoheteu,  the  house  is  empty. 

Nehellatank,  the  Lord  ;  {nehellalowit.     A.) 

Neichgussin,  to  be  seen,  to  be  manifested. 

Neichquot,  apparent. 

Neichtin,  to  see  each  other, 

Neka,  he,  she,  it. 

Nekama,  he,  she,  it. 

Nekamawa,  they. 

Nekti,  the  only  one,  single. 

Nektilennin,  to  be  quite  alone, 

Nektinquot,  one-eyed, 

Nelema,  not  yet, 

Nelemago,  not  yet. 

Nelemata,  not  yet, 

Nellnill,  these. 

Nelowauchsin,  to  lead  a  heathenish  life,  to  be  a  heathen. 

Nelowauchsit,  unbeliever,  heathen. 

Nemen,  to  see. 

Nemoagan,  sight. 

Nemochwitschet,  the  main  sinew  of  the  leg. 

Nenachgistawachtin,   to   hearken   to   one  another,  to 

listen  to  each  other. 
Nenajunges,  horse  ;  (from  najiindam,  to  carry  burdens 

on  the  back.     A^ 
Nenajungeshammen,  to  ride  on  horseback. 


94  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Nenapalek,  unworthy,  good  for  nothing. 

Nendawagan,  torch,  lamp. 

Nendawen,  to  carry  a  lamp,  to  go  with  a  torch. 

Nennachgallit,  stammerer,  stutterer;  [nachtachqiieu.  A) 

Nennawipoquot,  right  tasted. 

Nennemawahan,  to  find  somebody  out. 

Nenostammoewagan,  understanding. 

Nentsitasin,  to  appear;  (not  in  use.     A) 

Nape,  I  also ;  I  too. 

Nepene,  we  also  ;  we  too. 

Nescalenk,    or,   Nesgessit   Lenape,    Z.,    black    man, 

negro  (///.,  black  face.     A). 
Ne  schuk  (used  after  negat.),  but. 
Ne  shaki,  so  long  as. 
Nesquo,  not  yet. 
Netami,  first,  the  first, 
Netamiechen,  first,  the  first. 
Netamiechink,  first,  in  the  first  place. 
Netopalis,  warrior;  {iJienetopalis,  a  scout  or  skirmisher. 

A) 
Netopalowewagan,  war. 
Neuchtin,  to  see  each  other, 
Neweleney,  fourfold. 
Neweleneyit,  fourth. 
Ne-wen,  four  times. 
Newentschi,  therefore. 
Newinachke,  forty. 
Newo,  four. 


DICTIONARY.  95 

Newopachki,  four  hundred. 

Newowikan,  four  fathoms. 

Ngachkenumen,  Z.,  the  break  of  day. 

Ngagebinque,  etc.,  I  am  bHnd,  etc. 

Ngagepchoa,  etc.,  I  am  deaf,  etc. 

Ngagiguwe,  etc.,  I  am  Hvely,  etc. 

Ngaginche,  etc.,  I  am. 

Ngaltin,  to  quit  each  other. 

Ngamuin,  to  keep  a  feast  in  Indian  style. 

Ngattummen,  to  leave  behind,  to  bequeath;  nga'ttavi- 

vicn,  Z.  (to  abandon,  not  to  bequeath.     A^. 
Ngemewi,  always,  constantly. 

Nguttachtschessowen,  to  lay  up  one  treasure  only. 
Nguttapachki,  one  hundred. 

Nguttelendin,  to  be  of  one  mind,  to  have  one  object. 
Ngutteleneyachgat,  a  single  one. 
Ngutteii,  one,  single;  singly. 
Ngutti,  one. 

Nguttitehen,  to  be  of  one  heart  and  mind,  to  agree. 
Nguttitehewagan,  the  being  of  one  mind;  unanimity. 
Nguttokuni,  one  night. 
Nhakeuchsin,  to  hope,  to  trust. 
Nhakeuchswochwen,  to  go  in  hope. 
Nhakewelendamen,  to  hope,  to  trust. 
Nhakewelendamoagan,  hope. 
Nhakey,  myself 
Nhittami,  at  first,  the  first. 
Ni,  I. 


96  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Nianque,  Z.,  a  wild  cat. 

Niechin,  to  come  down. 

Nieskeu,  Z.,  dirty. 

Nigani,    before,    foremost,    beforehand ;    (out   of    use ; 

nichala,  I  outrun  him.     A) 
Niganigapawin,  to  stand  foremost. 
Niganit,  the  foremost. 
Niganitawan,  to  run  before  somebody,  to  outrun  some 

one  ;  to  come  before  somebody. 
Nihillachquen,  to  kill  a  bear. 
Nihillalatschik,  subjects,  people. 

Nihillalgussin,  to  be  dependent  on  another's  command. 
Nihillalquonk,  Lord,  master. 
Nihillan,  to  strike  somebody. 
Nihil'lan,  to  kill  somebody. 
Nihillapejuwagan,  redemption,  ransom. 
Nihillapeuhen,  to  make  free,  to  liberate,  to  redeem. 
Nihillapeuhoalid,  my  Redeemer. 
Nihillapewi,  free. 

Nihillapewin,  to  be  one's  own  master,  to  be  free. 
Nihillapewit,  freeman. 
Nihillasohen,  to  make  free,"to  deliver. 
Nihillasowagan,  freedom,  liberty. 
Nihillatamen,  to  own,  to  be  master  of 
Nihillatammoewagan,  right,  privilege. 
Nihillatschi,  self,  one's  own  person. 
Nihillowen,  to  put  to  death,  to  murder. 
Nihillowet,  murderer. 


DICTIONARY.  97 

Nihillowewi,  murderous. 

Nik,  these,  those. 

Nikik,  these,  those. 

Nil,  these. 

Nilchgussin,  to  be  struck  dead. 

Nilchtin,  to  strike  each  other  dead. 

Nilum,  my  sister-in-law;  (or  brother-in-law,  in  opposite 

families.     A.) 
Niluna,  we  (including  only  the  party  speaking). 
Nimat,   my  brother;    (used   also  as  friendly  salutation 

between  distant  relatives.     A.) 
Nimawanachen,  to  make  provision  for  a  journey  (from 

nimazvan,  a  lunch.     A^. 
Nimenees,  fish  hawk. 
Ninachtak,  my  brethren. 
Ninutachpin,  to  be  from  the  beginning. 
Ninutschi,  at  the  beginning,  before  now. 
Nipachton,  to  raise,  to  set  up. 
Nipahwi,  by  night,  at  night. 

Nipahwochwen,  to  go  by  night,  to  travel  at  night. 
Nipawin,  to  stand,  to  stand  up. 
Nipen,  summer, 
Nipenachhen,  summer  hunt. 
Nischa,  two. 

Nischapachki,  two  hundred. 
Nischasch,  seven. 

Nischasch  tcha  pachki,  seven  hundred. 
Nischasch  tche  nachke,  seventy. 


98  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Nischekat,  double. 
Nischeleney,  twofold,  two  sorts. 
Nischen,  twice. 
Nischeneyit,  second. 
Nischinachke,  twenty. 
Nischink,  in  the  second  place. 
Nischitquin,  to  kneel  down  ;  (iiishitqiiihin.     A.) 
Nischitquitawan,  to  kneel  to  somebody. 
Nischogunakat,  two  days  ago,  day  before  yesterday. 
Nischogunakhake,  two  days  hence,  day  after  to-morrow. 
Niskachgelunen,  to  lie  abominably. 
Niskachgelunewagan,  an  abominable  lie. 
Niskalamuin,  to  make  an  ugly  noise,  to  cry. 
Niskallogen,  to  do  dirty  work. 
Niskallogewagan,  nasty  work. 
Niskandamen,  to  taste  nasty. 
Niskassisku,  muddy,  miry. 
Niskelan,  ugly  weather,  rainy  weather. 
Niskelendam,  to  loathe. 
Niskenolhand,  miserably  lazy. 
Niskeu,  nasty,  dirty;  {iiiskaloje,  Z.,  it  is  dirty.) 
Niskiton,  to  dirty  ;  to  bedaub. 
Niskpatton,  to  make  wet,  to  throw  water. 
Niskpeu,  wet. 

Nisktonhen,  to  be  noisy,  to  talk  nasty. 
Nisktonhewagan,  noisy,  lying,  nasty  talk. 
Nitaton,  to  be  able  to  make  something,  to  know  how  to 
do  it;  iinita,  I  can. 


DICTIONARY.  99 

Nitaus,  sister-in-law  (my  brother's  wife)  (not  in  use.   A.). 

Nithuy,  Z.,  the  navel. 

Nitis,  friend,  companion. 

Nitsch !  my  child  (exclamation  of  fondness). 

Nitschan,  my  child,  my  friend;  (my  child)  (not  friend. 
A.) 

Nitschantit,  my  little  friend. 

Noch,  my  father. 

Nocha,  my  father. 

Nochan,  my  father. 

Nochgoatamen,  to  lick;  (I  lick.     A.) 

Nochnutemaliuwet,  watchman,  keeper;  {inechnotaliwet. 
A.) 

Nochnutemexetschik,  shepherds. 

Nodhittamen,  to  come  into  danger;  (to  meet  by  acci- 
dent, lucky  or  unlucky,     y^.) 

Nohenopenowagan,  Z.,  the  ague  (///.,  the  sickness  that 
recurs  again  and  again.     A}j. 

Nohulentschik,  those  who  give  suck  ;  (error  ;  it  means 
the  infants  who  suck.     A^ 

Nolemelanden,  sultry  weather;  (the  word  means  some- 
thing pleasing  or  agreeable,  hence,  warm  weather.    A^ 

Nolemiwi,  invisible,  unseen ;  (properly  means,  not  see- 
ing, or  not  looking.     A)) 

Nolemutees,  silk  worm. 

Nolhand,  lazy ;  (out  of  use.     ^<tQ  gichtainmen.     A.) 

Nolhandewagan,  laziness. 

Nonagan,  milk;  (error;  it  means  the  nipple  or  mamma 


100  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

of  a  woman  ;  no  native  word  for  milk  is  known.     The 

English  niellik  is  used.     ^.) 
Nonetschik,  sucking  babes. 
Nonohellaan,  Z.,  to  give  suck. 
Nonschetto,  Z.,  a  doe. 

Nosawoapamen,  to  gaze,  to  look  steadfastly  at  some- 
thing. 
Noschhokquin,  to  go  over  the  ice. 
Nosogamen,  to  follow;  (to  imitate  a  person's  conduct. 

A) 
Nostamoewagan,  understanding. 
Nostawachtin,  to  understand  each  other. 
Notamaeishican,  //.,  a  fishing  spear. 
Notchan,  to  come  to  somebody. 
Notschingen,  to  nurse. 
Nowahan,   to  know   somebody;    (dub.,    n'nennawa,    I 

know  him.     A)) 
Nowaton,  to  know. 

Nowoaktschochwen,  to  go  a  crooked  road. 
Nowoawelendam,  to  be  certain,  to  be  sure  of;  (out  of 

use  ;  ni  Jiiajazvclcn'dam,  I  am  certain  of  it.     A^ 
Nquistook,    my   sons ;    an   old    form ;    modern    form, 

n'qiiisak.     (The  syllable  to  is  still  inserted  in  certain 

formal  addresses.     A.) 
N'schingi,  etc.,  I  do  it  unwillingly. 
Ntiasohen,  to  feed,  to  pasture  ;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
Ntite,  for. 
Ntite,  I  think;  {n'diteha,  I  think.     A) 


DICTIONARY.  IQl 

Ntitechquo,  for,  because. 

Ntitechto,  for,  because. 

Ntutemawachtin,  to  question  each  other. 

Nukachtachemawachtowagan,  last  will,  testament. 

Nukachtummen,  to  forsake,  to  leave. 

Nukalan,  to  forsake  somebody,  to  leave  some  one. 

Nukti,  once  more  ;  only  07ie. 

Nuktogunak,  one  night. 

Nuktoguni,  only  one  night. 

Nummahauwan,  to  perceive  somebody,  to  be  aware  of 

some  one. 
Nuna'gan,  Z.,  the  breasts  of  a  woman  (see  above). 
Nundahemewagan,  want,  scarcity. 
Nundajelensin,  to  be  discouraged,  to  be  low-spirited ; 

(more  exactly,  I  do  not  feel  equal  to  it.    A) 
Nundajelensowagan,  humility. 
Nundajelensuochwen,  to  go  humbly. 
Nundawi,  wanting,  less. 
Nundehhellan,  to  want,  to  be  in  need. 
Nundehhellewagan,  want. 
Nundejek,  wanting,  deficient,  defective. 
Nundewi,  wanting,  less. 
Nungachtschin,  to  shake  for  cold,  to  shiver. 
Nungihillan,  to  tremble,  to  shiver, 
Nungiwi,  trembling. 
Nunscheach,  she-bear. 
Nunschetto,  doe. 


102  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Nutachgamen,  somebody  calls  from  the  other  side  of 

the  river,  he  wants  to  be  fetched  across. 
Nutamemensemin,  to  have  children. 
Nutamemenseu,  child's  nurse  ;  (a  companion  of  a  child. 

A.) 
Nutemalan,  to  watch  somebody. 
Nutemekiset,  shepherd. 
Nutemekschet,  shepherd. 

Nutiken,  to  keep  watch;    (rather,  to  mind  a  house.     A.) 
Nutiket,  watchman,  a  guard. 
Nutindam,  to  watch  a  place. 
Nutschi,  at  the  first,  at  the  beginning. 
Nutschihhillachsin,  to  be  frightened. 
Nutschihhowe,  night  walker,  witch. 
Nutschinallitin,  Z.,  to  begin  war. 
Nutschingaat,  Z.,  a  nurse. 
Nutschisquandawet,  doorkeeper. 
Nutschque,  in  vain,  to  no  purpose;  (not  in  use.     A.) 
Nutschquehend,  innocent  sufferer,  martyr. 
Nuwingi,  I  like  it,  I  am  willing,  etc. 
N'wingi,  etc.,  I  do  willingly,  etc. 


DICTIONARY.  103 

o. 

Oapelukquon,  white  frost ;  (wap-takpan.     A.) 

Ochdomus,  a  woman's  cousin  ;  (dub.,  A.) 

Ochquaso,  belt  of  wampum. 

Ochquechum,  female  of  beasts. 

Ochquehelleu,  female  of  fowls  and  birds. 

Ochquekangan,  neck. 

Ochquetit,  little  girl, 

Ochquetschitsch,  girl. 

Ochqueu,  woman. 

Ochquewasquall,  swamp  fern. 

Ochunk,  at  his  or  her  father's, 

Ochwall,  his  or  her  father. 

Oh  !  exclamation  used  in  answering. 

Oho  !  exclamation  used  in  answering. 

Ohoh  !  exclamation  of  vociferation, 

Ohum,  grandmother. 

Ojos,  meat,  flesh ;  a  piece  of  meat. 

Ojotit,  a  little  piece  of  meat. 

Ok,  pi.,  oqiiak,  Z.,  a   moth    (error ;    it   means    maggot, 

A). 
Olahellan,  to  have  somebody,  to  possess  some  one. 
Oleleu,  bullfrog ;  (imitated  from  the  croak,     ^.) 
Olhatton,  to  have,  to  possess ;  to  put  up. 
Olsittam,  to  believe, 
Olsowagan,  goodness  ;  (out  of  use.     ^4.) 
Omen,  to  come  from  whence. 


104  LENAPE-ENGLISn 

Oschummo,  horn;  (out  of  use;  wilawan.     A.) 
Otchan,  to  somebody. 
Otchuwewagan,  his  coming. 
Otwebhassin,  to  become  flesh. 
Owoahan,  to  know  somebody. 

Owoaton,  to  know ;  [wesivaton,  to  become  conscious. 
A.) 

P. 

Paalochqueu,  Z.,  a  coquettish  girl. 

Paan,  to  come. 

Pabhaku,  a  pheasant ;  [pachpachko.     A) 

Pachat,  spHt;  {pachhaque,  to  spHt.     A.) 

Pachelammen,  to  spUt  wood. 

Pachenikan,  frow,  spHtting  iron. 

Pachgammak,  black  ash ;  (at  present,  peclipoJiammen, 
the  pounded  wood.  Baskets  were  made  from  this, 
the  strips  being  obtained  by  pounding.     A}j 

Pachgammakan,  cutlass. 

Pachgandhatteu,  all  is  ready. 

Pachgandikan,  maul,  hammer  {moguil,  maul,  possibly  a 
corruption  of  the  English;  pachgandikan  is  now  con- 
fined to  the  flat  piece  of  wood  used  in  beating  wash 
clothes.     A). 

Pachganuntschi,  white  walnut;  (at  present,  quinokquim, 
=1  oblong  nut.     A.) 

Pachgeechen,  where  the  road  turns  off. 


DICTIONARY.  105 

Pachgelendam,  Z.,  to  anger  (///.,  to  go  from  the  right 

road.     A). 
Pachgen,  to  turn  out  of  the  road. 
Pachgihillan,  to  break, to  break  asunder;  [pachgeu,  one 

who  leaves  the  road ;  pacJigUiillan,  to  leave  the  road  at 

one  side,  to  run  off  the  road.     A) 
Pachhakqueu,  noon. 

Pachhamawo,  Z.,  the  wild  red  plum  {pochgaina.     A.). 
Pachhaquoakan,  iron  wedge. 
Pachihillan,  to  split,  to  crack. 

Pachkam'an,  to  beat  somebody,  to  strike  some  one. 
Pachkamen,  to  let  blood. 

Pachkenum,  dark;  (should  be /'«i'^w«;«,  as  below.    A) 
Pachkschawen,  to  cut  meat. 
Pachkschikan,  knife. 
Pachkunummen,  to  break  off. 
Pachpanaloje,  broad  axe. 
Pachsachenikan,  tinder;  (punk.     A) 
Pachsa'jeek,  Z.,  a  vale  or  valley;  dim.  pachsajetit,  a 

gulley. 
Pachschaquoacan,  broad  saw,  board  saw. 
Pachsegink,  H.,  in  the  valley. 
Pachsenummen,  to  halve. 
Pachsilawe,  half  a  fathom. 
Pachsiwi,  half. 
Pachsukquin,  to  rise  up. 
Pachtenummen,  to  pull. 
Pachtschukquilkees,  grasshopper. 

H 


106  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Pachtschuppeu,  soft,  mild;  (doubtful;   at  present  this 

word  means  tapering,  pointed.     A.) 
Packcha'ck,  Z.,  a  board. 
Pagachtschateu,  full,  filled  ;  (arch..  A.) 
Pagachtschaton,  to  fill ;  i^pagachtschucJipeen.     Z?) 
Pagachtschiechen,  filled. 

Pagachtschuppen,  to  fill  (used  of  liquids.     A). 
Paiachkammen,  to  shoot,  to  fire  off. 
Paiachkhikan,  gun,  rifle. 
Paihakquenaxin,  to  be  glad  to  see  somebody. 
Pakachtechin,  to  fall  to  the  ground;  (to  fall  forward. 

A) 
Pakachtehellan,  to  prostrate. 
Pakallohu,  Z.,  to  halloo,  to  shout. 
Pakandamen,  to  beat. 
Pakandaptonen,  to  finish  a  discourse. 
Pakandhatton,  to  repair,  to  make  whole. 
Pakantin,  to  box  with  each  other;  (to  strike  with  any- 
thing.     A.) 

Pakantschi,  complete,  full ;  fully,  entirely. 

Pakantschiechen,  accomplished. 

Pakantschiechtasu,  finished,  completed. 

Pakantschiechton,  to  fulfil,  to  complete. 

Pakenum,  dark. 

Pakenummuihhilleu,  it  grows  dark. 

Pakihm,  cranberries. 

Pakitatamauwan,  to  forgive  somebody. 

Pakitatamawachtin,  to  forgive  each  other. 


DICTLONARY.  107 

Pakitatamawachtowagan,  forgiveness. 

Pakiton,  to  throw  away. 

Pakquehellan,  to  desert. 

Palaton,  to  earn,  to  acquire;  (arch.,  A.) 

Palenach,  five. 

Palenach  tcha  pachki,  five  hundred. 

Palenachtchegit,  fifth. 

Palenach  tche  nachke,  fifty, 

Palippawe,  buck. 

Pallachpin,  to  be  innocent. 

Pallachpuwagan,  innocence. 

Pallalogasin,  to  sin. 

Pallalogasowagan,  crime,  evil  deed. 

Pallatschimuin,  to  speak  otherwise  than  the  truth,  to 

prevaricate. 
Pallawewagan,  transgression,  guilt. 
Pallelensin,  to  be  innocent. 

Pallenummen,  to  make  wrong,  to  set  about  wrongly. 
Pallhammen,  to  be  unable  to  perform. 
Pallhiken,  to  shoot  amiss;  {pallakhiken.     A.) 
Pallhittehemen,  to  strike  amiss. 
Palliaan,  to  go  away. 
Pallihillan,  to  miss  the  time. 
Pallikteminak,  unfortunate,  unlucky. 
Pallilennemen,  to  put  elsewhere. 
Pallilinaquot,  otherwise. 
Pallilisgawan,  to  drive  somebody  away. 


108  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Pallilissin,  to  do  amiss;  (now  means,  to  look  different 

from  what  was  expected.     A.) 
Pallilissowagan,  transgression. 
Palliton,  to  spoil  something,  to  do  it  wrong. 
Palli  undachqui,  somewhere  else ;  where  else  ? 
Palli  untschi,  from  somewhere  else. 
Palliwi,  elsewhere,  otherwise ;  different. 
Palliwochwen,  to  go  elsewhere. 

Palpateu,  it  boils  over ;  (it  overflows,  from  any  cause  ; 
pallikauiindeu,  water  overflows  because  of  a  fire.     A) 
Palsachtin,  to  be  sickly. 
Palsin,  to  be  sick;  (arch.,  A') 
Palsittamen,  to  disbelieve. 
Palsowagan,  sickness. 
Pangepoantit,  bit  of  bread. 
Pangeschin,  to  cut  a  piece. 
Pangewi,  a  piece ;  (anything  broken  off     A^ 
Pankhanne,  steep  bank. 
Pankpechen,  drop. 
Papabin,  to  play  ;  (arch.,  A') 
Papaches,  woodpecker;  {papachko.     A.) 
Papachgillintsch,  the  flat  of  the  hand. 
Papallachwilsummen,  to  miss  one's  luck,  to  miss  one's 

chance. 
Papalligeen,  Z.,  to  spoil ;  sqq  palliton. 
Papalsin,  to  be  very  sickly. 
Papchakhitehasu,  bruised. 


DICTIONARY.  109 

Papeek,  Z.,  a  pond. 

Papenauwelendam,  to  pay  attention  to,  to  be  concerned 
for. 

Papen'damen,  to  hear  by  chance ;  (error ;  it  is  an  itera- 
tive from  pendamen,  to  hear,  and  means  to  continue  to 
hear.  The  initial  syllable  pa,  gives  the  iterative  or 
continuing  sense  in  this  and  most  of  the  following 
words.     A?) 

Papesu,  patient;  (a  person  who  waits.     A^ 

Papiluwulissin,  to  be  otherwise  disposed. 

Papohhamen,  to  knock  at  the  door. 

Papommeuchtum,  to  go  about  weeping. 

Papomminin,  to  go  about  idle. 

Pasachtaje,  wind  in  the  belly. 

Pasalanges,  locusts. 

Pasawinchikan,  yeast. 

Passenummen,  to  deny,  to  disown;  {pasiien.     A.) 

Passihillachgechquiminschi,  swamp  oak. 

Passikachk,  board ;  also  packchack. 

Passikachkhen,  to  make  boards. 

Passitechin,  to  stumble. 

Pasteu,  it  rises  (bread). 

Patachwilsin,  to  gain,  to  get;  {pachtachwilsin,  to  gain 
by  working.     A?) 

Patahowen,  to  overcome,  to  subdue. 

Patahowewagan,  Z.,  wages,  pay. 

Pataman,  to  pray. 

Patamauwan,  to  pray  to  somebody,  to  worship. 


110  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Patamawos,  God. 

Patamoelchan,  to  pray  for  somebody. 

Patamoelchittewagan,  supplication  for  each  other. 

Patamoelchittin,  to  pray  for  one  another. 

Patamoelchuwewagan,  intercession. 

Patamoewagan,  prayer,  worship. 

Patamoewigawan,  house  of  prayer,  temple,  church. 

Patatammoewagan,  merit. 

Pawalin,  the  corn  blossom  falls  off. 

Pawallessin,  to  be  rich. 

Pawallessit,  rich  person. 

Pawallessohen,  to  make  rich. 

Pawallsoagan,  wealth,  riches. 

Pawinquehiken,  to  shell  corn. 

Pawunnen,  to  sieve, 

Pawunnikan,  sieve. 

Pecho,   soon,  by  and  bye; — linitti,  directly,  in  a  little 

time. 
Pechot,  soon  ;  near. 

Pechotschi,  very  near,  near  by,  close  by. 
Pechotschigalit,  neighbor ;  [pechzvigalit,  he  lives  near 

me.     A.) 
Pechpommauchsohaluwet,  Saviour. 
Pechuwat,  nigh,  near. 
Pechuwelendam,  to  think  one's  self  near. 
Pechuwigamen,  to  be  near  somebody. 
Pechuwihhilleu,  the  time  is  near. 
Pechuvviwi,  near. 


DICTIONARY.  HI 

Pedhakquon,  it  thunders. 

Peechgaugatase,  knee,  calf;  (dub.,  refers  to  the  joint  or 

bend  of  the  limb.     A.) 
Peechgawinachgaja,  calf  of  the  elbow. 
Pegenawan,  to  dress  somebody,  to  clothe  some  one. 
Pegenind,  dressed. 
Pegenink,  darkness. 

Page,  Z.,  by  chance  (error,  it  means  to  be  tired  of.     A.). 
Pegui,  dressed,  clothed;  (eqiat,  the  clothing.     A.) 
Peguwoagan,  clothing,  dress,  finery. 
Pehachpamhangik,  seafarers. 
Pehawan,  to  wait  for  somebody. 
Pehowen,  to  wait. 
Pejat,  he  that  cometh. 
Pejeju,  it  comes. 

Pejewike,  it  comes,  it  draweth  nigh. 
Pekandaptonen,  to  have  finished  speaking. 
Pekandapanke,  when  it  is  quite  daybreak. 
Pekenink,  H.,  in  the  dark. 
Peki,  perhaps  then. 

Pelachpit,  one  that  is  innocent,  a  guiltless  person. 
Pelsittank,  unbeliever. 
Peltowak,  they  are  coming. 
Pemachpin,  to  be  present. 

Pemachtiewit,  any  creature  that  lives  upon  grass. 
Pemapanik,  the  heavens,  sky. 
Pemapuchk,  rock. 
Pemauchsohaluwed,  he  who  makes  hve;  Saviour. 


112  LEN  APE-ENGLISH 

Pemauchsoheen,  to  make  live,  to  cause  to  live. 
Pemauchsowaptonamik,  word  of  life. 
Pemetonhen,  to  preach. 
Pemhakamik,  earth;  (the  landscape  within  the  horizon. 

A.) 

Pemhakamixit,  man;  the  world,  mankind;  (it  rather 
means  all  living  creatures,  not  man  only.     A.) 

Pemhakamixitschik,  mankind. 

Pemhallachpen,  to  hunt  in  company. 

Pemi,  until  now  ;  about  this  time,  at  present. 

Pemmetonhen,  to  preach. 

Pemsit,  he  that  walketh  ;  walker. 

Pemuteneyik,  the  towns  round  about. 

Pendamen,  to  hear ;  to  understand. 

Pendameuhen,  to  cause  to  hear,  to  make  known. 

Pendaquot,  it  is  heard. 

Pendaskitquehelleu,  a  rising  river  which  swells  the 
water  of  a  creek. 

Pendawachtin,  to  hear  one  another. 

Peneawan,  to  hear  somebody. 

Pengelaku,  dusk  ;  (from  parige,  piece.     A^ 

Penihillan,  to  fall  off,  to  fall  down. 

Penipachgihhilleu,  it  falls  off. 

Pennahum,  to  break  off,  to  knock  down. 

Pennamen,  to  see,  to  behold. 

Pennassiechen,  downwards,  down  hill. 

Pennassin,  to  come  down ;  penasse,  down  hill  (means 
now,  to  see,  to  look.    A^. 


DICTIONARY.  113 

Pennauwan,  to  look  at  somebody. 

Pennauweleman,  to  consider  about  somebody,  to  be 

concerned  for  some  one,  to  take  care  of  somebody. 
Pennauwelendam,  to  think,  to  consider. 
Pennauwelendamoagan,  consideration. 
Pennawachtin,  to  look  at  each  other. 
Penquihilleu,  dried. 
Penquon,  dry;  (alludes  to    fabrics,  clothes,  skins,  etc. 

A) 
Penundhiken,  to  testify,  to  bear  witness,  to  show  unto. 
Penundhikewoagan,  testimony,  direction. 
Penxummen,  to  dry. 

Pepachgamgussowagan,  beating,  striking. 
Pepachgank,  calamus-root;  sweet  flag. 
Pepachgekingil,  branches;   (twig,  etc.,  anything   that 

grows  from  the  side  ;  root,  pack.     A) 
Pepachgitschiminhis,  manifold  in  the  belly  of  animals. 
Pepachkhamatunk,  Z.,  a  lancet  (or  lance). 
Pepalistank,  unbeliever. 
Pepalsittaamen,  Z.,  disobedient. 
Pepenaus,  looking-glass, 

Pepetelan,  showers  of  rain;  it  rains  now  and  then. 
Pepguschikan,  anger. 
Peptukquekhikenk,  compass ;  circle. 
Peschgonk,  nine. 

Peschgonktchapachki,  nine  hundred. 
Peschgonk  tchenachke,  ninety. 
Peschuwat,  near. 


114  lenAp6-english 

Pesoop,  he  waited. 

Petachdonamen,  to  come  to  seek. 

Petachgussin,  to  climb  hither. 

Petapan,  daybreak;  dawn. 

PetapaniAvi,  at  break  of  day. 

Petaquiechen,  the  water  is  rising. 

Petaschowen,  to  swim  hither. 

Petasemowik,  giving  hght,  shining  hither. 

Petasummawan,  to  give  Hght  to  somebody,  to  shine 

unto  some  one. 
Petauchsin,  to  Hve  until  now. 
Petauchsoheen,  to  cause  to  live  until  now;  to  preserv^e 

one's  life  until  this  time. 
Petawoatamen,  to  expect. 
Petekhamman,  to  write  to  somebody. 
Petenumman,  to  be  brought  to  somebody;  {peffinma- 

zuan,  to  reach  something  to  some  one.     A) 
Peteuchtummen,  to  come  weeping. 
Pethakwonn,  Z.,  a  thunder  gust.     Ste  pedhakwori. 
Pethinquechin,  to  look  hither. 
Petisgamen,  to  drive  hither. 
Petisgauwan,  to  chase  or  drive  hither. 
Peton,  to  bring. 
Petschi,  until,   unto;  until   here,   so   far;   (up  to  here. 

A.) 
Petschihilleu,  it  draws  near ;  he  is  coming  on. 
Petschimuin,  to  fly  or  escape  hither ;  (error ;  it  means 

to  decoy  animals,  lit.,  to  draw  them  hither.     A.) 


DICTIONARY.  1  1 5 

Petschitehen,  to  think  so  far. 

Petscholtin,  to  come  hither. 

Peuchto^vagan,  patience. 

Pichpemmetonhet,  preacher,  minister. 

Pichtaweu,  double. 

Pidhitehemen,  to  cut  one's  self. 

Pihm,  to  sweat;  {ji' dapi pihm,  H.,  I  come  from  sweating 

at  the  sweat  house). 
Pihmoakan,  sweat  house. 
Pikihilleu,  torn,  rent  in  pieces. 
Pikschummen,  to  cut  fine. 
Pilapeu,  big  boy;  (a  grown-up  lad,  not  yet  connected 

with  a  woman.     A) 
Pilawessin,  to  be  a  boy. 
Pilawetit,  little  boy. 
Pilawetschitsch,   boy;  (the  ordinary  word   for  boy  is 

skahcnso.     A.) 
Pilewiechgussin,  to  be  cleansed,  to  be  made  pure,  to  be 

sanctified. 
Pilhik,  clean,  pure. 
Pili,  otherwise,  another;  ajiwen,  some  one  else; — kekii, 

something  else. 
Pililinaquot,  it  looks  otherwise. 
Pilkisch,  peach. 
Pilsin,  to  be  clean,  to  be  chaste. 
Pilsit,  chaste,  pure. 
Pilsohalgussowagan,  holiness,  purity. 
Pilsuwi,  clean,  chaste. 


116  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Piluwi,  clean,  chaste. 

Piluwinaquot,  it  looks  cleanly. 

Pimachtelinque,  squint-eyed. 

Pimenatan,  thread ;  {n'bimenate.     Z.,  I  make  thread.) 

Pim'eu,  slanting,  oblique. 

Pimiechen,  slanting. 

Pimiechton,  to  make  slanting. 

Pimihilleu,  it  is  oblique. 

Pimingus,  red  squirrel. 

Pimoacun,  Z.,  a  sweat  house.     See  Pihm. 

Pimochkhasu,  stirred,  moved. 

Pimochqueu,  turned,  twisted. 

Pimochquikan,  stirring-ladle. 

Pindachsenacan,Z^,     tobacco  pouch  (cartridge  pouch. 

A). 
Pindalanak,  white  pine. 
Pindassenakan,  a  tobacco  pouch. 
Pindawan,  to  clothe  somebody,  to  dress  some  one. 
Pindham,  to  put  in,  to  fill. 
Pindhasu,  loaded,  charged. 
Pindhewachton,  to  put  in  a  bag;  (means  simply  to  put 

in,  as  in  a  room,  etc.     A^ 
Pindhikan,  ramrod;  sausage. 
Pindpehellachtikan,  funnel. 

Pintschihillachtauwan,  to  put  clothes  on  somebody. 
Pintschihillachton,  to  put  on  ;  to  make  slip  in. 
Pintschixin,  to  creep  in. 
Pipaan,  to  come  awhile  ago. 


DICTIONARY.  H7 

Pipinamen,  to  choose. 

Pipinamoagan,  an  election  (choosing  of  any  kind.    A.). 
Pischk,  night-hawk. 
Piselid-tulpe,  large  sea-tortoise. 
Piselisso,  shrunken,  wrinkled. 
Pisgaje,  it  holds  much. 
Pisgapamoaquachtop,  it  was  dusk. 
Pisgapamukquot,  dusky,  somewhat  dark. 
Pisgeke,  by  night  (last  night.     A);  pisgeep,  it  was  night. 
Pisgenemen,  to  grow  dark. 
Pisgeu,  dark,  night;  (///.,  it  is  dark.     A) 
Pisgihilleu,  it  grows  dark,  night  sets  in. 
Pishikamen,  to  go  to  meet  somebody. 
Pisikolis,  snipe;  large  grey  snipe. 
Pit,  perhaps. 

Pitaptonen,  to  blunder  in  speaking. 
Pitawegiechen,  double. 

Pitawigawan,  porch  in  front  of  a  house; — pent  house. 
Piteet,  perhaps. 

Pitelaweminschi,  honey  locust  tree. 
Pitenummen,  to  make  a  mistake. 
Pi'tey,  Z.,  foam,  froth  [pichteu,  it  foams.     A.). 
PitkuUentsch,  the  fist. 

Pitschi,  accidentally,  by  chance,  inadvertently,  unfore- 
seen. 
Piwitak,  aunt;  [n'militak.     A.) 
Pixu,  ragged,  rent ;  (torn,  scratched  in  body.     A.) 
Pkindey,  light  ashes. 


118  lenApe-english 

Pkuschikan,  auger,  gimlet. 

Plipitehan,  to  knock^somebody  on  the  head. 

Plitey,  junk  of  fire,  firebrand. 

Poaktschehellan,  to  jump  over  a  fence. 

Poam,  thigh;  ham. 

Poawin,   to  conceive;  to  be  pregnant  (///.,  to  become 
swollen.     A.). 

Pochenikan,  drum. 

Pochquachpus,  Z.,  a  mouse. 

Pohonasin,  Z.,  to  beat  the  drum  (to  beat ;  to  pound ; 
to  lift  up ;  pochomimmeii,  he  drums.     A^ 

Pokawachne,  a  creek  between  two  hills. 

Pokhakenikan,  grave;  (from  pokhawcu,  a  hole  or  hol- 
low in  the  ground.     A}) 

Pokhammen,  to  knock  out,  to  knock  in,  to  break. 

Pokqueu,  clam,  muscle. 

Pomih',  fat,  oil,  tallow. 

Pomihen,  to  beat  oil. 

Pomillachtan,  to  go  by  water. 

Pommauchsin,  to  live. 

Pommauchsowagan,  life. 

Pommauchsowaganit,  he  who  is  the  life. 

Pommauchsuwi,  living. 

Pommenan,  to  beat  somebody,  to  conquer  somebody. 

Pommihilleu,  it  flies  away. 

Pomminehiken,  to  dispute. 
Pomminehotin,  to  dispute  with  one  another. 
Pommipeso,  lath. 


DICTIONARY.  HQ 

Pommisgen,  to  begin  to  walk. 
Pommissin,  to  go  afoot,  to  walk. 
Pommitachpanschi,  lath. 
Pommixin,  to  creep. 
Pomsin,  to  walk. 

Ponelendam,  to  quit,  to  give  up,  to  be  no  more  con- 
cerned. 
Ponemen,  to  let  go,  to  leave  off. 
Pongus,  sand  fly. 

Poniton,  to  let  be, to  remain;  {ponihil,  H.,  let  me  alone.) 
Ponk,  dust ;  (ashes,  powder.     A.) 
Ponxu,  full  of  sand  flies. 
Poochpsin,  to  be  weakly. 
Pooxit,  the  month  of  falHng  leaves  ;  October. 
Popachgandamen,  to  beat,  to  strike. 
Popankpechen,  it  drops. 

Popetelan,  it  rains  now  and  then ;  it  rains  by  showers. 
Popohham,  to  knock. 
Popokus,  partridge. 
Poquewachen,  nigher  road. 
Poquewi,  straightway. 
Poquiechen,  broken. 
Poquiechton,  to  break. 
Poquihhilleu,  broken. 
Poquihillachton,  to  break  in  two. 
Potatikan,  pumpkin-stem  pipe. 
Pottenin,  to  take  off. 
P'quitehican,  Z.,  a  chisel. 


120  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Psakquiechen,  close  together,  tight. 

Psakquietehasu,  crucified. 

Psakulinscheu,  Z.,  a  squirrel. 

Psatte^voan,  tinder. 

Pschiki,  Z.,  fine,  pretty.     See  schigt. 

Psindamoakan,  parched  meal. 

Psindhammen,  to  cover  with  earth. 

Psindpeu,  overflowed  with  water. 

Ptukalluns,  bullet;  [lit.,  round  missile.     A^, 

Ptukhanne,  crooked  river  or  creek. 

Ptukhikan,  round  ball. 

Ptukquim,  walnut. 

Ptukquiminschi,  black  walnut. 

Ptukquinschu,  bowl,  dish. 

Ptukschummen,  to  cut  round. 

Puchtschessu,  hollow. 

Pulpecat,   //■.,  deep   dead  water   {zualpecat,   very  deep 

water.     A). 
Pumoe,  a  boil. 
Pundhen,  to  weigh. 
Pundhikan,  steelyards. 

Punk,  Z.,  ashes,  dust;  gunpowder.     See  Po>ik. 
Pusihn,  Z.,  to  enter  a  canoe  (or  any  vehicle.     A). 
Putam,  to  escape. 
Putamohen,  to  cause  to  escape. 
Putawen,  to  blow;  {^puta'tamen,  to  blow  as  in  starting 

a  fire.     ^.) 
Putawoakan,  bellows. 


DICTIONARY.  121 

Putschek,  corner  of  a  room. 

Putschisktey,  poison  vine ;  {w'hatchiskey.     A.) 


Q. 

Quajaqui,  still,  yet,  yet  more,  nevertheless,  however. 
Qualcheu,  it  smokes;  {qualchek,  smoke.     A) 
Quallassin,  to   bathe;    to  sweat;   (properly,  to   sweat 
A) 

Quappalawan,  to  take  somebody  out  of  the  water. 

Quatsch,  why  -^—atta,  why  not  -—eet,  why  perhaps. 

Quatschee !  exclamation  of  surprise. 

Queh  !  exclamation  of  joy. 

Quekolis,  whipper  will ;  {wekolis.     A.) 

Quekulukquihilleu,  lame. 

Quekuluxit,   he  that  is  lame;  (means  rather,  one  who 

has  joints.     A) 
Quenek,  length ;  (something  long.     A) 
Queneuhappachpoon,  table. 
Quenischquney,  panther;   (///.,  long-tailed.     A)  quen- 

schuhiney,  Z. 
Quenschukuney,  panther  ;  (see  above.) 
Quequongalle,  pike  fish  ;  {lit.,  long-gilled ;  but  the  usual 

term  is  gufihojiqtie,  tapering  fish.     A.) 
Queschanigat,  tooth  holes. 
Quesquelendam,  to  be  out  of  humor;  (usual  term  now 

is  nisquelendam.     A.) 


122  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Quetajaku,  old  tree ;  (applied  to  any  plant  or  tree  which 

has  reached  full  age  and  the  fibres  hardened.     A.) 
Quetit,  little  girl. 

Quidhikewagan,  forbiddance,  reproof. 
Quilawelelendam,  to  be  at  a  loss  what  to  do. 
Quilawelendamoagan,  confusion,  perplexity. 
Quilawelensin,  to  be  doubtful,  to  be  uncertain. 
Quilawelensitchewagan,  distress,  anguish. 
Quilawelensowagan,  concern,  trouble. 
Quilawelensu,  doubtful,  uncertain. 
Quilutamen,  to  fall  upon,  to  attack. 
Quin,  a  long  while;  long. 
Quiquingus,  large  wild  duck. 
Quis,  son. 

Quischgumowe,  viper,  snake. 
Quischimawan,  to  appoint  somebody  to  an  office. 
Quischktonhen,  to  whisper. 

Quischoschemo,  middle  of  the  head;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
Quitellitowoagan,  Z.,  commandment. 
Quitsut,  Z.,  the  great  toe. 
Quochoak,  Z.,  he  fears  you. 

S. 

Sa  !  exclamation  of  indignation. 
Sabbeleechen,  sparkling,  glittering. 
Sabbeleu,  it  shines  brightly;  (refers  to  the  reflection  of 
light  in  the  sky  or  water.     A.) 


DICTIONARY.  123 

Sachapiwak,  lightning  afar  off. 

Sachgachtoon,  Z.,  to  cook. 

Sachgaguntin,  to  lead  each  other. 

Sachgagunummen,  to  lead. 

Sachkenachgen,  to  shake  hands ;  {lit.,  to  take  hold  of; 
also  and  usually  wangundin.    A.) 

Sachsapan,  Z".,  soup. 

Sagachgutteje,  top  of  a  hill  or  mountain;  (properly, 
"sloping  upwards,"  applied  to  the  upper  slopes,  not 
top  of  a  mountain.     A.) 

Sagalachgat,  so  deep  the  hole. 

Sajewi,  at  first,  foremost. 

Sakaweuhewi  Gischuch,  the  month  in  which  the  deer 
begin  to  turn  gray — August. 

Saken,  to  shoot  forth,  to  spring  up. 

Sakhaken,  to  stay  out  from  home  so  long. 

Sakima,  chief,  king. 

Sakimauchheen,  to  make  to  a  chief  or  king. 

Sakimawagan,  kingdom. 

Sakime,  mosquito. 

Sakquachsoagan,  troublesome  life. 

Sakquamallessin,  to  feel  troubled. 

Sakquamallsin,  to  feel  troubled. 

Sakquamallsoagan,  trouble,  uneasiness. 

Sakquelendam,  to  be  melancholy,  to  be  sad, 

Sakquelendamen,  to  be  troubled  in  mind,  to  be  dis- 
quieted. 

Sakquelendamoagan,  trouble,  sorrow,  disquietude. 


124  LENApfe-ENGLISH 

Sakquipaan,  to  come  in  a  troublesome  time. 

Saksak,  pea  vines,  wild  beans ;  (any  kind  of  a  bur.     A.) 

Sakuwit,  mouth  of  a  creek,  mouth  of  a  river ;  (more 

exactly  sakivihillak.     A.) 
Salachgihillan,  to  be  frightened,  to  be  terrified. 
Salamoagan,    weeping,    howling ;    (collective    form,   a 

number  cry  together.     A.) 
Salumbiechen,  to  ring  the  bell. 
Salumbunikan,  bell;  (arch.,  A.) 
Salumbuniken,  to  ring  the  bell. 
Samumptan,  to  tie  something  (not  in  use.     A.). 
Samuttonen,  to  shut  the  mouth. 
Saniqui,  Z.,  to  blow  the  nose  {saniquin.     A.). 
Sankhikan,  gun  lock. 
Sanquen,  weasel. 
Sapiu,  it  lightens. 

Sapiwagan,  lightning;  (not  in  use.     A) 
Saputti,  Z.,  the  arse-hole. 
Sasappekhasu,  spotted,  speckled. 
Sasappelehelleu,  Z.,  it  flashes  lightning. 
Sasappeu,  spotted,  speckled. 
Sasappis,  lightning  bug,  fire  fly. 
Saschchuppawen,  to  gape,  to  yawn. 
Sasehemen,  to  sow,  to  scatter. 
Sasukhoalawan,  to  spit  upon  somebody. 
Scaphackamigeu,  Z.,  wet  ground. 
Schaback,  Z.,  the  box  bush. 
Schabuwihilleu,  Z.,  diarrhoea  {lit.,  running  through,  of 

liquids.     A.). 


DICTIONARY.  125 

Schachachgach'ne,  a  straight  course  in  a  river. 
Schachachgageechen,  straight  road. 
Schachachgameu,  straight  row. 
Schachachgapewi,  honest,  righteous. 
Schachachgapewin,  to  be  just,  to  be  upright,  to  be  true, 

to  be  correct. 
Schachachgapewit,  an  upright  person. 
Schachachgauchsowagan ,  righteousness. 
Schachachgek,  just  so. 
Schachachgekhasu,  striped. 
Schachachgelendam,  to  be  sure  of  a  thing,  to  have 

one's  mind  made  up,  to  be  determined. 
Schachachgennemen,  to  make  straight. 
Schachachgeu,  straight;  right,  exact,  correct. 
Schachachgiechen,  straight  road. 
Schachachkaptonagan,  upright  saying. 
Schachachkaptonen,  to  speak  the  exact  truth,  to  tell  a 

straight  story. 
Schachachkatschimuin,  to  speak  the  truth. 
Schachachki,  certain,  certainly  true,  surely. 
Schachachkoochwen,    to   go    straight,   to   follow   the 

straight  road. 
Schachamek,  eel ;  {w'schachamek,  lit.,  it  is  a  straight 

fish.     ^.) 
Schachihilleu,  it  slips,  it  slides, 
Schagaskat,   grass  wet  with   dew;    [sachgaskat,   green 

grass,  or  fresh  young  grass.     A.) 


126  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Schagsut,  Z.,  covetous  (out  of  use.     A^. 
Schahamuis,  Z.,  a  crawfish. 

Schahowapewi,  heartless,  disheartened,  desponding. 
Schajahikan,  seashore;  {w'shajahitcan.     ^.) 
Schajawonge,    hill-side;    (should    have   an   initial   w\ 

A.) 
Schajelinquall,  eyebrows  ;  (error;  properly,  eyelid.     A.) 
Schakamon,  food,  nourishment;  (anything  put  in  the 

mouth,  for  food  or  otherwise.     A.) 
Schakhokquiwan,  coat. 
Schameu,  Z.,  grease,  fat  (it  is  greasy.     A.). 
Schammenummen,  to  anoint,  to  grease. 
Schapoalchasu,  bored  through,  pierced  through. 
Schapulinsch,  finger-ring ;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
Schaschiwilawechgussin,  to  be  put  to  grief. 
Schauchsin,  to  be  tired,  to  be  weak;  (to  be  weak,  not 

tired.     A.) 
Schauchsowagan,  weakness,  feebleness. 
Schauwalamuin,  to  faint  from  hunger. 
Schauwemi,  beechwood. 
Schauweminschi,  red  beech  tree. 
Schauwessin,  to  make  haste  ;  {schaiiwesoagan,Z.,  haste,) 

{schauwelendavi,  to  be  in  a  hurry.     A^ 
Schauwewi,  tired,  weak,  weakly. 
Schauwihilleu,  it  withers,  it  is  weak,  it  faints. 
Schauwinachk,  weak  hand. 
Schauwinaxowagan,  weakness,  weakly  look. 


DICTIONARY.  127 

Schauwipachteu,  withered,  faded. 

Schauwoppihilleu,  it  bends. 

Schauwussu,  weak. 

Schauwutteu,  withered,  faded. 

Schawanachen,  southerly  wind. 

Schawanachgook,  Z.,  horned  snake. 

Schawanammek,  shad  (fish;  chwame  gischuch,  Z.,  the 

month  of  March,  or  of  shad). 
Schawaneu,  southward,  southerly. 
Schawanewunk,  southward. 
Schawanochqueu,  Shawano  woman. 
Schawek,  weak. 
Schawl,  immediately,  directly. 
Schaxin,  to  be  avaricious ;  {schaxu,  Z.,  greed.) 
Schaxowagan,  covetousness. 
Sche  !  see  there ;  lo  ! 

Scheechganim,  shelled  corn  coarse  pounded;  (chaff,   Z}^ 
Schehelleu,  it  hangs  ;  wulli  schehellak,  Z.,  it  hangs  there 

{w  ell' helleu.     A.). 
Schejek,  string  of  wampum ;  (///.,  edge  or  border.     A.) 
Schela !  see  there ! 
Schellachton,  to  hang  up. 
Schengiechen,  it  lies. 
Schengiechin,  to  lie  down. 
Schepaje,  this  day  early,  this  morning. 
Schepella  !  see  there  ! 
Schesquim,  bran,  corn  husk ;  {schequasquim,  the  hulls  of 

the  corn.     A^ 


128  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Scheuchsit,  weak. 

Schewek,  weak,  tired. 

Schev^rondikan,  bag,  tobacco  pouch. 

Schewongellikik,  the  lame. 

Scheychellat,  Z.,  a  forerunner ;  scheyiachpitschik,  those 

who  live  on  the  border. 
Scheyjunuppek,  lake;  (probably  dialectic;  not  in  use. 

A.) 
Schi,  either,  or. 

Schibhammen,  to  spread  out;  (with  an  initial  w'.     A.) 
Schibhasu,  spread  out. 

Schiechikiminschi,  maple  tree  ;  (the  soft  maple.     A) 
Schiess,  Z.,  an  uncle  (always  with  possess,  prons.     A.) 
Schigi,   fine,  pretty;  nice  (generally  applied  to  quality 

rather  than  appearance.     A.). 
Schikochqueu,  widow. 
Schikschasiki,  shavings. 

Schiku,  widow ;  (error  ;  it  means  an  orphan.     A.) 
Schimuin,  Z.,  to  flee ;  noschimui,  I  flee ;  uchschimo,  he 

flees ;  schinioagan,  flight. 
Schind,  spruce  ;  (hemlock.     A') 
Schindikeu,  spruce  forest ;  (hemlock  woods.     A') 
Schingachpin,  to  be  somewhere  unwillingly. 
Schingachteyapuchk,  flat  rock. 
Schingalan,  to  hate  somebody. 
Schingalgussowagan,  the  being  taken. 
Schingaltin,  to  hate  each  other;  {schinginawa  altin.  A.) 
Schingaltowagan,  enmity,  hatred. 


DICTIONARY.  129 

Schingaluet,  enemy,  adversary. 

Schingaskunk,  bog  meadow. 

Schingattam,  to  be  unwilling,  to  dislike,  to  disapprove. 

Schingelendam,  to  dislike,  to  be  against  one's  inclina- 
tion, to  be  tired  of. 

Schin'geu,  level;  schinghacki,  Z.,  a  flat  country. 

Schingi,  unwilling,  disliking,  unwillingly. 

Schingihakihen,  to  plant  unwillingly. 

Schingimikemossin,  to  work  unwillingly. 

Schinginamen,  to  hate. 

Schinginawachtin,  to  hate  each  other. 

Schinginawachtowagan,  enmity. 

Schingiptikan,  leather  string,  rope. 

Schingochwen,  to  be  unwilling  to  go. 

Schingsittam,  to  dislike  to  hear, 

Schingsittawan,  to  dislike  to  hear  somebody. 

Schingtschenamen,  to  hate  excessively,  to  be  unable  to 
bear. 

Schipaquitehasu,  crucified,  outstretched. 

Schipenasu,  stretched,  spread  out,  extended. 

Schiphammen,  to  spread,  to  extend. 

Schiphasu,  spread  out,  extended. 

Schipihilleu,  stretched. 

Schipinachgen,  to  put  forth  the  hand. 

Schipinachk,  outstretched  arms. 

Schiquineu,  fatherless,  motherless ;  (either  one  or  the 
other.     ^.) 

Schiquitehasik,  chips. 


130 


LENAPE-ENGLISH 


Schiquitehasid,  Z.,  booty  {schiquinitehasik,  booty  ob- 
tained in  war.     A). 

Schita,  either,  or. 

Schiwachpin,  to  be  weary  of  staying. 

Schiwamallessin,  to  feel  grief,  to  feel  sorrow. 

Schiwamallsin,  to  feel  grief  and  pain. 

Schiwamallsoagan,  sorrowful  pain. 

Schiwa'pew,  Z.,  blue  {wulih'ke,  blue,  at  present.     A.). 

Schiwelendam,  to  be  sorry,  to  be  sad,  to  be  melancholy, 
to  moan. 

Schiwelendamowitehewagan,  repentance. 

Schiwilawechgun,  to  be  put  to  grief. 

Schkaa'k,  a  pole-cat,  skunk. 

Schkiwan,  Z.,  to  piss. 

Schohakan,  glue. 

Schquot,  to  abort,  to  miscarry,  Z.  {lit.,  beat  to  a  pulp, 
alludes  to  the  pulpy  afterbirth.     A.) 

Schuk,  but,  only ;  (used  after  negat.)  but ; — atta,  but 
not,  not  only. 

Schukquan,  Z.,  to  chew;  schguanda,  thou  chewest. 

Schukund,  only,  but  then. 

Schukuney,  the  trail  of  an  animal. 

Schwewak,  salt  meat ;  (from  schewmik,  salt.     A) 

Schwilawe,  discouraged,  disheartened. 

Schwon,  saltish,  sour;  {schwoll,  Z.  and  A.  A  white 
man  is  called  schwonack,  from  the  salt  ocean.     A) 

Schwonnachquaxen,  European  shoes. 

Schwonnachquinenk,  among  white  people. 


DICTIONARY.  131 

Schwonnihilla,  snipe ;  (shore  snipe,  tilt  birds.     A.) 

Sedpok,  early  in  the  morning;  at  daybreak  (properly, 
part  of  the  night,  half  of  the  night.     A.). 

Sedpokuniwi,  early  in  the  morning. 

Segachpapachton,  to  make  wet. 

Segachtehikan,  branch,  twig. 

Segachtek,  ardent,  fervent;  {segachteu,  it  begins  to  burn. 
A) 

Segantpechink,  overhead. 

Segauchsin,  to  live  so  long. 

Sehe,  H.,  hush,  be  quiet. 

Sekentek,  length;  (refers  to  the  length  of  a  house,  room, 
etc.     A) 

Seki,  so  long,  till. 

Seksitechinan,  at  thy  feet. 

Seksitechink,  at  his  feet. 

Sesachquilawendam,  to  trouble. 

Sesalassummoehund,  frying  pan ;  {salasseu,  it  is  cook- 
ing or  frying.     A.) 

Sesalumboink,  bell. 

Sesegauwihan,  to  whip  somebody,  to  scourge  some 
one. 

Sesegauwihugewagan,  scourging. 

Sessuk,  Z.y  spittle. 

Shaki,  as  long,  so  long,  as  far,  so  far  as,  until. 

Shakochwen,  to  go  so  far. 

Sigachgochgissin,  to  bleed. 

Sigapehikan,  strainer. 


132  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Sihhtanin,  to  run  at  the  nose. 

Sihilleu,  the  freshet  abates,  the  river  subsides. 

Sihunasu,  Z.,  conquered  (out  of  use.     A^. 

Sikey,  salt  {sikheunk,  H.,  at  the  salt  spring),  (out  of  use; 

see  schewewah.     A.) 
Sikeyhasu,  salted,  pickled. 
Sikunikan,  scourgrass,  rushes. 
Sillikakhammen,  to  squeeze,  to  press,  to  beat. 
Sillkitehemen,  to  press,  to  squeeze. 
Simaquon,  corn  stalk ;  (arch.,  A.) 
Singawikanawon,  backbone ;  (refers  to  processes  of  the 

vertebrae,  from  singek.     A) 
Singek,  outside  corner  of  a  house ;  (corner,  point,  angle, 

in  general.     A.) 
Singigamika,  corner  of  a  house. 
Sipachgihhilleu,  it  buds,  sprouts  out. 
Sipo,  river. 

Sipotit,  small  creek  ;  {siposis.     A.) 
Sipuos,  wild  plum  ;  (doubtful.     A.) 
Siquon,  spring  of  the  year ;  [siequanke.   Z.,  next  spring.) 
Siquonachen,  spring  hunt. 
Siquonnatewinilleu,  showers  of  snow  and  rain  in  the 

spring. 
Sisawehak,  oysters ;  (now  called  e'sak  (pi),  referring  to 

the  shells.     A.) 
Sisi'lija,  Z.,  the  buffalo  (this  means  an  animal  that  butts 

against  and  breaks  in  pieces.     A.). 
Sisinghos,  iron  pot ;  (out  of  use.     A) 


DICTIONARY.  133 

Sisquahoasu,  a  plastered  fireplace. 

Sissummoek,  bell. 

Skaphakamigeu,  wet  ground. 

Skaphakejeu,  wet  ground. 

Skappeu,  wet;  (strictly,  that  which  is  wet  partly,  as 
toward  the  end.     A.) 

Skattek,  burning,  ardent,  fervent,  zealous,  hot;  (see 
segachtek.     A.) 

Skattelendam,  to  loathe,  to  hate. 

Skattewi,  burning. 

Skattsin,  to  be  loathsome. 

Skin,  to  make  water. 

Skiquall,  grass. 

Skulin,  to  keep  school ;  (English.) 

Sogahellas,  chain. 

Sogahen,  to  spill. 

Soganechin,  to  pour  out. 

Sokan,  hind  part  of  a  church  ;  (///.,  buttocks,  arse,  back- 
side.    A.) 

Sokelan,  it  rains. 

Sokenepaltowagan,  baptism;  (from  sogaheti.     A.) 

Sokenepasu,  baptized. 

Sokpehellak,  cataract. 

Sookpehelleu,  the  water  tumbles  down  from  a  precipice. 

Soopsu,  naked ;  (out  of  use  ;  sohsexu,  at  present.     ^,) 

Sopenaxin,  to  be  naked,  to  strip  one's  self 

Sophalan,  to  make  one  bare  ;  to  make  somebody  naked. 

Soppinquen,  to  shut  the  eyes. 


134  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Spanquewagan,  wink  of  an  eye. 
Spiechgejeu,  member,  joint;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
Squandamen,  to  chew. 

Squewachgitehen,  to  bruise  one's  self  by  accident. 
Sukachgook,  black  snake. 
Sukachqualles,  negro. 
Sukachsin,  iron. 
Sukachsinhet,  smith. 
Sukamek,  black  fish. 
Sukanepil,  black  fish. 
Sukelechen,  it  looks  black. 
Sukeu,  black. 

Sukhattaquall,  black  thread,  black  yarn. 
Sukqui,  spittle. 
Suksit,  black. 
Sungi,  eat  thou. 

Suppinquall,  tears  ;  (from  the  eyes)  (always  with  a  pos- 
sessive.    A.) 


T. 

Ta,  no,  not ; — am,  not  at  all ; — haschi,  never. 

Ta,  how ; — elgilen,  how  large ; — elgiqui,  how  soon  ; — 
elinaxit,  what  color ; — hatsch,  how  will  it  be  ; — linaquot, 
what  is  it  like  ; — ne  liechen,  how  then,  how  is  it ; — segek, 
how  long ; — shaki,  how  long ;  ichen,  how  many ;  how 
many  times ; — tchi,  how  much. 


DICTIONARY.  135 

Ta,  where ; — talli,  whitherwards ;  undachqui,  whereabouts, 
towards  \i\\&XQ\—untschi,  whence,  wherefrom ;— w^, 
towards  where. 

Ta,  then. 

Ta  keeche,  some;  a  \\\.'<i\&;—keechen,  so  often. 

Ta  likhikqui,  at  what  time. 

Ta  pemi,  about,  about  this  time. 

Taan,  where ; — a  undachqui,  which  then ; — ha,  how  then. 

Taat,  as  if,  Hke. 

Tachan,  wood;  piece  of  wood;  (arch..  A) 

Tachanigeu,  woody,  full  of  wood. 

Tachpachaxu,  little,  mean,  low,  humble;  {tachpeachxu, 
gives  a  general  notion  of  condition,  humble,  exalted, 
etc.     A) 

Tachpachelensuwi,  low,  little,  humble. 

Tachpachihilla,  in  the  afternoon. 

Tachpachiwi,  humble,  modest;  little, low. 

Tachpachsu,  low;  (indefinite  term  referring  to  condi- 
tion.    A) 

Tachpamsin,  to  be  less,  to  be  lower. 

Tachpatamauwan,  to  keep  or  preserve  unto  somebody. 

Tachpawewagan,  advice,  commandment. 

Tachquahamoakan,  parched  meal. 

Tachquahoakan,  mortar,  mill. 

Tachquahoakaniminschi,  gum  tree. 

Tachquahoaken,  to  pound,  to  grind. 

Tachquallonikan,  pair  of  scissors. 

Tachquambeso,  tied  together. 


136  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Tachquatten,  frozen  ;  (frozen  together.     A.) 
Tachquihilleu,  it  joins  close  together, 
Tachquinschehikan,  pair  of  pincers. 
Tachquipoagan,  feast. 
Tachquipuin,  to  hold  a  feast; — ahoaltuwi,  to   hold   a 

love  feast. 
Tachquiwi,  together. 

Tachquoak,  fall ;  autumn ;  tachquogike,  Z.,  next  fall. 
Tachquoakcheen,  fall  hunt. 
Tachquoakches,  fall  skin. 
Tachquoakike,  in  the  fall. 
Tachquoch,  land  turtle. 
Tachquondikan,  pair  of  pincers. 
Tachsigiu,  it  hails. 
Tachtakan,  thick,  stiff. 
Tachtamse,  now  and  then,  often. 
Tahakan,    paddle   oar ;    (always   with   the  possessives, 

;/',  k',  w\  etc.     A^ 
Tahunnan,    to   arrest   somebody,   to    take    some    one 

prisoner. 
Taiachquoan,  bridge;  atta  tajachgonewi?  Z.,  is  there 

no  bridge  ? 
Takachquiminschi,  white  wood,  linden  tree. 
Takachsin,  lead. 
Takan  (pL,  ik),  another,  other. 
Takanilaku,  moderately  warm  evening. 
Takanitpikat,  moderately  warm  night. 
Takeet,  perhaps,  I  don't  know. 


DICTIONARY.  137 

Takindamen,  to  count,  to  read. 

Takomen,  to  come  from  some  where. 

Takpeu,  wet,  damp,  soft,  soaked ;  {ta'hokpeu,  he  is  cold 

from  wet.     A.) 
Takquak  (pi.,  ik),  other,  second,  the  rest. 
Taktani,  I  don't  know,  I  don't  know  where ;  somewhere 

perhaps ;  be  it  where  it  may. 
Takta  undachqui,  anywhere. 
Takta  untschi,  from  somewhere, 
Talakat,  cracked,  split. 
Talala,  white  cedar. 
Talattauwoapin,  to  behold,  to  view. 
Talawachto,  how  dear  is  it,  what  does  it  cost. 
Taleka,  crane. 
Tallachpaje,  cold  morning. 
Talli,  there. 
Tamse,  sometimes,  now  and  then,  perhaps; — nail,  once, 

Anally  ; — ta  likhikqui,  once,  sometime  or  other ; — tamse, 

now  and  then. 
Tandachgitechton,  to  shake  off. 
Taneek,  perhaps,  I  don't  know ;  {takeet.     Z.) 
Tangaman,  Z.,  to  thrust,  to  stick. 
Tangamikan,  spear. 
Tangandikan,  spear. 
Tangawachto,  cheap,  low-priced. 
Tangawachtohen,  to  cheapen. 
Tangeemhoantit,  little  spoon. 
Tangelendam,  to  think  little  of  one's  self. 

J 


138  LENAPfe-ENGLISn 

Tangelensin,  to  be  lowly  minded,  to  be  humble. 

Tangelensochwen,  to  walk  humbl)''. 

Tangelensowagan,  lowliness  of  mind. 

Tangelensuwi,  humble,  modest. 

Tangenindin,  to  vouchsafe,  to  condescend. 

Tangetto,  short,  small. 

Tangitehen,  to  think  little  of  one's  self, 

Tangitehewagan,  humility. 

Tangitehewi,  humble,  modest. 

Tangitti,  small,  little;  {tanghotit,  Z.,  a  little  kettle.) 

Tani,  where  ;  how  ;    (used    in  questions)  then ; — leu,    in 

what  manner  then. 
Tanikaniminschi,  white  beech. 
Tankalinschawontit,  little  finger. 
Tankhakan,  basket. 
Tankhakanachen,  to  make  baskets. 
Tankhannen,  little  creek;  (especially  the  narrows  of  a 

stream.     A}j 
Taquatschin,  to  freeze,  to  be  cold. 
Taquatten,  frozen. 
Taquiechen,  joined  together. 
Tassenahamohen,  to  stone. 
Tassenahamolan,  to  stone  somebody. 
Tatamse,  often,  sometimes; — ne  leep,  there  was    more 

done. 
Tatandachgoquehellan,  to  shake  the  head. 
Tatandachgoquehellewagan,  shake  of  the  head. 
Tatask,  sled. 


DICTIONARY.  139 

Tatchen,  little. 

Tatchendo,  but  few,  very  little. 

Tatchittu,  very  little, 

Tatchuppekat,  shallow  water. 

Tauchechin,  to  listen  privately. 

Tauchsittam,  to  hear  privately. 

Tauwachsin,  to  burn,  to  use  for  firewood. 

Tauwatawik,  anjuninhabited  place;  iachtawawek.     A.) 

Tauwatawique,  in  the  wilderness. 

Tauwiechen,  open. 

Tauwinachgechi,  open  arms. 

Tauwinipen,  beginning  of  summer,  May. 

Tauwiquoakan,  key. 

Tau"wunnasin,  to  be  buried. 

Tauwunummen,  to  open. 

Tawonnalogewagan,  labor  in  vain. 

Tawonni,  although. 

Tawwunasin,  Z.,  to  bury ;  tauwundin,  burial  place  {lit., 

to  put  under,  /.  .^.j'^the  ground  ;  it  begins  with  aq,  q'tau. 

A.). 
Tchen,  times. 
Techi,  quite ; — matta,  not  at  all,  absolutely  not,  by  no 

means  ( — takii). 
Techthunnentschik,  prisoners,  captives. 
Techtummischikan,  candle  snuffers. 
Tehek,  cold. 
Tekauwontowit,  the  patient,  meek,  mild  God,  Lamb  of 

God. 


140  LEN  APE-ENGLISH 

Tekauwussitawan,  to  show  somebody  favor, 
Tekene,  woods,  an  uninhabited  place;  [tekenink,  H.,  in 
the  woods.) 

Tellamasgeek,  Z.,  a  cedar-swamp. 

Tellen,  ten. 

Tellen  tchen  tchapachki,  one  thousand. 

Temagehikan,  water  pail. 

Temahikan,  axe,  hatchet. 

Temiki,  any;  single;  something; — koeku,  anything, 
something,  a  single  thing. 

Temitehemen,  to  cut  off. 

Tengamend,  pierced,  stabbed. 

Tengandasuwi,  pierced  through. 

Tengettik,  little. 

Tenktitit,  little. 

Tenktschechen,  open;  (burst  open,  broken  open.     A.) 

Tepalachgat,  deep  enough. 

Tepawachto,  reasonable,  not  too  dear,  fair  price. 

Tepelendam,  to  have  enough,  to  be  satisfied,  to  be  con- 
tent. 

Tepelendamoagan,  sufficiency. 

Tepelook,  enough  of  them. 

Tepi,  enough. 

Tepihilleu,  it  is  enough,  it  answers  the  purpose. 

Tepiken,  ripe,  full  grown. 

Tepilawechgussin,  to  be  satisfied,  to  have  received 
satisfaction. 

Tepilawehan,  to  satisfy  somebody. 


DICTIONARY.  141 

Tepilawen,  to  satisfy. 

Tequipin,  to  hold  a  feast. 

Tesquachtaminschi,  shiver  hickory. 

Tesquoalintsch,  the  Httle  finger. 

Tetanktitit,  Httle  one. 

Tetauwiwi,  between. 

Tetawonkhillentschik,  those  who  have  been  deceived, 

misled  ;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
Tetawonkhillowet,  deceiver. 

Tetpissin,  to  be  in  a  like  manner,  to  do  in  a  like  manner. 
Tetschpihillen,  split  off,  separated  from  one  another. 
Tetuppalachgat,  rifle;  (refers  to  the  groove  inside  the 

bore ;  from  tuppeii,  spiral,  circular.     A}) 
Tetuptschehellak,  wagon,  cart ;  (from  tuppeu,  referring 

to  the  wheel.     A^ 
Teu,  it  is  cold. 
Tgauchsin,  to  be  good,  to  be  kind,  to  be  meek,  to  be 

friendly,  to  be  good  natured. 
Tgauchsu,  good,1mild,  gracious. 
Tgauchsuwaptonen,  to  speak  civil,  to  speak  kind. 
Tgauchsuwi,  good,  kind. 
Tgauwitti,  soft,  mild;  slowly,  by  little  and  little;  also 

tgaitte. 
Tgauwiwi,  slowly,  gently. 
Thagitti,  a  very^little  while. 
Thaquetto,  short. 
Thiechumin,  Z.,  to  bathe. 
Thinaquot,  Z.,  cool  (anything  that  looks  cold.     A). 


142  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Thitpan,  bitter;  {tiecht'pan,  astringent,  pucker}'.     A.) 
Thitpanihm,  white  hickory  nut ;  (the  root  of  an  herb  is 

called  tiecht'pan.     A.) 
Thunnan,    to    arrest    somebody;    to   take    somebody 

prisoner ;  {tach'JiiuDian.     A.) 
Thuppeek,  spring,  well ;  (means  simply  cool  water.    A.) 
Tigamikat,  cold  house;  (cold  room.     A.) 
Tihilleu,  it  is  cold. 
Tilaku,  cool  evening. 
Timmeu,  wolf;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
Tinajappawe,  cold  morning. 
Tindeuchen,  to  make  fire. 
Tindey,  fire. 
Tinnohagan,  first  finger. 

Tipas,  hen,  fowl  ;  (not  in  use  ;  kikipisch,  at  present.    A^ 
Tipasigawan,  hen  coop;  {kikipshican.     A.) 
Tipatit,  little  chicken. 
Tiskemanis,  little  fisher  bird. 
Titpanunschi,  bitter  hickory  tree  ;  [titpaniui,  Z.,  hickory 

nut.) 
Titpikat,  cold  night. 
Togenan,  to  waken  somebody. 
Togendowagan,  wakening 
Togihillan,  to  arise,  to  awake. 
Tombikan,  crab  apple,  wild  apple. 
Tonkdonechin,  to  open  the  mouth. 
Tonktschechen,  the  door  is  open. 
Tonktschechton,  to  open  the  door. 


DICTIONARY.  143 

Tonktschenemen,  to  open. 

Tonktschequoakan,  key. 

Tonquihilleu,  open. 

Topalowagan,  war. 

Topalowilenno,  Z.,  a  warrior;  pi.,  netopallisak. 

Topalowoagan,  Z.,  war-time  (scout,  skirmisher.     A)). 

Topan,  white  frost. 

Topi,  Z.,  the  alder  tree  {Alnus  rubra  f). 

Towin,  Z.,  to  wade,  to  ford  (toiven,  he  is  walking  in  the 

water.     A). 
Tpisgau^vi,  just  alike,  even. 
Tpisgauwiechton,  to  do  something  just  so,  to  make  it 

alike,  to  make  it  even,  to  make  it  right. 
Tpisgauwihhilleu,  the  time  is  at  hand;  it  falls  upon, 
Tpisqui,  just  alike,  even,  just  so;  against,  over,  opposite; 

{tipiskawi.     A)^ 
Tpisquihilleu,  the  time  is  at  hand ;  it  falls  upon. 
Tpittawe,  altogether  ;  all  together. 
Tpoku,  last  night ;  (arch.,  A)) 

Tpoquik,  by  night;  {tipocnnhvi gisclmck,  Z.,  the  moon.) 
Tschachgachtin,    stump ;    (properly,   a   crooked    limb 

torn  off.     A) 
Tschachgihilleu,  torn  off,  broken,  slipped  off;  {niach- 

gihilleu,  wrenched,  violently  torn ;  tschachgilleu  means 

straightened  out,  something  crooked   made  straight. 

a:) 

Tschachquochgamen,  short  day. 
Tschallaan,  Z.,  an  Indian  bedstead. 


144  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Tschannauchsin,  to  be  blamable,  to  sin,  to  transgress. 
Tschannauchsowagan,  misbehavior,  fault,  trespass. 
Tschannelendam,  to  consider,  to  be  in  doubt,  to  scruple. 
Tschannelendamoagan,  doubt,  scruple. 
Tschannilissin,  to  do  wrong,  to  make  wrong. 
Tschannindewagan,  difference,  disagreement. 
Tschanninquanukgun,  my  eyes  were  kept  from  discern- 
ing. 

Tschannistammen,  to  misunderstand. 

Tschannistammoewagan,  misunderstanding. 

Tschansittamen,  to  hear  wrong. 

Tschansittamoewagan,  hearing  wrong. 

Tschemamus,  Z.,  a  hare. 

Tschepsit,  stranger. 

Tschetschpat,   otherwise,  differently;  it  does    not  join 

together. 
Tschetschpenammen,  to  separate. 
Tschetschpi,  different,  unlike ;  asunder,  apart. 
Tschetschpiechen,  asunder,  to  separate. 
Tschetschpihilleu,   split,   split   asunder,  broken   off,  it 

cracks,  it  splits  asunder. 
Tschetschpissin,  to  disagree,  to  wrangle. 
Tschibhattenamin,  to  be  indisposed  in  mind. 
Tschiechachpoakan,  roasting  spit. 
Tschiechhammen,  to  comb ;  (out  of  use ;  now  wuliech- 

qnannnen.     A.) 
Tschigantschi,    wholly,   entirely,   full,   enough,   all ; — 

likhiqiii,  as  soon  as. 


DICTIONARY.  145 

Tschihoapekelis,  bluebird. 

Tschikachpoochwe,  sled. 

Tschikenum,  turkey;  (arch.,  A.) 

Tschikhammen,  to  sweep;  {tschik  ik  kavimen.     A.) 

Tschikhikan,  broom. 

Tschilchwehamen,  Z.,  to  castrate, 

Tschimakan,  paddle,  oar. 

Tschimalus,  bluebird. 

Tschimamus,  rabbit. 

Tschimhammen,  to  row  ;  to  paddle. 

Tschinga,  pike  fish. 

Tschingalsu,  stiff,  unbending. 

Tschinge,  when. 

Tschingteung,  Z.,  south  side  of  a  hill, 

Tschinque,  Z.,  a  wild  cat  {nianque.     A.). 

Tschipelendam,  to  think  disagreeable  ;  to  be  unpleasant. 

Tschipelendamoagan,  strangeness,  oddness. 

Tschipey,  spirit,  ghost ;  (also  applied  to  the  dead  body. 

A.) 
Tschipilek,  strange,  wonderful. 
Tschipileu,  strange,  bad  accident ;  awful. 
Tschipinaquot,  it  looks  strange,  it  looks  disagreeable. 
Tschipinaxu,  he  seems  strange,  uncommonly  unpleas- 

ing. 
Tschipisin,  to  have  a  fit,  to  get  fits. 
Tschipsoagan,  uncommonness. 
Tschiquoalale,  a  muscle;  (a  snail,  refers  to  the  spiral 

form  of  the  shell.     A.) 


146  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Tschiquoalaletit,    little    muscle ;    (a    small    snail,   see 

above.     A.) 
Tschisgihilleu,  wiped  out,  rubbed  out;  (scraped,  applied 

to  tlie  skin  when  scratched,  etc.     A.) 
Tschisgokus,  robin. 

Tschiskhammen,  to  wipe  off,  to  blot  out. 
Tschitanambeso,  tied  fast. 
Tschitanatten,  hard  frozen. 
Tschitanek,  fast,  strong. 
Tschitanennan,  to  hold  somebody  fast. 
Tschitanessoagan,  Z.,  authority,  power. 
Tschitaneu,  strong. 
Tschitani,  strong. 

Tschitaniechton,  to  make  fast,  to  make  strong. 
Tschitanigachen,  established,  firm,  sure. 
Tschitanissin,  to  be  strong. 
Tschitanigapawin,  to  stand  fast. 
Tschitanissohen,  to  strengthen. 
Tschitanissowagan,  power,  capability;  strength. 
Tschitanissowaganit,  he  who  is  strength. 
Tschitanitauwan,  to  strengthen  somebody. 
Tschitanitehen,  to  stand  firm  in  mind ;  to  persevere. 
Tschitgussin,  to  be  silent. 
Tschitqui,  silent. 
Tschitquihilleu,  he  is  silent. 
Tschitsch,  again,  once  more;  yet,  still;  still  more; — 

U/ien,  again  as  much. 
Tscholens,  bird;  (not  in  use.     See  Awehelleu.     A.) 


DICTIONARY.  147 

Tscholentit,  little  bird. 

Tschoskin,  Z.,  to  ford,  to  wade. 

Tschukquilques,  Z.,  a  locust  (insect). 

Tschuppik,  root ;  {tschappik,  root  generic ;  also  medi- 
cine.    ^.) 

Tschuppinamen,  it  seems  odd,  it  looks  strange. 

Tschutti,  Z.,  a  comrade,  a  friend;  n'tsclm,  my  friend. 

Tsiheniken,  to  milk. 

Tskennak,  black  bird  ;  (now  tschukqiialle.     A.) 

Tspat,  different,  unlike,  strange,  unusual;  separately. 

Tspinaquot,  it  looks  quite  otherwise. 

Tspinaxu,  he  looks  strange. 

Tspiwi,  separately. 

Ts quail,  frog. 

Tsqualli  gischuch,  the  month  in  which  the  frogs  begin 
to  croak,  February. 

Tukauwussowagan,  favor,  kindness. 

Tulpe,  turtle,  water  turtle. 

Tumb,  brain ;  (always  with  the  possessives,  n\  k' ,  w\ 
etc.     A.) 

Tumhican,  Z.,  an  axe;  see  Teniahican. 

Tuney,  beard  {wiechtimey,  chin  beard.     ^.). 

Tunktonechin,  Z.,  to  gape,  to  open  the  mouth. 

Tuppehelleu,  it  flows  out,  it  runs  out;  {ktuppe' helleu. 
A.) 

Tuptschehelleu,  it  rolls;  it  revolves. 

Tutaam,  to  set  on,  to  set  at;  to  incite  one  to  do  some- 
thing. 


148  LENAP6-ENGLISH 

u. 

Uchtechsiit,  Z.,  the  sole  of  the  foot  {pochsitawi,  the  flat 

of  the  foot.     A.). 
Uchtehelinsch,  palm  of  the  hand. 
Uchtscheyunque,  within. 
Uchtuchen,  Z.,  a  bough,  a  branch. 
Ulakanahen,  to  make  dishes;  (wooden  dishes.     A) 
Ulakanahunschi,  elm  tree;  ulakanahemunschi,  Z. 
Ulakanis,  dish. 
Ulakens,  dish. 

Ulakunipoagan,  supper;  {lit.,  the  evening  meal.     A) 
Ulaque,  yesterday. 

Ulepen,  onion;  (not  in  use  ;  at  present  wi'nonsck.     A.) 
Unami,  one  of  the  3  tribes  of  the   Lenni   Lenape  or 

Delawares. 
Undaaktschehellan,  to  jump  hither. 
Undach,  here,  this  way. 
Undachgamen,  this  side  the  water. 
Undachlenni,  hand  it  here. 
Undachlitti,  a  little  this  way. 
Undachqui,  hither,  this  way,  that  way. 
Undaptonen,  to  speak  thereof 
Undauchsin,  to  live  from,  to  live  on. 
Undauchsowagan,  food  to  live  upon. 
Undenummen,  to  take  from. 
Undoochwen,  to  come  or  go  for  something. 
Undsoagan,  Z.,  an  accident;  wundso,  he  is  unlucky. 


DICTIONARY.  149 

Unitschaanin,  Z.,  to  beget   a  child  ;  to  bring  forth  a 

child. 
Unk,  in,  in  the,  on,  out  of. 

Untschi,  of,  by,  therefore ;  from  ;  with  ;  concerning. 
Untschihilleu,  to  come  from  somewhere  rapidly,  to  flow 

out  of 
Uschewinaquot,  painful. 
Uschewinaxu,  painful;  (he  looks  weakly  or   in   pain. 

a:) 

Uschumallsin,  to  feel  sorrowful,  to  feel  painful. 
Uschuwamallsin,  to  feel  grief,  to  feel  sorrow. 
Uschuwauchsoagan,  troublesome  life,  sorrowful  life. 
Uschuwelemuwi,  miserable,  painful,  burthensome. 
Uschuwelendam,  to  be  grieved,  to  be  troubled  in  mind, 

to  be  burthened  with  labor,  sorrow  or  trouble. 
Uschuwinaxowagan,  sorrowful  look,  painful  look. 
Uteney,  city,  town  ;  {utaney.     A.) 
U tsche,  ^y;  {utckeuwes.     A.) 


W. 

Wabiminschigeu,  Z.,  chestnut  tree.     See  JVoak. 
Wachejeu,  Z,  light,  bright  {wacheyek,  light,  brightness. 

Wachelachkey,  fish  scale  ;  {walachkey.     A.) 
Wachganessu,  Z.,  lean  (bony,  from  wochgan.     A.). 
Wachgutey,  petticoat ;  {wachgotey.     A.) 


150  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Wachschiechey,  bird's  nest ;  {wisaiviamoe  wachschiechey^ 

a  wasp's  nest.) 
Wachtanquall,  his  brother-in-law. 
\A^achteneu,  he  has  the  belly-ache. 
Wachtey,  stomach,  belly. 
Wachtschangussin,  to  be  enslaved. 
Wachtschu,  hill,  mountain. 

^Vachtschuhatteu,  it  is  full;  {zva-clui-ivateu.     A.) 
Wachtschuwi,  hilly. 
Wachtschuwiketo,  mountainous. 
Wachtschuwikeu,  hilly. 
Wachtuchwepi,  body,  flesh. 
Wachtuchwepiwi,  bodily,  personal. 
Wagagapoak,  Z.,  they  stand  in  a  circle. 
W^ahh,  egg. 

Wahhellemat,  wide,  far;  (it  is  a  great  distance.     A.) 
Wahhellemelendam,  to  seem  to  be  far. 
^A^ajauwe,  see  Wojauwe. 
Waktscheu,  crooked  ;  (bent,  warped.     A) 
^Vaktschiechen,  the  road  is  crooked. 
Walak,  hole  ;  {ivaleck,  a  hollow  or  excavation,  not  a  hole 

which  penetrates.     A?) 
Walaxiall,  Z.,  entrails,  guts. 

\Ai^aletittin,  to  advise  one  another,  to  inform  each  other. 
Walha'ndi,  Z.,  a  ditch  or  trench. 
^A^alhasu,  buried;  covered  over  with  earth. 
^Valheu,  he  is  digging  a  hole. 
Waliechtschessu,  a  hollow  tree. 


DICTIONARY.  151 

"Waloh,  Z.,  a  cave. 

"Wanachkwim,  Z.,  an  acorn. 

Wanggwannelentsching,  Z.,  a  span. 

^Vangundin,  to  salute  one  another ;  wangomen,  Z,,  to 

greet. 
^A(^annessin,  Z.,  to  forget ;  n'tvansi,  I  forgot  it ;  wannes- 

sowoagan,  forgetfulness. 
Wanquon,  heel. 
W^apahamink,  back,   backwards,  behind ;    (at   present 

packhantmink  is  used.     A)) 
Wapaleechen,  white. 
W^apanacheen,   good  morrow;    (///.,   he  has   lived  till 

morning,     y^.) 
Wapaneu,  easterly. 
Wapanke,  to-morrow. 

Wapie'chquey,  Z.,  a  bubble  (a  blown  bladder.     A\ 
W^apielukquon,  Z.,  hail ;  a  hail  stone. 
Wapintschachke,  garfish,  with  a  bill  like  a  duck. 
\A(^apsit,  white  person. 
"Wapsu,  white. 
W^aputschies,   Z.,  a  hornet  {wapotis,  from    his  hinder 

part  being  whitish.     A?). 
Wasachtehella,  to  lie  on  the  back  ;  (means  to  turn  on 

the  back  and  then  turn  again  ;  to  lie  on  the  back  is 

wasachtehin.     A}) 
"Waselandeu,  clear  sunshine. 
Waseleechen,  clear,  light. 
^A^aselenemen,  to  lighten,  to  kindle. 


152  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

"Waselenikan,  light,  candle. 

Waselenikanin,  to  burn. 

^Vaseleu,  clear,  light. 

"Waskejek,  thin  ;  (comp.  scheye) 

^Vaskeu,  thin. 

Wassandeu,  clear  day. 

"Wattengim,  milt,  spleen. 

^Vattenkginem,  colic. 

^Vauchtamsin,  to  tarry. 

Wawangoman,  to  salute  somebody. 

Wawangomgussowagan,  the  being  saluted  ;  greeting. 

^Vawikan,  the  back. 

Wawikanin,  to  have  backache  ;  {zvaivikaninen.     A.) 

Wawinuwen,  to  beg  ;  to  ask  for. 

^Vawoachepingus,  lightning  bug,  firefly. 

^A^awulamallessin,  to  be  always  well. 

Wawulauchsin,  to  live  orderly,  to  live  blameless. 

Wdallachgummenanink,  in  our  midst. 

^Vdallachpihewon,  the  net  inside  the  belly;  (the  dia- 
phragm.    A.) 

Wdallachquelendam,  to  grudge,  to  be  unwilling  to 
give  ;  (to  give  with  hesitation.     A.) 

^A^dallemuns,  tame  beast;  (see  Da//emuns.) 

Wdallemunsin,  to  have  cattle. 

^^^dallemunsit,  the  owner  of  cattle. 

Wdallewussowagan,  power,  might. 

Wdallowelemuwi,  excellent,  precious. 

Wdallowilissowagan,  glory. 


DICTIONARY.  153 

Wdamemenshassin,  to  become  a  child. 

Wdamemensuwi,  childlike. 

Wdanis,  daughter. 

^Vdapande^vagan,  commandment. 

Wdee,  heart. 

W^dehin,  heart. 

Wdehiwi,  heartily,  cordial. 

W^deleleman,  to  take  some  one  to  be,  to  consider  some- 
body to  be. 

"Wdelinamen,  to  imagine,  to  conjecture ;  (error ;  it 
means  the  mode  of  doing  something.     A.) 

"Wdellewunsowagan,  name ;  {w' liwiinsowagan.     A.) 

"Wdelsowagan,  behavior,  conduct. 

"Wditehen,  to  think. 

"Wdoon,  the  mouth. 

Wdulhe,  the  breast;  (the  thorax,  not  the  mamma.     A.) 

^Vdulhewinewagan,  pain  in  the  breast. 

Wduschusowagan,  grief,  sorrow. 

^Vechwulam^loehend,  water  pail. 

Wechwulilawehuwet,  comforter. 

Wehemoalan,  to  mock  at  somebody,  to  make  sport  of 
some  one. 

"Wehiwallahagan,  horse  gear. 

'Welanittowit,  the  good,  gracious  God. 

^A^elapassigan,  good  physic. 

AA^elapensit,  the  blessed  ;  (the  fortunate,  the  lucky.     A.) 

Welaquik,  last  evening,  last  night. 

Welauchsit,  an  orderly,  well-behaved  person. 

K 


154  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Welches,  stallion,  boar. 

^Vele^lukquek,    round  hill;  (arch.,   ivehimqueu,  it  is  a 

knoll  or  mound.     A^ 
^A/'elhik,  good  ;  {wellihk' .     A.) 
Welilissit,  pious  person. 
^Velsit,  best ; — jutschitschank,  Holy  Ghost. 
"Welsittank,  believer  in  Christ. 
\Vemhundammen,  to  carry  all. 
"Wemi,  all; — auzuen,  everybody; — ia  li,  everywhere; — 

ta  untschi,  from  everywhere. 
Wemihan,    to   destroy  somebody,  to   make  an  end  of 

some  one;  (to  destroy  all.     A^ 
Wemihilleu,  it  is  all  gone,  it  is  all  spent. 
AA^emiten,  to  go  all  out. 
^Vemoltin,  to  go  all  away. 

^A(^endachguttechen,  where  the  road  goes  up  the  hill. 
\A^endachguttejek,  up  hill ;  (///.,  from  below  upwards.   A?f 
Wendamen,  to  fish  with  hook  and  line. 
W^endaptonachga,  of  or  from  the  word. 
Wendasemowik,  it  shineth  from  thence. 
Wendauchsin,  by  what  to  live. 
W^endenuxowagan,  reception,  admittance. 
Wengup,  whence  he  came. 
Wenhamma,  almost,  narrowly. 
Wenigajek,  trifle  ;  (not  in  use.     A) 
^Venigajekink,  in  small  things,  in  trifles. 
Wenitschanit,  parent ;  (either  father  or  mother  or  both ; 

///.,  the  one  who  has  produced  the  child.     A^ 


DICTIONARY.  155 

^\^entschi,  because,  therefore,  for  this  reason. 
^A/'entschijeyin,  to  belong  to  a  place,  to  be  from  a  place. 
\A<^entschikin,  to  descend,  to  grow  out  of. 
Wentschindewagan,  call,  invitation. 
W^entschintin,  to  call  each  other. 
W^entschipennassiechen,   where  the  road  goes  down 

the  hill. 
Weschilematschil,  his  relation  by  marriage. 
Weschilemuk,  my  relation  in  marriage;  (used  by  either 

spouse  with  reference  to  the  family  of  the  other.     A.) 
^Veschumais,  cow,  calf;  (out  of  use.) 
W^eski,  a  little  while  ago;  sometime  to-day ;  (anew,  again. 

A.) 
\Vetachguppachtak,  he  that  watereth  or  moisteneth. 
^Vetegakil,  his  messengers ;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
\A(''etochemuxit,  Father. 

Wetochwink,  Father;  (one  who  is  a  father.     A.) 
Wetschitschauquit,  man;  {i.  £.,  one  who  has  a  soul. 

A.) 
Weuchschummuis,  horned  cattle. 
W^euchsin,  to  know. 
W^euchsowagan,  knowledge. 
Weuhokeyit,    man;  (/.  f.,  one  who    has  a  body,  from 

hakey,  body,     yi.) 
Wewidhiken,  to  testify;  (something  without  doubt.  A^ 
W^ewidhikewagan,  testimony. 
Wewiechgukil,  his  acquaintance. 
W^ewikit,  master  of  the  house. 


156 


LENAPE-ENGLISH 


Wewingtonheet,  Z.,  a  babbler  (one  who  likes  to  talk. 

Wewitschi,  perhaps. 
Wewitschinaquot,  it  is  likely ;  probable. 

^Vewoapisak,  guard,  watchmen. 

"Wewoatam,  to  be  of  good  understanding,  to  be  wise, 

V^ewoatamowi,  wise,  prudent. 

Wewoatamowino,  wise  man. 

■Wewoatangik,  wise  men. 

Wewulatenamohaluwet,  Saviour. 

Wewundachqui,  on  both  sides;  opposite;  wewundach- 
qui'wicu,  he  lives  opposite  {i.  e.,  we  live  on  both  sides, 
he  on  one,  I  on  the  other.  The  word  means  "  on 
both  sides  "  and  not  opposite  in  the  ordinary  sense. 
A.) 

"Whittangan,  neck  {lit.,  back  of  the  head.     A). 

\Af^hittawak,  ears. 

"Wiagasksin,  to  be  unruly;  (out  of  use.     A.) 

^Viagasksowagan,  wantonness,  unruly. 

"Wiakat,  enough  and  to  spare  ;  plenty,  abundance. 

"Wiaki,  enough  and  to  spare;  plenty,  abundance. 

Wiakipuin,  to  have  plenty;  to  have  abundance  to  eat. 

"Wiamochki,  among  each  other,  mixed. 

"Wiaxowagan,  plenty,  sufficiency. 

W^idhoman,  to  go  in  a  canoe  with  somebody. 

Wiechenin,  to  boil,  to  cook,  to  prepare  food ;  (not  in 
use.     yi.) 

Wiechgawotschi,  unexpectedly;  unawares. 


DICTIONARY.  157 

Wiechpongus,  nettle ;  {wiechponganit,  the  bitter  weed. 

A.) 
^Viechquelinschepi,  gloves ;  {lit.,  hands  tied  up ;  arch., 

A) 
"Wiechquepiso,  tied  round ;  a  bundle. 
Wiechquepton,  to  tie  around. 
W^iguluk,  bill  of  a  fowl  or  bird. 
W^igunacka,  the  point  of  an  island. 
"Wihhinachk,  birch  tree. 
Wi'hillaan,  Z.,  to  name;  n'wihilluk,  he  names  one;  root, 

hinsi. 
W^ihitawemguppanil,  those  that  had  been  with  him. 
W^ihoman,  to  make  an  offering  to  somebody. 
Wihundewagan,  sacrifice,  offering. 
W^ihungemuin,  to  hold  a  feast. 
Wihungen,  to  make  an  offering,  to  sacrifice. 
Wijagaskau,  fickle. 
Wikasch,   the  nail  on  hand   or  foot ;  fingers ;    claws  ; 

nikasch,  my  nail. 
Wikat,   leg;  wi'ckaat,  Z.  {wihk'kaat;   otenkhaat,  hind 

leg.     A) 
Wikathoos,  an  iron  pot  with  feet. 
^Vikbi,  Z.,  bast,  the  inner  bark  of  trees. 
^Vikhakamik,  end  of  the  world. 
W^ikhetschik,  builders. 
Wikheu,  to  build ;  gisclmch  wikheu,  Z,  halo  of  sun  or 

moon ;  {lit.,  the  sun  or  moon  builds  a  house.) 
^Vikiak,  my  house. 


158  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Wikian,  thy  house. 

Wikimak,  my  wife;  (out  of  use;  witawemak,  he  or  she 

who  Hves  with  me  in  the  home,  my  house  mate.     A}) 
^Vikindewagan,  marriage;  {now ,  zvitawendewagan.    A.) 
"Wikinditschik,  married  people. 
Wikingen,  to  marry;  wiwu,  Z.,  he  is  married  {lit.,  he 

copulates.     A). 
Wikinget,  married  person. 
"Wikit,  his  house. 
■Wikiwon,  nose. 

Wiktschi,  bottom  of  a  keg,  breech  of  a  gun. 
^Viktschiechak,  butt  end  of  a  tree. 
^Viku,  he  has  a  house. 
^Vikul,  fat  in  an  animal's  belly. 
Wikwahemunk,  in  the  house. 
\Vikwam,  house. 
^Vikwames,  little  house. 
Wikwamhassin,  to  make  an  abode. 
\Vikwamtit,  little  room. 
Wil,  head. 

"Wilachkey,  Z.,  male  genitals. 
^A^ilano,  tongue. 

"Wilanoall,  pumpkin  seeds  ;  (any  leguminous  seeds.     A.) 
W^ilawi,  rich,  valuable,  precious;  (from  W/,  head,  with 

the  idea  as  superior,  royal.     A) 
"Wilawilihan,  to  treat  somebody  generously. 
^Vilawiochqueu,  rich  woman. 
Wilawussall,  his  corn  ;  his  grain. 


DICTIONARY.  159 

Wilinen,  to  have  head  ache. 

Wilinewagan,  head  ache. 

"Wilooxi,  warm  thyself. 

Wilsu,  fat  meat. 

Wimachtendienk,  Z.,  brotherhood. 

^Vimb,  heart  of  a  tree;  (any  core  or  centre  of  a  trunk, 

etc.     A}) 
Wimbeneman,  to  relieve  somebody ;  (to  sacrifice  one's 

self  for  another;  a  strong  expression.     A^ 
Winak,  sassafras. 

W^inamallsachtin,  to  be  a  common  sickness. 
W^inamallsachtowagan,  sickness,  distemper. 
\Vinaniallsin,  to  be  sick,  to  feel  pain. 
"Winamandamen,  to  feel  pain. 
"Winamandamoagan,  pain,  sore. 

"Winamin,  the  corn  is  ripe ;  (when  it  is  fit  to  eat.     A^ 
"Winaminge,  Z.,  the  month  of  August ;  (///.,  "  time   of 

roasting  ears.") 
\Vindamen,  to  mention. 
^A^indasu,  mentioned,  named. 
Wineu,  it  snows. 

Wingachpin,  to  like  to  be  in  some  place. 
"Wingachtochwilsit,  lover  of  hunting. 
W^ingallauwin,  to  hunt  willingly. 
\Vingan,  sweet,  savory;  good  tasted. 
Wingandamen,  it  tastes  good. 
^Vingapue,  good,  sweet  broth. 
AVingel,  eatable. 


160  LENAP6-ENGLISH 

^Vingelawossi,  it  burns  well. 

Wingelendamoagan,  approbation,  liking. 

■Wingeleu,  it  burns  well. 

^Vingelewe^len,  to  do  a  pleasure. 

■Wingewochqueu,  a  raven ;  (out  of  use.     A.) 

AA^ingi,  fain,  gladly,  willingly. 

Wingilauchsin,  to  live  willingly  in  a  particular  manner. 

^Vingilaweman,  to  do  somebody  a  pleasure. 

^Vingimachtek,  odoriferous. 

^Vingimaquot,  it  has  a  good  pleasant  smell. 

\A^inginamen,  to  delight  in,  to  be  pleased  with. 

Wingipendam,  to  hear  willingly. 

Wingochwen,  to  go  willingly,  to  travel  with  pleasure ; 

to  like  to  go. 
Wingsittam,  to  like  to  hear. 
Wingsittawan,  to  like  to  hear  somebody. 
Winhattak,  bad  accident;  (not  in  use.     A.) 
Winhattakuwagan,  danger. 
Wini  gischuch,  snow  month,  November. 
Winike,  when  it  is  ripe. 
"Winingus,  mink. 
\Vinktek,  done,  boiled. 
^Al^inkteu,  done,  boiled  enough. 
Winu,  ripe;  (ready  to  be  eaten.     A.) 
^A^inunschi,  Z.,  an  onion. 
Winuwelchittewagan,  supplication. 
Winuwewagan,  petition,  request. 
^Vinxu,  ripe  (fruit). 


DICTIONARY.  161 

Wipachsoagan,  fear;  (out  of  use.     A.) 

^A(^ipantin,  to  eat  with  each  other, 

Wipasin,  to  be  in  fear. 

Wipelachteu,  soot. 

'Wipentin,  to  lie  with  each  other,  to    sleep   with  one 

another. 
W^ipiechkeu,  rotten  wood. 
^Vipit,  tooth. 

Wipochk,  bush  ;  grub  ;  (a  bushy  place,  a  thicket.     A.) 
"Wipochsoagan,  Z.,  fright. 
Wipuelendam,  to  be  fearful. 
^A^ipundin,  to  keep  a  feast. 
Wipungweu,  Z.,  brown. 
\Vipunquoak,  white  oak. 
"Wipunxit,   gray ;  {wapantpeu  lenno,  Z.,  a  gray-headed 

man.) 
Wiquajek  or  W^iquek,  the  head  of  a  creek  or  run. 
Wiquajeu,  the  head  of  a  creek. 
Wiquajungo,  at  the  end. 
^A^iquajun quick,  at  the  end. 
^Viqualamo,  to  suffer  hunger;  (arch.,  A) 
Wiquenachk,  the  end  of  the  fence. 
Wiquey,  box  made  of  bark ;    bark  trunk ;    (refers  to 

birch  bark,  which  is  called  wiquey.     A) 
Wiquiechink,  end,  point ;  {iviquajunquik,  Z.,  to  the  end.) 
Wiquihillau,  to  be  tired. 
W^iquimemguke,  on  the  end  of  the  plain. 
Wiquon,  dull,  blunt. 


162  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

^Viquonummen,  to  make  dull. 

"Wisachgak,  black  oak ;  bark  canoe. 

Wisachgamallessin,  to  feel  sore  pain. 

W^isachgamallsoagan,  bitter  pain. 

■Wisachgank,  rum,  brandy;  (from  the  sharp,  biting  taste. 

^.) 
AVisachgim,  wild  grapes. 

Wisachgiminschi,  wild  vine. 

"Wisachgissi,  it  hurts  me,  it  burns  me ;  (means  simply 

to  hurt.     A.) 
W^isamek,  catfish ;  (arch.,  at  present  wahlheti,  mudfish ; 

wisamek  means  '*  a  fat  fish."     A') 
W^isaminschi,  yellow-wood  tree ;  (a  species  of  oak,  with 

a  yellow  bark  used  in  dying.     A}) 
■Wisawanik,  red  squirrel. 
Wisawek,  yellow;  also,  sulphur,  etc. 
^A^isaweu,  yellow. 
Wischalau,  frightened. 

Wischalowe,  rattlesnake;  (the  frightener.     A) 
Wischassin,  to  fear;  {wischasnagan,  Z.,  fear.) 
^Vischiki,  busily. 
^Vischixin,  to  be  active,  to  be  brisk,  to  be  nimble ;  to 

exert  one's  self.     (See  Heckewelder,  History,  p.  439.) 
W^iseu,  scar. 
Wishaque,  to  notch  a  tree;  {wis'haque,  to  tap  a  maple 

tree.     A) 
Wismi  or  Wiswi,  Z.,  the  gall. 
Wisohen,  to  fatten. 


DICTIONARY.  163 

W^isquon,  elbow ;  tobacco[^twist. 

Wisu,  fat,  fleshy. 

^Visuwagan,  fatness. 

Witachpin,  to  live  with,  to  dwell  with  ;  (to  be  with  one 

at  a  place.     A.) 
Witaheman,  to  assist  somebody,  to  relieve  some  one. 
Witahentin,  to  help  each  other. 
Witalamuin,  to  cry  with;  to  sing  in  company  with. 
Witalogen,  to  work  with. 
Witamehhellen,  to  walk  with. 

Witatschimolsin,  to  advise  with,  to  hold  council  with. 
Witauchsall,  her  brother's  wife;  (dub.,  it  means  living 

together.     A.) 
■Witauchsoman,  to  be  in  fellowship  with  somebody. 
Witauchsundin,  to  have  fellowship  with  one  another. 
"Witauchsundowagan,  fellowship. 
Witawematpanni,  who  was  with  him;  witawemat,  Z., 

an  aid,  assistant  (now  used  exclusively  for  man  or  wife. 

A). 
Witawentin,  to  be  together,  to  live  or  dwell  with  each 

other. 
^Vitchwi,  Z.,  the  navel. 
"Witen,  to  go  with. 
^Vitgochquall,  her  sister. 
Witisin,  to  esteem  ;  (not  in  use.     A) 
Witochwen,  to  go  with,  to  travel  with. 
Witonquoam,  to  lodge  at  one's  house,  to  board  with,  to 

sleep  with. 


164  LENAPfe-ENGLISK 

Witscheachgenimatpanni,  one  who  helped  to  accuse 
him. 

\Vitscheman,  to  help  somebody;  {witsch'man.     A) 

^Vitsche^van,  to  go  with  somebody. 

Witschewot,  he  who  goes  with  him. 

"Witschi,  with,  at  the  same  time. 

^A(''itschindin,  to  help  one  another,  to  assist  each  other, 

to  lend  a  hand. 
^Vitschingen,  to  help  along. 
Witschu,  calf  of  the  leg;  pi.,  wak. 
Witschwochak,  pine  nuts;  (out  of  use.     A^ 
V^iuchschachauwan,  to  load  somebody  with  a  burden. 
Wi^vasch,  bundle,  load. 
Wiwaschin,  to  carry  a  load. 
"Wiwundhakamik,   before   now,  in    former   time,   very 

long  ago. 
"Wiwunigagun,  I  am  surrounded. 
Wiwunigapawin,  to  stand  all  around. 
W^iwuniwi,  round  about. 

Wiwunochwen,  to  go  all  around;  to  go  round  about. 
^Viwuntschi,  beforje  now,  of  old ;  (not  in  use.     A^ 
^Vo!  o!  oh! 
"Woachejek,  light. 
W^oachejekumin,  to  be  light. 
"Woachejekumuit,  he  who  is  the  light. 
\A^oachejeu,  clear,  light. 
NVoagai,  round  about. 


DICTIONARY.  165 

Woak,  and,  also,  as  well  diS\—atta,  neither,  nor)— lappi, 

repeatedly,  again. 
Woakagapawin,  to  stand  in  a  circle. 
Woakawi,  round  about,  anywhere  around. 
Woakhattimi,  mulberry;  {mint' quakin.     A.) 
Woakhattiminschi,  mulberry  tree. 
"Woakeu,  crooked. 
Woaktschachne,  a  bend  in  the  river. 
"Woaktschaquot,  crooked  like. 
W^oaktschiechen,  crooked  road. 
W^oaktschiechton,  to  make  crooked. 
W^oaktschinni,  bend  it. 
Woaktschochwen,  to  go  a  crooked  road. 
Woakus,  the  gray  fox. 
^Voalak,  hole  in  the  ground. 
Woalhen,  to  dig  a  hole. 
\Voapachpoan,  white  bread. 
Woapachsaney,  white  blanket. 
"Woapachsun,  Z.,  chalk. 
^A^oapak,  water  beech;  (not  in  use.     A.) 
^Voapalanne,  bald  eagle. 
Woapanacheen,  good  morning. 
^Voapaneu,  morning. 
"Woapange,  to  morrow. 
"Woapaniken,  lime. 
Woapank,  to-morrow. 
"Woapaschapiall,  white  beads. 
^A^oapassisku  achsin,  unburnt  brick. 


166  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

Woapasum,  white  sunshine, 

Woapchwees,  a  marten. 

Woapek,  gensi  root. 

Woapelechen,  it  looks  white. 

Woapeu,  white. 

^Voaphattaquall,  white  yarn,  white  thread. 

Woaphokquawon,  gray  hair. 

Woapim,  chestnut. 

"Woapiminschi,  chestnut  tree. 

^Voapink,  opossum,  a  wild  beast. 

Woapipen,  wild  white  potato. 

\Voapsit,  white  person. 

Woapsu,  white. 

Woaptigihilleu,  pale. 

Woaptiginquehelleu,  broken  eyes. 

^Voasgejeu,  thin. 

"Woatasik,  known  ;  {weuivistasik.     A.) 

^Voatauweju,  it  blossoms. 

W^oatawes,  flower;  {wachawes.     A.) 

"Woaton,  to  know  ;  {weuwiton.     A.) 

^Voaxachey,  fox  skin. 

W^ochgalan,  forehead. 

^Vochgan,  bone. 

W^ochganihm,  seed. 

^A^ochganiponk,  hard  burnt  ashes. 

^A^ochganissin,  to  become  lean,  to  grow  meager. 

^Vochgidhakamik,  on  earth,  upon  the  earth. 

Wochgitachtenne,  top  of  the  hill. 


DICTIONARY.  167 

W^ochgitaque,  on  the  top  of  the  house. 

^A/'ochgitschi,  above,  on  the  top,  on  the  surface. 

"Wochgitschik,  above,  on  the  top,  up  there. 

Wochkunk,  above,  at  the  top. 

■Wochpahellan,  to  awake,  to  come  to  one's  senses. 

W^ochpiechquey,  bladder. 

W^ochtschuhatteu,  full. 

^A/'oh!  oh! 

^A^ojauwe,  Z.,  a  chief;  {zvejjaweu,  he  is  a  chief.  This  is 
the  word  now  in  use  in  place  of  the  older  word  sake- 
ma.     A.) 

"Wolanniall,  feathers  of  a  bird's  tail. 

^Von,  this,  this  one. 

W^onachgulinschall,  tips  of  the  fingers. 

\Vonachquiwi,  the  top  of  anything. 

^A^onachxitall,  tops  of  the  toes. 

W^onanno,  cheek. 

W^onatam,  to  be  weak,  to  be  impotent,  to  faint,  to  be 
out  of  one's  senses;  {wonachq'tcn.     A.) 

^A^onataInmoagan,  faintness. 

Wonatamowi,  weak,  impotent,  fanciful,  out  of  one's 
senses. 

Wonipakquihilleu,  the  leaves  come  out. 

W^onnessin,  to  forget. 

\A^onnissowagan,  forgetfulness. 

\A^onspi,  Z.,  sap  of  trees. 

^Votsche  anenk,  by  the  way. 

Wotschi,  near  by. 


168  LENAP6-ENGLISH 

Wotschuwiechen,  full, 

^Vottallauwin,  to  hunt  by  the  way. 

"Wouchokquin,  to  cough  ;  {wohoch' quin.     A.) 

^Vowoatam,  experienced,  skilful. 

^Vowoatammoagan,  wisdom. 

^Vowoatammowino,  wise  man. 

^Vsamgigun,  too  big. 

^Vsa^li,  too  much. 

"Wsamiechen,  too  much. 

^A^schachan,  smooth,  glossy. 

"Wschacheu,  slippery ;  smooth,  glossy. 

^Vschachihillan,  to  slip. 

^^schappan,  thin. 

"Wscheechachquall,  chips,  shavings. 

'Wscheton,  lip  ;  {w'schefton.     A.) 

"Wschewinaxu,  painful. 

Wschimuin,  to  fly,  to  run  off,  to  escape. 

AVschummo,  horn ;  pi.,  wscJmmowall  (arch.,  the  usual 

word  is  wilazuan,  from  wil,  head,  headgear.     A.). 
Wsigau,  sunset;  {w'si'gau.     A) 
Wsihotewagan,  gain,  profit. 
"Wsihotin,  to  gain  a  wager. 
"Wsihuwen,  to  gain,  to  win. 
^Vsit,  foot. 
^Vsitak,  handle. 

Wsuppi,  sap  of  trees  ;  (see  wonspi.) 
^A^takanachen,  moderately  warm  wind. 
W^takaneu,  mild  weather. 


DICTIONARY.  1 69 

^Vtakaquenimo,  tough  tree. 

Wtakeu,  soft,  tender;  (pliable.     A.) 

Wtakhammen,  to  divide. 

"Wtakhattenamoagan,  softness,  mildness. 

Wtakigachen,  it  lies,  soft. 

Wtakolsin,  to  save,  to  preserve. 

Wtaksu,  soft,  tender,  supple. 

Wtankhitton,  to  loose. 

"Wtappandewagan,  advice,  counsel,  information. 

W^taspiwagan,  ascension, 

^Vtauwachtoju^lmenanink,  in  our  midst. 

^Vtawongellowagan,  loss,  damnation. 

^A^tegauwan,  to  follow  somebody. 

W^tehim,  strawberries. 

Wtelgiqui,  likewise,  in  like  manner,  so  much  so. 

"Wtelgixin,  to  be  worthy  ;  (not  in  use.     A.) 

Wtelgixowagan,  worthiness,  merit. 

^Vtellenahawanink,  on  the  right  hand  ; — //,  towards  the 

right  hand. 
^A(^tellewunsowagan,  name. 
Vi^telli,  thus,  so. 
^A/'tellsin,  to  be  so,  to  do  so. 
W^teltschenemen,  to  roll. 
Wtenk,  after,  behind;  thereon,  thereafter ;  lastly,  at  last; 

afterward ; — untschi,  thereupon,  afterward. 
\A^titehan,  to  think,  to  conjecture;  (now  teliteJian.     A.) 
^A^tschagamique,  in  the  earth. 
Wtscheet,  sinew  ;  {ii'tsch-liet.     A.) 
L 


170  LENAPfe-ENGLISII 

Wtscheyunque,  within,  inwardly. 
Wtschitschank,  spirit. 
Wtschitschanquiwi,  spiritual. 
Wtukauwatschachtowagan,    kind     treatment,      kind 

usage. 
"Wuhhala,  Z.,  to  protect. 
Wulacans,  Z.,  a  basin  (a  bowl.     ^.). 
Wulachen,  to  give  up ;  (this  word  means  "  a  fair  wind ;" 

probably  an  error  for  wulachnummen,  to  loosen,  to 

untie.     A^ 
Wulachneu,  a  stream  without  falls ;  (a  pleasant,  smooth 

stream  ;  from  anne,  stream,  and  wulit.     A) 
Wuladhakawanik,  good  physic. 
^A/'ulaha,  better. 
Wulahellan,  to  have  somebody,  to  possess  some  one ; 

(to  put  a  person  or  thing  in  safe  keeping.     A.) 
^Vulakamike,  Z.,  bottom  land  (///.,  fine  land,  good  land. 

A). 
^Vulakenimgussin,  to  be  spoken  well  of,  to  be  praised. 
W^ulakenimgussowagan,  the  being  praised. 
Wulakenindewagan,  good  report  of  somebody. 
Wulakhelan,  to  take  somebody  in  care. 
Wulaku,  evening. 
"Wulakuniwi,  in  the  evening. 
Wulalogewagan,  good  work. 
"Wulalowe,  black  fox;  (///.,  beautiful  tail;  this  may  be 

an  error  for  luhalowes,  bushy  tail,  which  is  the  present 

name  of  the  animal.     A?) 


DICTIONARY.  171 

Wulamallessin,  to  be  well,  to  be  happy. 
Wulamallessohalid,  he  who  makes  me  happy. 
Wulamallessohaluwed,  he  who  makes  one  happy. 
Wulamallessohen,  to  make  well,  to  cause  to  be  happy. 
Wulamallessuwi,  well,  happy. 
Wulamallsin,  to  be  well,  to  be  happy. 
Wulamat,  fine  ground, 

Wulamehelleu,  it  goes  well,  it  goes  gently. 
Wulamhittamen,  to  believe. 
W^ulamhittamoewagan,  faith,  belief;  (rather,  the  proof 

or  testimony.     A.) 
Wulamissowe,  a  little  while  ago  ;  (out  of  use.     A.) 
Wulamoc,  he  speaks  truly  ;  true. 
"Wulamocan,  Z.,  a  calabash,  a  gourd  (formerly  used  for 

the  rattles  in  ceremonies.     A.). 
^Vulamoe,    long   ago;    (out   of  use;    chiihn'ne   is  the 

present  term,     y^.) 
Wulamoehen,  to  convince  of  the  truth. 
V/ulamoeii,  truly. 
Wulamoeju,  true,  right. 
^A^ulamoen,  to  keep  one's  promise. 
Wulamoewagan,  truth. 
W^ulamoewaganit,  he  who  is  truth. 
Wulamoewaptonamik,  true  word,  true  saying, 
W^ulampton,  to  tie  well. 
Wulamquoam,  Z.,  to  dream;  n\ielungwam,  I   dream, 

etc.  (to  dream  good  things.     A) 
^Vulamsittamen,  to  believe  what  is  said. 


172  LENAPfe-ENGLISH 

"Wulandeu,  fine  day,  warm  weather,  fine,  clear  weather. 
Wulangundin,  to  be  at  peace  with  one  another. 
Wulantowagan,   grace;  (having  a  good  spirit;   wulit 

and  manitto.     A.) 
"Wulapamukquot,  clear,  well  to  be  seen. 
Wulapan,  fine  morning. 
Wulapeju,  just,  upright,  honorable. 
"Wulapejuwagan,  uprightness. 
^A^ulapendanlen,  to  enjoy  a  benefit. 
^A^ulapensohalan,  to  bless  somebody. 
Wulapensowagan,  blessing;  (lit.,  the  things  which  we 

enjoy,  prosperity,  blessings.     A.) 
"Wulaptonachgat,  fine  word,  good  news. 
^A^ulaptonaelchukquonk,  he  speaks  a  good  word  for  us, 

he  advocates  our  cause. 
W^ulaptonaltin,    to   speak   good  to  each  other,  to   be 

reconciled  to  one  another. 
^Vulaptona^lik,  good  tiding. 
"Wulaptonen,  to  speak  favorably. 
Wulaque,  yesterday. 
Wulaquik,  evening, 
W^ulaquike,  this  evening, 
^Vulaskat,  good  pasture, 
W^ulatachkat,  fine  linen. 

"Wulatenamen,  to  be  happy;  {wulah' tenamin.     A.) 
"Wulatenamoagan,  happiness. 
^A(^ulatenanluwi,  happy, 
Wulaton,  to  save,  to  put  up. 


DICTIONARY.  173 

Wulatschahan,  to  use  somebody  well. 
"Wulatschimolsin,   to   treat  friendly,  to  discourse  in  a 

friendly  manner. 
Wulatschimolsowagan,  treaty  of  peace. 
Wulattauwoapin,  to  have  good  sight. 
"Wulattauwoapuwagan,  good  sight. 
Wulauchsowagan,  good  conduct,  good  behavior. 
Wuleleman,  to  take  or  consider  somebody  to  be. 
Wulelemelendam,  to  wonder,  to  admire. 
Wulelemi,  wonderful ;  (not  in  use.     A.) 
"Wulelemileu,  it  is  wonderful. 
Wuleleminaquot,  it  seems  wonderful. 
"Wulelendam,  to  be  glad,  to  rejoice,  to  be  joyful,  to  be 

merry. 
"Wulelendamoagan,  joy. 
"Wulelendamowaptonamik,    word    of    rejoicing,   glad 

tiding,  gospel. 
W^ulelendamuwi,  joyful,  merry. 

"Wulelensin,  to  be  proud,  to  be  haughty,  to  be  high- 
minded  {welelensin.     A.). 
"Wulelensowagan,  pride,  high-mindedness. 
Wulenensin,  to  dress ;  (not  in  use;  wulak'ko,  to  have  a 

handsome  dress  ;  waweesho,  to  dress  carefully.     A.) 
Wulenschgansit,  toe ;  {wides'hawesit.     A.) 
Wulensin,  Z.,  attire,  dress,  ornament  (decoration  rather 

than  dress.     A.). 
"Wulhallan,  to  keep  somebody,  to  take  care  of  some 

one. 


174  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

Wuli,  there,  yonder ;  (out  of  use  ;  at  present  7icllak.    A.) 

^A^uliachpin,  to  be  in  a  good  place. 

Wuliechen,  it  is  good,  it  is  well  done. 

"Wuliechenummen,  to  take  down;  (this  means  to  split 
into  splinters  ;  the  proper  form  zvnnieclicmiinmcn.     A.) 

Wuliechsin,  to  speak  plainly,  to  pronounce  well. 

Wuliechtagun,  he  makes  good  again. 

Wuliechtschessu,  hollow,  rotten ;  (out  of  use.     A.) 

V^uligatschis,  pretty  little  paw. 

"Wuligischgu,  fine  day. 

W^ulihan,  to  do  somebody  good. 

Wulihilleu,  it  is  good ;  (more  exactly,  it  functions  prop- 
erly, it  works  well.     A.) 

^A^ulik,  the  good ;  handsome,  pretty. 

^A^uliken,  it  grows  well,  it  thrives  well. 

"Wulilaweman,  to  comfort,  to  give  satisfaction. 

\A^ulilawemkewagan,  our  comfort. 

Wulilawendewagan,  comfort. 

Wulileu,  good  news,  it  is  a  good  time. 

W^ulilissin,  to  be  good,  to  behave  well. 

■Wulilissowagan,  goodness,  kindness. 

W^ulilissu,  good,  kind. 

Wulinamen,  he  likes  it,  it  pleases  him  ;  (arch.,  A.) 

Wulinaquot,  it  looks  well. 

Wulinaxin,  to  appear  well,  to  look  fine. 

Wulineichquot,  it  is  plainly  visible. 

Wulinemen,  to  see  very  well. 

Wulipendamen,  to  hear  well,  to  understand  well. 


DICTIONARY.  175 

Wulipommissin,  good  walking. 

Wulipoquot,  it  has  a  fine  taste. 

Wulisso,  good,  handsome,  fine,  pretty. 

Wulissowagan,  fineness,  prettiness,  beauty. 

Wulistammen,  to  believe. 

Wulistammoewagan,  faith,  belief. 

Wulit,  good,  right,  handsome,  pretty ;  well. 

Wulitehasu,  well  hewn,  well  cut,  well  squared ;  {wuuh' 
tehasii.     A.) 

W^ulitehemen,  to  hew  well. 

^A^uliton,  to  make  well. 

W^uliweuchsin,  to  know  well. 

^Vuliwiechinen,  to  rest  well. 

"Wuliwoatam,  to  know  well,  to  be  of  good  understand- 
ing. 

Wullamoc,  Z.,  ancient. 

W^uloamisowe,  lately,  some  days  ago. 

Wulongachsis,  a  man's  cousin;  (out  of  use;  it  is  from 
wulonquan,  wing.     A}j 

^A«^ulonquan,  wing. 

Wulonquoam,  to  dream  something  good. 

Wulowachtauwoapin,  to  look  over,  to  look  beyond. 

Wulowinquehellan,  to  overlook,  to  take  no  notice  of. 

Wulumhigiechen,  to  squat  down. 

Wulummachdappin,  to  sit ;  (especially  on  the  ground 
with  the  legs  in  front.     A?) 

Wulumqueu  or  W^ulumquot,  a  round  hill. 

"Wunachgin,  thou  hand ! 


176  LENAPE-ENGLISH 

^Vunachk,  his  hand;  his  arm;  (it  means  either.     A.) 

Wunachqualoje,  a  sharp  point;  (the  extreme  end.     A.) 

^Vunachquim,  an  acorn. 

^Vunajumawall,  he  carries  him. 

Wunalan,  to  fetch  somebody;  (not  in  use;  at  present 
peschwan,  means  to  bring  some  one.     -^4.) 

"Wunattochton,  to  inquire,  to  search  after. 

Wunattonamak,  his  son-in-law;  (or  her;  proper  form 
is  wunattononiakwall.     A.) 

Wundaman,  to  show  to  somebody ;  to  declare  unto 
some  one. 

■Wundanglen,  to  die  for  some  cause. 

Wundangunsin,  to  pray  for. 

^A^undanunxin,  to  be  angry  at,  to  be  angry  for  some- 
thing. 

"Wundaptonen,  to  speak  of 

"Wundchen,  the  wind  comes  from  thence. 

^Vundchenneu,  west,  westerly;  (out  of  use;  the  present 
word  is  elochsichgat,  when  the  sun  disappears.     A) 

"Wundchennewunk,  westward. 

Wundelemuin,  to  boast,  to  look  upon  as  an  honor ; 
(rather,  to  put  trust  or  confidence ;  it  is  from  wuntschi, 
from;  to  rely  upon  what  we  expect /;w«  another.     A) 

Wundelendamoagan,  boasting,  glorying  in. 

Wundenasik,  where  it  is  to  be  got  from. 

Wundeu,  it  boils. 

Wundpeu,  it  leaks,  it  drops,  it  boils  over;  {kundpeu,  it 
oozes  out;  wungiku,  it  leaks.     A?) 


DICTIONARY.  177 

"Wundsowagan,  misfortune  ;  (not  now  used.     A.) 

Wundschun,  the  wind  comes  from  a  particular  quarter, 

Wundsummen,  Z.,  to  cook  (properly,  to  boil  some- 
thing,    A.). 

Wunenachgistawan,  to  hearken  to  somebody. 

Wunentsitawoaganit,  his  appearing. 

Wunipachgihilleu,  it  buds,  it  sprouts. 

Wunipak,  leaf;  (see  Comdack.) 

Wunita,  he  can,  he  is  able ;  (he  knows  how.     A.) 

Wunitaton,  he  can  do  it ;  (he  knows  how  to  do  it.     A.) 

Wunspak,  Z,  juice  (juice  extracted  by  pressure;  from 
zviintschi,  i.  e.,  that  which  cow.qs  from.     A). 

Wuntschi,  of,  on  account  of,  from,  therefore. 

Wuntschijeyju,  where  he  belongs  to,  from  whence  he 
is. 

Wuntschiman,  to  call  somebody  hither. 

Wunutschi,  he  began. 

Wuschgink,  eye,  face,  sight. 

W^uschginquiwi,  face  to  face. 

"Wuskamamquot,  new  feeling. 

Wuskchum,  young  creature,  young  beast. 

Wuskelenape,  young  person. 

Wusken,  anew,  latterly. 

Wuskhaxen,  a  new  shoe. 

Wuski,  new. 

>Aruskijeyju,  it  is  new. 

Wuskiochqueu,  young  woman. 

Wuttoney,  beard. 

M 


178  LENAPfe-ENGLISII    DICTIONARY. 

Wundamawachtowagan,  declaration,  message. 
^Vewoatamoewagan,  wisdom. 
Wawangundowagan,  salutation. 


Y. 

Yabtschi,  Z.,  yet. 

Yanewi,  Z.^  always. 

Yapeechen,  H.,  along  the  bank  (rather,  along  the  edge 

of  the  water.     A}j. 
Yapewi,  Z.,   on   the  river   bank    (on   the  edge  of  the 

water.     A}j. 
Yucke,    Z.y    now;    gischquik,    to-day; — untsclii,    here; 

petschi,  till  now  ;  {yuch.     A.) 
Yukella,  O  that! 
Yuni,  H.,  this,  this  one. 
Yu  undach,  Z.,  on  this  side  {j/uh  windach.     A.). 


Z. 

Zelozelos,  cricket ;   {tschelo'tschelos,  an  imitative  word. 
A) 


INDEX 


Thefigjtres  in  broad-faced  type  indicate  the  page,  those  that/ollatu,  the  line. 


Aaron  root,  72,  6. 

Abandon,  to,  95,  10. 

Abates,   the    freshet,    132,    2 — the 

water,  48,  12. 
Abide  in  somebody,  12,  12. 
Able,  he  is,  177,  8. 
Abode,  12,  8 — to  make  an,  158,  16. 
Abominably,  to  lie,  98,  11. 
Abort,  to,  130,  14. 
About,  12,  I ;    45,  7 — the   present 

time,  51,   13 — this   time,    112,  8 

— to  turn,  44,   17 — to   walk,  12, 

2  ;  86,  3 — turned,  44,  18. 
Above,  24,  5;  49,  4;  167,  2,  3,  4 

— from,  49,  4 — the  earth,  49,  4. 
Abridgment,  31,  20. 
Abroad,  56,  6 — to  be  always,  85,  19 

— to  carry,  17,  5. 
Absolutely  not,  139,  20. 
Abundance,  156,  15,  16. 
Abuse   to,   70,    15 — each  other   by 

words  to,  75,  12 — some  one,  to, 

56,  23. 
Accept,  to,  91,  13, 
Accident,  an,    148,    24 — bad,  145, 

20  ;  160,  16 — to  meet  by,  99,  13. 
Accidentally,  117,  24. 
Accomplished,  106,  18. 
According  to,  89,  14. 
Account  of,  on,  177,  il. 
Accusation,  10,    15;    13,  3;  42,  5; 

60,  6 — bad,  69,  II. 
Accuse  him,  one  who   helped   to, 

164,  I — somebody,  to,  69,  9. 
Acorn,  an,  151,  2;   176,  3. 


Acquaintance,  his,  155,  22. 
Acquainted  with,  to  be,  52,  20. 
Acquire,  to,  107,  4. 
Act,  so,  to,  65,  4 — strangely,  to,  13, 

24 — wicked,  69,  15. 
Action,  bad,  37,  8;  70,  22. 
Active,  to  be,  162,  18, 
Activity,  17,  2. 
Admire,  to,  173,  8. 
Admittance,  154,  19. 
Admonish,  to,  41,    20;    46,    14 — 

somebody,  to,  41,  21. 
Admonition,  46,  15. 
Adultery,  to  commit,  54,  i. 
Adults,  53,  II. 
Advantage,  to  desire  to  give  one  an, 

49.  19- 
Adversary,  129,  I. 
Advice,  24,  3;   135,  17;  169,  9. 
Advise  one  another,  to,  150,  22— 

with,  to,  163,  10. 
Advocates  our  cause,  he,  172,  12. 
Affirm,  to,  54,  19. 
Afflicted  to  death,  to  be,  9,  7. 
Afloat,  89,  13. 
Afoot,  to  go,  119,  2. 
After,    89,    9;     169,    23— a    little 

while,  22,  14 — Sunday,  15,  20. 
Afternoon,  92,  7,  10 — in  the,  135, 

12. 
Afterward,  169,  23. 
Again,  52,  5;  61,  2;  146,  24;  155, 

10;   165,  I. 
Against,    88,    13;     143,    13 — one's 

inclination,  to  be,  129,  4. 


179 


180 


INDEX. 


Aged,  53,  1 1— to  be,  53,  13 ;  84,  21. 
Ago,  a  little  while,  40,  3;  41,  24; 

171,   II— long,  62,   2;    65,    17; 

171,  14— not  long,  40,  3. 
Agony  of  death,  78,  24. 
Agree  to,  95,  18— -with  one  another, 

to,  88,  18. 
Agreement,  71,  20;  88,  19. 
Agrees,  it,  71,  26. 
Aground,  it  is,  28,  9. 
Ague,  the,  99,  14. 
Ah!  51,  14. 
Aid,  an,  163,  15. 
Air,  62,  13. 

Alder  tree,  the,  143,  8. 
Alike,  just,  143,  10,   13 — to  make 

it,  143,  II. 
Aliment,  86,  7. 
All,  144,  23  ;  154,  8 — for  good  and, 

15,   II — is  ready,  104,  15 — over 

the    country,  32,    9 — the    world 

round,  33,  i — to  carry,  154,  7 — 

together,  143,  15. 
Alliance,  an,  79,  18. 
Allow,  to,  63,  4. 
Ally,  to,  79,  20. 
Almighty,  the,  34,  6. 
Almost,  36,   18;  38,  4;   154,  21 — 

nearly,  36,  10 — too  much,  36,  10. 
Alone,  71,  25;  78,  15;  89,  i;  93, 

1 — let,  50,  II — let  it,  52,  4 — to 

be,   88,    24;    93,    2,   3  —  to   be 

quite,  93,  13. 
Along  shore,  50,  18 — the  bank,  50, 

18;   178,  6 — the  road,  32,  li  — 

to  roll,  17,  9 — to  take,  39,  10. 
Aloud,  to  cry,  46,  27. 
Already,  16,  14;  83,  7. 
Also,  33,  II;   141,  18;   165,  I. 
Also,  they,  52,  16 — thou,  52,  13 — 

we,  52,  14 — ye,  52,  15. 
Although,  82,  13;  139,17;  143,15- 
Always,  9,  3  ;  50,  17 ;  95,  1 1 ;   178, 

5 — well,  to  be,  152,  16. 


Am,  as  I,  33,  20. 

Amiss,  to  do,  108,  i — to  shoot,  107, 

19. 
Among  each  other,  156,  18. 
Amusing  tale,  an,  55,  7. 
Ancestors,  12,  13;  86,  15. 
Ancient,  175,  14. 
And,  165,  I. 

Anew,  155,  10;   177,  20. 
Anger,  24,  9;  60,  5 ;  74,  14;  113, 

20— to,  59,  16;   105,  I. 
Angle,  to,  20,  16. 
Angry,  to  be,  74,  13 — at,  to  be,  176, 

II — for  something,  to  be,  176,  11. 
Anguish,  122,  7 — mental,  58,  9 — 

of  mind,  to  be  in,  58,  8. 
Animal,  any  domesticated,  18,  9 — 

domestic,  29,  6 — the  trail  of  an, 

130,  18 — to  skin  an,  26,  I4. 
Animate,  25,  23. 
Anoint,  to,  126,  10. 
Another,  58,  12;    115,17;    136,21 

— manner,  58,   12 — to   pay  one, 

30,  I. 
Answer,  to,  88,  20 — somebody,  to, 

88,  17. 
Answering,   exclamation   used    in, 

103,  13,  14. 
Answers  the  purpose,  it,  140,  21. 
Ant,  33,  8. 
Anvil,  22,  15. 
Any,  140,  8. 
Anything,  89,  8;   140,  8. 
Anywhere,  137,  6 — around,  165,  3. 
Apart,  144,  16 — to  pull,  66,  4. 
Apparent,  93,  7. 
Appear,   to,  94,  8 — well,  to,  174, 

23. 
Appearance,  his,  33,  12. 
Appearing,  his,  177,  5. 
Appears,  as  he,  33,  12 — large,  it,  77, 

18. 
Apple,  22,  4 — crab,  142,  22 — May, 

74,  19 — wild,  142,  22. 


INDEX. 


181 


Appoint  somebody  to  an  office,  to, 

122,  15. 
Apprehension,  16,  10. 
Approliation,   160,   2 — exclamation 

of,  30,  8. 
Approval,  exclamation   of,   45,   2 ; 

52,  II. 
Ardent,  131,  6;  133,  6. 
Ardently,  to  desire,  29,  3. 
Arise,  to,  20,  18;  142,  21. 
Arm,  his,  176,  i;  the  tiiick  part  of 

the,  29,  13. 
Arms,  open,  139,  1 1 — outstretched, 

129,  23. 
Around,  anywhere,   165,  3 — to  go 

all,   164,   17 — to  stand  all,   164, 

15- 

Arrest  somebody,  to,  136, 17;  142,3. 

Arrow,  18,  19;  72,  12. 

Arse,  133,  16 —  -hole,  the,  124,  16. 

As,  32,  18;  33,  5;  64,  8— also,  91, 
2 — big,  32,  19 — far,  131,  20 — he 
appears,  33,  12 — he  does,  33,  21 
— he  is  minded,  33,  21 — he  saith, 
33,  22 — he  thinks,  33,  14 — I  am, 
33,  20— I  do,  33,  20;  if,  72,  7; 
I35j  7 — is  customary,  33,  9 — is 
usual  with  one,  33,  9 — it  is,  32, 
4 — it  were,  71,  7 — long,  131,  20 
— many  as,  34,  12 — many  as  are 
here,  34,  9 — much  again,  61,  2 — 
much  as,  34,  12 — much  as  one 
owes,  34,  10 — much  so,  32,  18 — 
often  as,  32,  18;  34,  11 — soon 
as,  58,  20;  64,  8;  144,  23— that, 
33,  10 — the  other,  33,  10 — this, 
33,  10;  64,  17 — well  as,  32,  18; 
165,  I — wide  as,  32,  19. 

Ascend,  to,  23,  17,  19. 

Ascension,  169,  10. 

Ash,  83,  20 — black,  104,  13. 

Ashamed,  to  be,  73,  5;  84,  I,  2,  4 
— to  be  made,  84,  5 — of  one's 
self,  to  be,  84,  2. 


Ashes,  119,  10;  120,  21 — hard 
burnt,  166,  25 — light,  117,  27 — 
light  white,  84,  13. 

Ask  for,  to,  152,  14 — pardon,  to, 
78,  23. 

Assassinate,  to,  53,  23. 

Assassination,  53,  21. 

Assemble,  to,  76,  5. 

Assembled,  76,  13 — to  be,  76,  12. 

Assist  each  other,  to,  164,  6 — some- 
body, to,  163,  5. 

Assistant,  163,  15. 

Assure,  to,  54,  19. 

Astringent,  142,  i. 

Asunder,  144,  16,  17 — it  splits,  144, 
18 — split,  144,  18 — to  break,  105, 
3— to  go,  16,  8. 

At  all  times,  9,  3 ;  50,  17 — first,  95, 
26 — last,  83,  16;  90,  13,  20 — 
what  time,  135,  4. 

Attach  one's  self  to,  21,  20. 

Attack,  to,  122,  10. 

Attention  to,  to  pay,  109,  2. 

Attire,  173,  20. 

Auger,  118,  I. 

August,  the  month  of,  123,  10 ;  159, 

15- 

Aunt,  117,  25. 

Aurora,  the,  68,  12. 

Authority,  146,  9. 

Autumn,  136,  7 — month,  54,  12. 

Avaricious,  24,  8 — to  be,  127,  13. 

Avert,  to,  45,  10. 

Awake,  167,  5 — to,  142,  21. 

Aware  of  some  one,  to  be,  loi,  10. 

Away,  he  that  is  going,  32,  15 — to 
be  cast,  23,  2 — to  bring  some- 
body, 18,  16 — to  carry,  18,  15; 
75,  2 — to  go,  18,  17;  107,  21  — 
to  go  all,  154,  12 — to  throw,  107, 
2 — weeping,  to  go,  18,  14. 

Awful,  145,  20. 

Awhile,  45,  25. 

Awl,  87,  15. 


182 


INDEX. 


Axe,  140,  7 — an,  147,   18 — broad, 

105,  14 — to  cut  with  an,  44,  3. 
Ay!  31,  12. 
Aye!  31,  9. 


Babbler,  a,  156,  i. 

Babe,  19,  23. 

Babes,  sucking,  100,  I. 

Bachelor,  a,  53,  6. 

Back,  151,  7 — the,  152,  12 — to 
come,  22,  3;  to  drive,  46,  17 — 
to  give,  46,  26 — to  lie  on  the,  151, 
18 — to  look,  44,  16;  46,  16 — to 
push,  45,  10. 

Backache,  to  have,  152,  13. 

Backbone,  132,  10. 

Backside,  133,  16. 

Backwards,  151,  7. 

Bad,  6g,  14,  23;  70,  il,  12,  13,  14; 
71,  9;  72,  14;  78,  7,  8 — action, 
37,  8;  70,  22 — accusation,  69,  11 
— behavior,  37,  8 — it  is  too,  17, 
17 — morning  weather,  69,  12 — 
report,  10,  15 — shoes,  69,  13 — 
times,  69,  24 — travelling,  to  have, 
II,  22. 

Badger,  a,  87,  16. 

Badly,  to  travel,  75,  21. 

Bag,  81,  21  ;  128,  3 — saddle,  27, 
12 — shot,  18,  21. 

Bait,  76,  21. 

Baking,  the  bread  is  done,  42,  8. 

Bald,  85,  25 — eagle,  165,  20 — 
headed,  86,  26. 

Ball  of  the  foot,  39,  27;  40,  i — 
round,  120,  11. 

Band  for  carrying  burdens,  a,  47, 
22. 

Bank,  a  high,  51,  i — along  the,  50, 
18;  178,  6,  of  a  river,  high,  14, 
II — on  the  51,  I — on  the  river, 
178,  7 — steep,  108,  16. 

Banner,  68,  22. 


Baptism,  133,  l8. 
Baptized,  133,  19. 
Bare,  86,  25 ;  87,  3 — to  make  one, 

133.  24- 

Barefoot,  80,  12. 

Barefooted,  to  be,  80,  13. 

Bargain,  88,  19 — in  the,  47,  21. 

Bark,  20,  25 — canoe,  20,  24;  162, 
2 — of  a  tree,  49,  i— of  trees,  the 
inner,  157,  18 — trunk,  161,  21. 

Barrel,  47,  15. 

Barren,  78,  25 — tree,  79,  3. 

Basin,  a,  170,  6. 

Basket,  138,  14 — a,  83,  19— wood, 
25,  15. 

Baskets,  to  make,  138,  15. 

Bast,  157,  18. 

Bath,  sweat  by  a,  a8,  15. 

Bathe,  to,  121,  5  ;   141,  22. 

Battery  of  a  gun  lock,  30,  17. 

Battle,  to  die  in,  9,  8. 

Bay,  wild,  35,  18. 

Be  in  somebody,  to,  la,  12 — it 
where  it  may,  137,  5 — of  opinion, 
to,  39i  7 — so  good,  15,  12 — will- 
ing, 38,  3- 

Bead,  74,  17. 

Beads,  white,  165,  26. 

Beam,  12,  3. 

Bean,  47,  8;  72,  8. 

Beans,  47,  3 — earth,  47,  3 — wild, 
124,  2. 

Bear,  69,  2 — she,  loi,  24 — to  kill 
a,  96,  8. 

Beard,  147,  19;   177,  25. 

Bears,  plenty  of,  69,  3. 

Beast,  25,  4 — a  wild,  i65,  10 — 
tame,  152,  21 — young,  177,  18. 

Beasts,  female  of,  103,  4 — male  of, 
63,  20. 

Beat,  to,  io5,  13;  118,  9;  119,14; 
132,  7 — hard,  to,  56,  20 — oil,  to, 
iiS,  15 — somebody,  to,  105,  8; 
118,  21 — the  drum,  to,  118,  9. 


INDEX. 


183 


Beaten  road,  56,  25. 

Beating,  113,  11. 

Beauty,  175,  4. 

Beaver,  58,  16 — bait,  76,  21. 

Because,  33,  5^;  91,  2;  loi,   i,  2; 

155,  I- 
Become  a  child,  to,  153,  I — flesh,  to, 

104,  4 ;  one,  to,  79,  20. 
Bed,  38,  21  ;  a,  12,  9  ;  38,  15. 
Bedaub,  to,  98,  22. 
Bedstead,  27,  6 — an    Indian,    143, 

21. 
Bee,  20,  12 — hive,  20,  13. 
Beech   tree,   red,    126,    18 — white, 

138,  12. 
Beechwood,  126,  17. 
Beer,  76,  19 — to  brew,  76,  19. 
Before,  33,  13 ;  96,  4— now,  97,  14 ; 

164,  13,18. 
Beforehand,  96,  4. 
Beg,  to,  152,  14 — on,  to,  78,  23. 
Began,  he,  177,  14. 
Beget  a  child,  to,  149,  i. 
Beggar,  23,  8. 
Begin  war,  to,  102,  13. 
Beginning,  at  the,  97,  14;   102,  10 

— of  summer,  139, 12 — to  be  from 

the,  97,  13. 
Begotten,  78,  27. 

Behave  well,  to,  174,  18 — wonder- 
fully, to,  13,  24. 
Behaved,  foolish,  56,  16. 
Behavior,  61,    17;    153,   11  ;    bad, 

37.  8— good,  173,  6— sinful,  75, 4. 
Behind,  25,  14, 15  ;  151, 7  ;  169, 23 

— the  fence,  25,   12 — the  house, 

25,  8 — to  leave,  95,  10. 
Behold,  65,  14 — to,  10,  12;  64,  24; 

112,  22  ;   137,  10. 
Belief,  171,  10;   175,  6. 
Beheve,  to,  103,  23;    171,  9;    175, 

5 — to  be   blameless  or  holy,  to, 

57,  4 — what  is  said,  to,  171,  24. 
Believer  in  Christ,  154,  6. 


Bell,  124,  7;  131,  16;  133,  2 — to 
ring  the,  124,  6,  8. 

Belhed,  thick,  77,  4. 

Bellows,  120,  26. 

Belly,  150,  4;  fat  in  an  animal's, 
158,  12 — the  net  inside  the,  152, 
19 — ache,  he  has  the,  150,  3. 

Belong  to  a  place,  to,  155,  2. 

Belongs  to,  where  he,  177,  12. 

Beloved,  14,  25;  31,  5 — above  all 
things,  the,  33,  26 — best,  33,  26 
— the,  14,  17  ;   31,  6. 

Below,  from,  47,  12. 

Belt,  a,  39,  I — of  wampum,  103,  3. 

Bench,  47,  19;  62,  17. 

Bend  in  the  river,  a,  165,  7 — it,  165, 
II — of  the  river,  in  the,  32,  14. 

Bends,  it,  127,  2. 

Beneath,  34,  18. 

Benefit,  to  enjoy  a,  172,  8. 

Bent,  150,  18. 

Bequeath,  to,  95,  10. 

Beshit,  to,  87,  14. 

Besides,  52,  5. 

Best,  71,  25;  154,  5 — beloved,  33, 
26— the,  34,  3— the  very,  34,  5. 

Betray  each  other,  to,  40,  15 — some- 
body to,  40,  14;  58,  18. 

Better,  85,  12;  170,  10 — a  little, 
85,  12 — to  grow,  53,  9 — to  love, 

51,  3- 
Between,  141,  6 — to  step  or  stand, 

35,9- 

Bewitch,  to,  74,  2. 
Bewitched,  one  is,  72,  10. 
Beyond,  24,  5  ;  25,  14,  15 — to  look, 

175.  19- 

Big,  19,  13;  76,  26;  77,  12— as, 
32,  19 — and  wide  as  the  world  is, 
as,  33.  I — as,  as,  33,  2 — rock,  37, 
10 — too,  168,  7 — trough,  28,  I. 

Bill  of  a  fowl  or  bird,  157,  5. 

Bind  up  into  sheaves,  to,  21,  17 — 
up  or  dress  a  wound,  to,  11,  1 8. 


184 


INDEX. 


Binding,  36,  4. 

Birch  bark,  161,  21— tree,  157,  7. 

Bird,  146,  25 — a,  24,  11,  12 — bill 
of  a  fowl  or,  157,  5 — black,  147, 
8 — little,  147,  I — red,  79,  10 — 
the  young  of  a,  21,  9. 

Birds  and  fowls,  male  of,  63,  21. 

Bird's  nest,  150,  i. 

Birth,  79,  i. 

Biting,  53.  2,  5. 

Bitter,  142,  i — weed,  the,  157,  I. 

Black,  134,  12,  14 — ash,  104,  13 — 
bird,  147,  8 — cloth,  15,  15— fish, 
134,  9,  10 — fox,  170,  20 — it  looks, 
134,  II — man,  94,  II — oak,  162, 
2 — or  broad  cloth,  13,  5 — snake, 
134, 5 — snakeroot,  26, 1 1 — thread, 
134.  13— yarn,  134.  '3- 

Blackberries,  13,  6. 

Bladder,  167,  6 — a  blown,  151,  12. 

Blamable,  to  be,  144,  i. 

Blame,  73,  21  —one  another,  to, 
10,  16 — somebody,  to,  73,  19. 

Blamed,  to  be,  73,  20. 

Blameless,  to  believe  to  be,  57,  4 — 
to  live,  152,  17. 

Blanket,  13,  5  ;  15,  15 — white,  165, 

17- 
Bleed,  to,  131,  22 — at  the  nose,  to, 

79,  12 — fast,  to,  57,  7 — to  death, 

to,  9,4;  83,  8. 
Bless  somebody,  to,  172,  9. 
Blessed,  the,  153,  23. 
Blessing,  172,  10. 
Blind,  10,  19 ;  38,  25 — I  am,  95, 4 — 

person,  a,  38,  25 — to  be,  10,  18. 
Blood,  79,  9,   14;   86,   18 — to  let, 

105,  9- 

Bloody,  79,  9,  16 ;  81,  22,  23 — flux, 

79.  "• 

Blossoms,  it,  166,  18. 
Blot  out,  to,  146,  4. 
Blow,   to,    120,    25 — the    nose,  to, 
124,  II. 


Blows  hard,  the  wind,  56,  19. 

Blue,  130,  7 — bird,  145,  i,  8. 

Blunder  in  speaking,  to,  117,  6. 

Blunt,  58,  3;  161,  25. 

Boar,  154,  I. 

Board,  log,  14 — a,  106,  2 — a  thick, 
28,  18 — saw,  105,  17 — with,  to, 
163,  22. 

Boards,  to  make,  log,  15. 

Boast,  to,  176,  16. 

Boasting,  176,  17. 

Boat,  20,  9 — line,  44,  22 — wood, 
the,  20,  II. 

Bodily,  47,  6;    150,  12. 

Body,  47,  5  ;   150,  II — the,  27,  II. 

Bog  meadow,  129,  2. 

Boil,  a,  120,  18 — to,  156,  21 — water 
in  till  dry,  to,  48,  14. 
!    Boiled,  160,  21 — enough,  160,  22. 
I    Boils,  it,  176,  19 — over,  176,  20 — 
I        over,  it,  108,  8. 

Bone,  166,  23. 

Bony,  149,  18. 
j    Book,    26,    I;    62,    24;    72,    19. 

Booty,  130,  I. 

Border,  those  who  live  on  the,  128, 

5- 
I    Bored  through,  126,  il. 

Born,  43,  6 — to  be,  43,  5  ;    78,  26 ; 

86,  6. 
Borrowed,  41,  16. 
.    Bosom,  the,  29,  18. 
j    Both,  33,  16— sides,  on,  156,  10. 
j    Bottle,  a,  31,  4. 
I    Bottom  land,   170,   12— of  a   keg, 

I        158.  9- 

Bough,  a,  148,  4. 

Boulder,  a,  37,  10. 
I    Bound,  42,  14. 
I    Boundary,  a,  53,  i. 
I    Bow,  48,  2 — one's  self  down,  to, 

84,  15 — toward,  to,  84,  16. 
j    Bowl,   120,    14 — a,   170,   6 — large, 
i         28,  I. 


INDEX. 


185 


Box  bush,  the,  124,  25 — made  of 
bark,  161,  21 — with  each  other, 
to,  106,  16. 

Boy,  115,  14 — big,  115,  II — little, 
115,  13 — to  be  a,  115,  12. 

Brace  one's  self  for  a  jump,  to,  10, 
20. 

Brain,  147,  17. 

Bran,  66,  5  ;  127,  25. 

Branch,  131,  5 — a,  148,  4. 

Branches,  113,  13. 

Brandy,  76,  14;  162,  5. 

Bread,  12,  17 — bit  of,  108,  13 — 
huckleberry,  84,  24 — is  done 
baking,  the,  42,  8 — mixed  with 
beans,  71,  ii — my,  92,  13 — piece 
of,  12,  18 — white,  165,  16. 

Break,  to,  105,  3, 13;  118,  12;  iig, 
22 — in  two,  119,  24 — off,  1X2, 
21 — in  the  ice,  to,  76,  25 — of  day, 
the,  95,  3 — off,  to,  35,  17 — off  in 
speaking,  to,  15,  16 — off  speaking, 
to,  82,  25. 

Breast,  pain  in  the,  153,  15 — the, 
29,  18;  153,  14. 

Breasts  of  a  woman,  the,  loi,  11. 

Breath,  62,  13,  16. 

Breathe,  to,  62,  15. 

Breathing,  to  cease,  15,  25. 

Breech  of  a  gun,  56,  15  ;  158,  9. 

Breeches,  leather,  27,  17. 

Brethren,  97,  12. 

Brew  beer,  to,  76,  19. 

Briars,  38,  12. 

Brick,  68,  18 — unburnt,   165,  27. 

Bridge,  136,  18. 

Bridle,  44,  14 — bit,  38,  16. 

Bridled,  61,  6. 

Bright,  149,  16. 

Brightly,  it  shines,  122,  23. 

Brightness,  149,  16. 

Bring,  to,  1 14,  20 — somebody  away, 
to,  18,  15 — somebody  home,  to, 
75 »  3— together,  to,  76,  6. 


Brisk,  to  be,  162,  18. 

Broad,  10,   6;    31,   ii — axe,    105, 

14 — saw,  105,  17. 
Broadness,  31,  10. 
Broil,  to,  12,  21. 
Broken,  119,  21,  23;   143,  19 — off, 

144,  18 — up,  65,  20. 
Brokenly,  to  speak,  19,  15. 
Broom,  145,  5. 

Broth,  57,  23 — sweet,  159,  24. 
Brother,  elder,  27,  5 — in-law,  his, 

150,     2 — my,    97,   9 — or     sister, 

younger,  27,   16. 
Brotherhood,  159,  5. 
Brother's  wife,  his,  163,  11. 
Brought  to  somebody,  to  be,  114,  14. 
Brown,  161,  12. 
Bruise  one's  self  by  accident,  to,  134, 

4 — the  finger  nail,   to,  20,  14 — 

the  hand,  to,  26,  17. 
Bruised,  108,  24. 
Bubble,  a,  151,  12. 
Buck,    15,    9;    107,    9 — great,    27, 

20 — young,  24,  18. 
Bud,  to,  22,  II. 
Buds,  it,  132,  13;   177,  6. 
Buffalo,  the,  132,  21. 
Build,  to,  157,  21. 
Builders,  157,  20. 
Building  log,  81,  24. 
Bullet,  18,  19;   120,  9 — mould,  18, 

20. 
Bullfrog,  20,  23  ;   103,  21. 
Bundle,  164,  11 — a,  157,  3. 
Burden,  to  load  somebody  with  a, 

164,  10. 
Burdens,  a  band  for  carrying,  47, 

22. 
Burial,  139,  18 — place,  a,  70,  20. 
Buried,  150,  24 — to  be,  139,  14. 
Burn,  to,  67,  3,  5,  6;   139,  7  ;   152, 

2 — it  begins  to,  131,6 — the  kettle, 

II,  17. 
Burning,  133,  6,  8. 


186 


INDEX. 


Burns,  it,  67,  7 — in  a  flame,  it,  66, 
17 — me,  it,  162,  8 — well,  it,  160, 

I,  3- 

Burnt,  67,  4. 

Burst  open,  to  fall  and,  29,5. 

Burthensome,  149,  10. 

Bury,  to,  139,  18. 

Bush,  161,  8 — a,  9,  II — thorn,  68, 
25. 

Bushnet,  13,  9 — for  fishing,  12,  22 — 
to  fish  with,  a,  13,  8. 

Bushy,  9,  II. 

Bushy  place,  a,  161,  8. 

Busily,  162, 17. 

Business,  those  that  have  the  care  of 
some,  go,  23. 

But.  94,  12  ;  130,  15 — few,  139,  2 — 
if,  15,  12 — then,  130,  17. 

Butt  end  of  a  tree,  158,  lO. 

Buttocks,  133,  16. 

Buttonwood,  the,  20,  li. 

Buy,  to,  15,  14;  78,  18,  20. 

Buzzard,  turkey,  19,  16. 

By,  149,  3 — and  bye,  22,  14;  89, 
14;  no,  17 — close,  36,  10 — de- 
grees, 20,  26;  21,  I — little  and 
little,  20,  26;  21,  I ;  141,  18 — to 
pass,  17,  7 — the  way,  22,  12  ;  32, 
12. 


Cabin,   a,   63,     14 — covered    with 

grass,  84,  8. 
Calabash,  a,  171,  13. 
Calamus-root,  113,  12. 

Calf,  III,  2;  155,  9 — little,  87,  8— 
of  the  elbow,  iii,  3 — of  the  leg, 
164,  8. 

Call,  155,  4 — each  other,  to,  155, 
5 — somebody  hither,  to,  177,  13. 

Called,  67,  8 — as  he  is,  32,  17. 

Calling,  exclamation  used  in,  51,  II. 

Calm  mind,  to  be  of  a,  55,  11. 


Calmness,  58,  7 — of  mind,  15,  8  ; 
55,  12. 

Came,  whence  he,  154,  20. 

Camp,  77,  22. 

Camped,  76,  I. 

Can,  he,  177,  8 — he,  doit,  177,  9 — 
I,  98,  27. 

Candle,  152,  I. 

Candle  snuffers,  139,  22. 

Canoe,  20,  9 — bark,  20,  24 ;  162,  2 
— floats,  the,  89,  13 — little,  20, 
10 — is  finished,  the,  42,  15 — 
rope,  44,  22 — to  enter  a,  120, 
22 — with  somebody,  to  go  in  a, 
156,  20. 

Cap,  17,  21. 

Capability,  146,  17. 

Captain,  60,  3. 

Captives,  139,  21. 

Care,  20,  21 — of  somebody,  to  take, 
39,  12;  113,  2 — of,  to  take,  39, 
14;  59,  II;  91,  19 — to  be  free 
from  trouble  or,  55,  21 — to  be 
without,  58,  S — to  take,  20,  22 — 
to  take  somebody  in,  170,  16. 

Careful,  to  be,  92,  21. 

Carries  him,  he,  176,  4. 

Carry,  abroad,  to,  17,  5 — all,  to,  154, 
7 — a  load,  to,  90,  7;  164,  12 — 
away,  to,  18,  15;  75,  2 — some- 
body, to,  90,  6  —  some  one 
through,  to,  34,  23. 

Cart,  141,  12. 

Cask,  47,  15. 

Cast  away,  to  be,  23,  2. 

Castrate,  to,  145,  6. 

Cat,  a  wild,  96,  l  ;   145,  15. 

Cataract,  133,  20. 

Catch  something  with  a  net,  13,  7- 

Caterpillar,  86,  22. 

Catfish,  162,  9. 

Cattle,  24,  10— horned,  155,  16 — 
the  owner  of,  152,  23 — to  have, 
152,  22. 


INDEX. 


187 


Caught,  56,  7. 

Cause,  he  advocates  our,  172,  12 — 

to,  42,  21 — to  hear,  to,  112,  13 — 

to  live  until  now,  to,  1 14,  II. 
Cautiousness,  20,  21. 
Cave,  a,  151,  i. 
Cease,  to,  65,  24. 
Cease  breathing,  to,  15,28. 
Ceases,  the  wind,  15,  24. 
Cedar,  red,  79,  6 — swamp,  140,  3 — 

white,  137,  9. 
Cellar,  a,  47,  2. 
Certain,  125,   17 — of  it,  I  am,  100, 

15 — one,  a,  71,  21;    79,    17 — to 

be,  24,  19;  100,  15. 
Certainly,  54,  13 — true,  125,  17. 
Chain,  a,  49,  3;   133,  13. 
Chair,  47,  19;  62,  17. 
Chalk,  165,  18. 
Chance,    by,  iii,    7;    117,    24 — to 

hear  by,  log,  3 — to  miss  one's, 

108,  21. 
Chapter,  22,  18. 
Charge,  13,  3. 
Charged,  116,  19. 
Chase    or    drive    hither,   to,    114, 

19. 
Chaste,  115,  21,  23  ;   116,  I — to  be, 

115,  20. 
Chastisement,  19,  19. 
Cheap,  22,  24;   137,  21. 
Cheapen,  to,  137,  22. 
Cheat,  to,  11,  9. 
Cheek,  167,  15. 
Cherry,  wild,  87,  13. 
Chestnut,    166,    8 — tree,    149,   15  ; 

166,  9. 
Chew,  to,  130,  16;   134,  3. 
Chicken,  little,  142,  15. 
Chief,  123,  13 — a,  167,  9 — man,  53, 

14 — to  make  to  a,  123,  14. 
Child,  19,  21 — my,  99,  4,  5 — to  be- 
come a,  153,  I — to  iDeget  or  bring 

forth  a,  149,  I. 
o 


Child's  nurse,  102,  3. 

Childish,  19,  22. 

Childlike,  19,  22  ;    153,  2. 

Children,  to  have,  102,  2. 

Chin,  49,  12. 

Chips,  129,  25  ;   168,  14. 

Chisel,  a,  119,  27. 

Choose,  to,  10,  7  ;   117,  i. 

Chop  fish,  63,  II — to,  44,  2,3 — 
wood,  to,  74,  4. 

Chosen,  the,  38,  23 — thy,  38,  22. 

Christ,  believer  in,  154,  6. 

Church,  no,  7 — hind  part  of  a, 
133,  16 — to  come  out  of,  58,  24. 

Circle,  113,  21  —  they  stand  in  a, 
150,  13 — to  stand  in  3,165,  2. 

Circular,  141,  11. 

City,  149,  13— great,  55,  3. 

Civil,  to  speak,  141,  16. 

Clam,  31,  2;   118,  13. 

Claws,  157,  15. 

Clay,  23,  21 — daubed  with,  23,  24 — 
to  mix,  23,  25. 

Clean,  57,  2,  6;  115,  16 — to  be,  57, 
12;  115,  19,23;  116,  I — to  make, 
57,  10. 

Cleanly,  it  looks,  116,  2. 

Cleahse,  to,  57,  13. 

Cleansed,  to  be,  115,  14. 

Clear,  42,  II;  57,  9;  86,  25;  87, 
3;  151,  20;  164,  23;  172,  4— 
day,  152,  6 — it  is,  42,  12 — sun- 
shine, 151,  19;  152,  3  — water, 
57,  II — weather,  87,  2;   172,   i. 

Clearly,  87,  3. 

Cleft  of  a  rock,  in  the,  29,  12. 

Climb  hither,  to,  114,  3— up,  I,  60, 
3 — up,  to,  39,  18  ;  60,  8. 

Climbs  up,  it,  60,  16. 

Close  by,  36,  10  ;  41,  14;   no,  19. 

Close,  to  shut,  45,  8  —  together, 
120,   I. 

Cloth,  black,  13,  5;  15,  15 — his, 
30,  14- 


188 


INDEX. 


Clothe  somebody,  to,  ii,  i6;  ii6, 
17 — someone,  to,  111,4. 

Clothed,  III,  8. 

Clothes-Iice,  27,  2. 

Clothes,  to  put  on,  13,  2 — to  put  on 
somebody,  116,  23. 

Clothing,  13,  2;  30,   13;    III,  9. 

Cloud,  II,  14. 

Cloudy,  II,  13,  15. 

Clown,  38,  14. 

Coal,  47,  4 — of  fire,  68,    II;    78, 

17- 

Coarse  linen,  19,  12. 

Coat,  126,  8. 

Cock,  a  turkey,  26,  12 — of  a  gun- 
lock,  71,  16. 

Cold,  139,  23 — it  is,  141,  13  ;  142, 
6 — morning,  137,  13 — to  be,  138, 
17 — to  shake  for,  loi,  21. 

Colic,  152,  8. 

Collect,  to,  76,  6. 

Collectively,  76,  13. 

Collector,  76,  2. 

Color,  what,  134,  19. 

Colt's  foot,  the  herb,  19,  17. 

Comb,  to,  144,  22. 

Come,  38,  3 — to,  104,  8 — awhile 
ago,  to,  116,  26 — back,  to,  22, 3 — 
before  somebody,  to,  96,  7 — 
down,  to,  96,  2;  112,  24 — from 
cutting  wood,  to,  22,  2 — from 
hunting,  to,  21,  23 — from  plant- 
ing, to,  21,  21 — from  somewhere, 
to,  137,  2 — from  somewhere  rap- 
idly, to,  149,  4 — from  whence, 
to,  103,  25 — from  work,  to,  21, 
24 — hither,  to,  115,  2 — in  a  trou- 
blesome time,  to,  124,  I — into 
danger,  to,  99,  13 — nigh  to  me, 
to,  82,  6 — or  go  for  something,  to, 
148,  23 — out  of  church,  to,  58,  24 
— out  of  the  house,  to,  59,  5 — 
together  again,  to,  61,  4 — to  one's 
senses,  to,   167,  5 — to  seek,  to. 


114,  2 — to  somebody,  to,  98,  10 

— up  with  somebody,  to,  75,  10. 
Comes,  it,  iii,  14,  15. 
Cometh,  he  that,  iii,  13. 
Comfort,    89,     17;    174,     16 — our, 

174,  15— to,  174,  14. 
Comforter,  153,  18. 
Coming,  his,  104,  3 — on,  he  is,  114, 

22 — they  are,  iii,  22. 
Commanded,  61,  6. 
Commandment,   122,   18;  135,  17; 

153,4- 
Commit  adultery,  to,  54,  i. 
Commodiousness,  54,  8. 
Commonly,  48,  15. 
Companion,  99,  3. 
Comparative  form,  17,  lO;   17,  16. 
Compare,  to,  72,  i. 
Compass,  113,  21. 
Compassionate  some  person,  to,  40, 

17- 

Complete,  106,  17 — to,  106,  20. 

Completed,  106,  19. 

Comrade,  a,  147,  6. 

Conceal,  to,  37,  6,  23. 

Conceive,  to,  118,  6. 

Concern,  59,  12;  122,  8 — to  wait 
for  with  much,  29,  3. 

Concerned  for,  to  be,  59,  11 ;  109, 
2 — for  somebody,  to  be,  59,  9 — 
for  some  one,  to  be,  113,  2 — for 
something,  to  be,  59,  10 — to  be 
no  more,  119,  6. 

Concerning,  149,  3. 

Conclude,  to,  42,  7. 

Concluded,  42,  6. 

Condemn,  to,  39,  22. 

Condemnation,  39,  21. 

Condemned,  to  be,  39,  20. 

Condemneth,  he  that,  39,  23. 

Condescend,  to,  138,  5. 

Conduct,  153,  II — good,  173,  6. 

Confederation,  79,  18. 

Confide  in,  to,  89,  16. 


INDEX. 


189 


Confidence,  89,  19. 

Confusion,  122,  5. 

Congregation,  81,  17. 

Conjecture,  to,  153,  9  ;   i6g,  24. 

Conquer  somebody,  to,  118,  21. 

Conquered,  132,  3. 

Conscious,  to  become,  104,  6. 

Consider,  to,  113,  3;  144,  3 — about 
somebody,  to,  113,  2 — somebody 
to  be,  to,  153,  8;  173,  7. 

Consideration,  113,  4. 

Considered,  to  have,  43,  12. 

Conspiracy,  a,  26,  19. 

Constantly,  95,  11. 

Consult,  to,  24,  2. 

Contains  but  little,  it,  73,  22. 

Contemptible,  75,  15. 

Contend,  to,  55,  15. 

Content,  to  be,  140,  17. 

Contrary,  88,  13 — mind,  22,  13. 

Convenience,  54,  8. 

Convenient,  54,  7. 

Conversation,  8g,  5. 

Convert,  to,  59,  3. 

Convince  of  the  truth,  to,  171,  15. 

Cook,  to,  123,  2;  156,  21 ;  177,  3. 

Cooked,  40,  8. 

Cool,  141,  23. 

Copper,  68,  9 — snake,  68,  7;  79,  15. 

Coquettish  girl,  a,  104,  7. 

Cord,  19,  3. 

Cordial,  153,  7. 

Corn  blossom  falls  off,  the,  no,  9. 

Corn,  boiled  whole,  82,  12 — coarse 
pounded,  shelled,  127,  16 — ear 
of,  81,  25 — his,  158,  25 — husk, 
127,  25 — Indian,  27,  7 — is  ripe, 
the,  159,  14 — roasted,  12,  19; 
35.  15— stalk,  132,  9. 

Corner  of  a  house,  outside,  132,  il. 

Corners,  many,  47,  23. 

Corporeal,  47,  6 — material,  79,  4. 

Correct,  125,  12— to  be,  125,  5. 

Corresponds,  it,  71,  26. 


Corrupted,  70,  18. 
Corruption,  79,  23  ;  80,  2, 
Cost,  what  does  it,  137,  II. 
Cough,  27,  26 — to,  27,  24;   168,   3 

— whooping,  9,  5 — to  have  the,  9, 

6. 
Coughing,   he   has  a  disease  with, 

27.  25. 
Council  with,  to  hold,  163,  10. 
Counsel,    24,  3;   169,    9 — to    hold, 

24.  2. 
Count,  to,  II,  5;   137,  I. 
Country,  a  flat,  129,  5 — all  over  the, 

32,  9- 
Cousin,  65,  7,  23 — a  man's,  175,  16 

— a  woman's,  103,  2. 
Covenant,  88,  19. 
Cover,  a,  56,  9,  14 — to,  82,22;  83, 

17 — somebody,  to,  82,  23 — witu 

earth,  to,  120,  7. 
Covered  over  with  earth,  150,  24, 
Covetous,  126,  I. 
Covetousness,  127,  14. 
Cow,  86,  24;  155,  9. 
Cow  stable,  87,  5. 
Crab  apple,  142,  22. 
Crack,  to,  105,  7. 
Cracked, 137,  8. 
Cracks,  it,  144,  18. 
Cradle,  an  Indian,  ig,  18. 
Cranberries,  106,  23. 
Crane,  137,  12. 
Crawfish,  a,  126,  2. 
Create  with   the   hands,  to,  43,  7 — 

with  the  mind,  to,  42,  18. 
Creator,  74,   i — Great,  40,  11. 
Creature,    24,    10;    42,    19 — tame, 

29,  6 — that  lives  upon  grass,  any, 

111,24 — young,  177,  18. 
Creep,  to,  iig,  4 — in,  to,  116,  25. 
Creek  between  two  hills,  a,  118,  10 

— crooked,   120,     10 — large,  77, 

14 — little,  138,  16 — mouth  of  a, 

124,    3 — or   run, the  head   of  a, 


190 


INDEX. 


i6i,  15 — small,  132,  15 — the 
head  of  a,  161,  15. 

Cricket,  178,  12. 

Crime,  107,  13. 

Crooked,  150,  18;  165,  6;  like, 
165,  8 — road,  165,  9 — road,  to  go 
a,  100,  14;  165,  12 — the  road  is, 
150,  19 — to  make,  165,  10. 

Crop,  second,  73,  17. 

Cross,  roads,  75,  11 — the,  23,  7 — to 
be,  74,  13. 

Crow,  a,  14,  13 — to,  42,  i. 

Crown,  21,  19 — of  the  head,  61, 
22. 

Crucified,  120,  2;   129,  17. 

Cry,  to,  98,  13 — aloud,  to,  46,  27 — 
out,  to,  19,  14;  37,  9 — with,  to, 
163,  7- 

Cunning  man,  63,  26. 

Cunningness,  67,  2. 

Cup,  a,  30,  15. 

Cure,  53,  10. 

Current,  strong,  57,  20. 

Curse,  to,  75,  22. 

Cushion,  80,  i. 

Custom,  29,  14;  64,  12. 

Customary,  as  is,  33,  9. 

Cut  a  piece,  to,  108,  14 — fine,  to, 
115,  10 — loose,  to,  66,  6 — meat, 
to,  105,  II — off,  to,  19,  I  ;  140, 
9 — one's  self,  to,  76,  18;  115,  6 
— round,  to,  120, 15 — smooth,  to, 
60,  14 — with  a  knife,  to,  43,  18 — 
with  an  axe,  to,  44,  3. 

Cutlass,  104,  14. 

Cutting  of  firewood,  the,  73,  16 — 
wood,  to  come  from,  22,  2. 


Daily,  46,  9. 
Dam,  a  fish,  11,  10. 
Damnation,  39,  21 ;   169,  12. 
Damp,  137,  3. 
Dance,  to,  40,  2. 


Danger,  iSo,  17 — to  come  into,  99, 

13- 

Dangerous,  11,  24. 

Dark,  69,  22;  105,  10;  io5,  21  ; 
117,  II  —  in  the,  iii,  18 — it 
grows,  io5,  22;  117,  12 — pitch, 
14,  9 — somewhat,  117,  8  —  to 
grow,  117,  10. 

Darkness,  iii,  6. 

Daubed  with  clay,  23,  24. 

Daughter,  153,  3. 

Daughter-in  law,  28,  3. 

Dawn,  68,  12  ;   114,  4. 

Day,  42,  24;  43,  19 — after  to-mor- 
row, 98,  10;  at  break  of,  114, 
5 — before  yesterday,  98,  9 — by, 
42,  25  ;  43,  20 — clear,  152,  6 — 
early,  this,  127,  23 — fine,  172,  I ; 
174,  9 — is  spent,  15,  21 — past, 
this,  41,  17 — short,  143,  20 — the 
break  of,  95,  3 — the  last,  79,  22. 

Daybreak,  42,  16  ;  114,  4 — at,  131, 
2 — when  it  is  quite,  in,  17. 

Daylight,  42,  16. 

Days  ago,  some,  175,  15 — ago,  two, 
98,  9 — hence,  two,  98,  10 — in  a 
lew,  32,  10 — one  of  these,  32, 13. 

Daytime,  in  the,  42,  25. 

Dead,  76,  24 — the,  30,  18 — the  one 
who  takes  care  of  the,  90,  24 — 
to  be  struck,  97,  5 — to  strike  each 
other,  97,  6. 

Deadly,  21,  6. 

Deaf,  I  am,  95,  5 — person,  a,  38, 
24 — the,  38,  24 — to  be,  10,  17. 

Deal,  a  great,  27,  14 — to  be  hard  to, 
24,  7 — with,  difficult  to,  24,  8. 

Dear,  14,  25;  27,  10;  31,  5;  77, 
6 — is  it,  how,  137,  1 1 — so,  32,  3. 

Death,  21,  5  ;  76,  22 — agony  of,  78, 
24 — painful,  25,  2 — to  be  afflicted 
to,  9,  7 — to  bleed  to,  9,  4 ;  83,  8 — 
to  freeze  to,  22,  16 — to  grieve  to, 
22,  17— to  put  to,  96,  25. 


INDEX. 


191 


Debt,  62,  21. 

Debts,  our,  32,  5. 

Decay,  to,  37,  20 — going  to,  21,  4. 

Deceit,  11,  8;  36,  19. 

Deceive,  to,   11,  9 — somebody,  to, 

11,7. 
Deceived,   those   who   have    been, 

141,  7- 
Deceiver,  141,  8. 
December,  77,  i. 
Declaration,  178,  i 
Declare  unto  some  one,  to,  176,  8. 
Decoy  animals,  to,  114,  23. 
Decrease,  to,  17,  6. 
Decreed,  to  have,  42,  17, 
Deed,  evil,  107,  13 — sinful,  6g,  15. 
Deep,  28,4;  45,  22 — enough,  140, 

15 — mire,    46,  5 — mud,  46,  5 — 

the  hole,  so,  123,  8 — water,  27, 

22. 
Deeply  marshy,  46,  6. 
Deer,  14,  i — lick,  at  the,  71,  17 — 

plenty  of,  14,  14 — tracks,  a  great 

many,  28,  6 — young,  72,  20. 
Deer's  hair,  14,  2. 
Defective,  loi,  19. 
Deficient,  loi,  19. 
Degrees,  by,  20,  26;    21,  I — more 

by,  21,  15. 
Delawares,  64,  23;  148,  12 — one  of 

the  three  tribes  of  the,  85,  14. 
Delight  in,  to,  160,  11. 
Deliver,  to,  96,  20. 
Deny,  to,  109,  12. 
Depart  this  life,  to,  34,  19. 
Dependent  on  another's  command, 

to  be,  96,  10. 
Depth,  great,  77,  20. 
Deride  some  one,  to,  90,  22. 
Descend,  to,  155,  3. 
Descended  from,  14,  12. 
Desert,  to,  107,  3. 
Design   evil  against  somebody,  to, 

83,  14- 


Desirable,  it  is,  15,  3;  36,  7. 

Desire,  15,  4;  36,  13 — to,  36,  15; 
37,  22;  38,  2 — ardently,  to,  29,  3 
— to  give  one  an  advantage,  49, 

19. 
Desired,  15,  5. 
Despicable,  75,  15. 
Despise,  to,  75,  i8 — somebody,  to, 

75,  14- 

Despised,  the  being,  75,  17 — to  be, 
75-   16. 

Desponding,  126,  3. 

Destined,  for  what  we  are,  32,  7. 

Destroy,  to,  65,  18,  22,  24 — some- 
body, to,  154,  9. 

Destruction,  73,  15. 

Determined,  42,  6 — to  be,  43,  12, 
13;   125,  10. 

Devil,  69,  19. 

Devilishness,  69,  20. 

Dew,  grass  wet  with,  125,  21. 

Diaphragm,  tlie,  152,  19. 

Diarrhoea,  124,  26. 

Die,  to,  15,  25;  21,  4;  34,  19— 
easily,  to,  22,  22 — for  some  cause, 
to,  176,  9 — in  battle,  to,  9,  8 — 
quickly,  to,  22,  22. 

Difference,  144,  6. 

Different,   108,   6;    144,    16;    147, 

9- 
Differently,  144,  14. 
Difficult,   II,  24;  58,   II — to  deal 

with,    24,    8 — to  think,   11,  25 — 

traveling,  14,  24. 
Dig,  85,  21 — a  hole,  to,  1C5,  14. 
Digging  a  hole,  he  is,  150,  25. 
Dilapidated  town,  78,  i. 
Diligent,  to  be,  64,  10. 
Diminish,  to,  31,  19. 
Direct  somebody  the   wrong  way, 

to,  69,  16. 
Direction,  113,  9. 
Directly,  41,  24,  no,  17,  127,  12. 
Dirty,  23,  22  ;  96,  3;  98,  21 — look- 


192 


INDEX. 


ing,  70,  1 1 — to,  98,  22 — work,  to 

do,  98,  14. 
Disagree,  to,  144,  19. 
Disagreeable,  it  looks,  145,  21 — to, 

think,  145,  16. 
Disagreement,  144,  6. 
Disapprove,  to,  129,  3. 
Disbelieve,  to,  39,  11  ;   108,  11. 
Discern,  to,  91,  13. 
Discerning,    my    eyes     were    kept 

from,  144,  7. 
Discontent,  70,  3. 
Discontented,  70,  5 — to  be,  70,  2  ; 

85,  10. 
Discontentment,  85,  11. 
Discouraged,  65,  20 ;     130,   20 — to 

be,  65,  19;  loi,   13. 
Discouragement,  65,  21. 
Discourse  in  a  friendly  manner,  to, 

173,  2 — to  finish  a,  106,  14. 
Disease  with  coughing,,  he  has   a, 

27,  25. 
Disesteem,  to,  31,  19. 
Dish,  120,  14;  148,  7,  8. 
Dishclout,  37,  19. 
Disheartened,  126,  3;  130,  20. 
Dishes,  to  make,  148,  5. 
Dislike,   to,  129,  3,  4 — to   hear,  to, 

129,   14 — to  hear  somebody,  to, 

129,  15. 
Dishking,  129,  6. 
Disobedience,  13,  22;  20,  I,  8. 
Disobedient,  113,  17. 
Disobey,  to,  20,  7. 
Disown,  to,  109,  12. 
Disperse,  to,  13,  13. 
Display,  to,  21,  20. 
Displeased,  to  be,  70,  2. 
Disposed,  to  be  otherwise,  109,  5 — 

to  be  so,  65,  4. 
Dispute,  37,   2;  55,    16 — to,    118, 

23 — with  one  another,  118,  24. 
Disquieted,  to  be,  11,  20;  123,  22. 
Disquietude,  123,  23. 


Dissatisfied,  to  be,  70,  2 — to  make, 
70,4. 

Dissolute,  to  be,  55,  9. 

Distemper,  159,  10. 

Distress,  122,  7. 

Distribute  to  somebody,  to,  10,  4. 

Distributer,  30,  9. 

Distribution,  10,  5. 

Ditch,  a,  150,  23. 

Divertisement,  55,  8. 

Divide,  to,  169,  3. 

Divider,  30,  9. 

Division,  10,  5  ;   62,  lO. 

Dizzy,  to  be,  36,  20. 

Do,  as  I,  33,  20 — to,  85,  I — great 
wonders,  to,  37,  12 — so  to  some- 
body, to,  64,  7 — something  just 
so,  to,  143,  II — what  to,  31,  24. 

Doctor,  83,  5. 

Doe,  loi,  25 — a,  100,  3. 

Does,  as  he,  33,  21. 

Dog,  18,  9;  86,  16— little,  18,  11. 

Dogwood,  48,  3  ;  86,  20. 

Doing,  to  be  incapable  of,  16,  9. 

Domesticated  animal,  any,  18,  9, 
II. 

Done,  40,  8 ;  i6o,  21,  22 — it  is  well, 
174,  3— to  be,  43,  3— planting, 
to  be,  42,  26 — there  was  more, 
20,  3  ;  138,  22. 

Don't,  52,  4. 

Door,  35,  2;  56,  10 — is  open,  the, 
143,  24 — shut  the,  56,  8 — to 
knock  at  the,  109,  6 — to  open 
the,  142,  25. 

Doorkeeper,  102,  15. 

Doors,  out  of,  56,  6. 

Double,  98,  I;  115,  5;   117,  17. 

Doubt,  144,  4 — something  without, 
155,  20— to  be  in,  144,  3. 

Doubtful,  122,  9 — to  be,  122,  6. 

Dove,  a,  20,  5. 

Down  hill,  112,  23 — stream,  90,  i 
— to   come,   96,  2;   112,  24 — to 


INDEX. 


193 


lie,  64,   5;   127,  22 — to    sit,  81, 

26^to   take,   64,  4;   174,  4 — to 

throw,  65,  22. 
Downward,  60,  15. 
Downwards,  112,  23. 
Draw  near  to  somebody,  to,  82,  6 — 

them  hither,  to,  114,  23. 
Draweth  nigh,  it,  iii,  15. 
Drawing  knife,  60,  13. 
Draws  near,  it,  114,  22. 
Dream,  a,  66,  8 — I,  171,  23 — to,  61, 

7;    66,22;    171,  23 — something 

good,  to,  175,  18 — to  have  a  bad, 

70,  17. 
Dress,  III,  9;  173,  20 — to,  173,  iS — 

a  wound,  to,  11,  18 — carefully,  to, 

173,  18 — somebody,  to,  111,4 — 

some  one,  to,  116,  17 
Dressed,  iii,  5,  8. 
Dried,  36,  5  ;   113,  6. 
Drink,  to,  81,  7 — with  each  other, 

to,  80,  23. 
Drinking,  81,  II — to  spend  in,  81, 

10. 
Drive  back,  to,  46,   17 — hither,  to, 

114,   18 — in  a  nail,  to,  39,  19 — 

out,  to,  40,  12 — somebody  away, 

to,  107,  26 — through,  to,  34,  24. 
Drop,  108,  17. 
Drops,  it,  119,  15;   176,  20. 
Drowned,  22,  21. 
Drowsy,  38,  8. 

Drum,  118,  7 — to  beat  the,  118,  9. 
Drums,  he,  118,  9. 
Drunk,  to  get,  80,  24. 
Drunkard,  81,  9. 
Drunkenness,  11,  6. 
Dry,  36,9;   113,7 — grass,  78,   2— 

to,   36,   6;     113,    10 — to  be,  for 

thirst,  36,  8. 
Duck,  large  wild,  122,  12. 
Dull,   II,   13;    58,  3;  161,  25 — to 

make,  162,  I. 
Dung,  71,  10;  87,  12. 


Dusk,  112,  18 — it  was,  117,  7. 

Dusky,  69,  22;  117,  8. 

Dust,  iig,  10;   120,  21. 

Dwell  with,  to,  163,  4 — with  each 

other,  to,  163,  16. 
Dye  red,  to,  71,  12. 
Dying,  the,  16,  I. 


Each  one,  80,  8. 

Eagle,   bald,    165,  20 — fork-tailed, 

27.  9- 

Ear  of  corn,  81,  25. 

Early,35,  19;  71,13 — in  the  morn- 
ing. 15)  10  ;    16,  6. 

Earn,  to,  107,  4. 

Earnest,  54,  21 — to  be  in,  54,  20. 

Ears,  156,  12. 

Earth,  47,  7  ;  112,  4 — above  the, 
49,  4 — bears,  47,  3 — covered  over 
with,  150,  24 — I  hide  myself  in 
the,  37,  6 — in  the,  16,  18;  169, 
25 — on,  166,  27 — to  cover  with, 
120,  7 — upon,  13,  I — 166,  27. 

Earthen  pot,  23,  23. 

Ease  one's  self,  to,  74,  24. 

Easily,  22,  23 — to  die,  22,  22. 

East  wind,  the,  12,  4. 

Easterly,  151,  10. 

Easy,  22,  23;  60,  17 — to  be,  58,  5 
— to  make,  22,  26 — to  think,  22, 
25. 

Eat,  thou,  134,  16 — to,  86,  13 — to 
have  abundance  to,  156, 17 — with 
each  other,  161,  2. 

Eatable,  159,  25. 

Eaten  enough,  to  have,  44,  4. 

Ebb  tide,  48,  13. 

Edge,  at  the,  51,  I. 

Eel,  125,  19. 

Egg,  150.  14- 

Eight,  26,  20 — hundred,  26,  21. 

Eighty,  27,  I. 

Either,  128,  7;  130,  2. 


194 


INDEX. 


Elated  by  praise,  the  being,  19,  8. 

Elbow,  163,  I — calf  of  the,  iii,  3. 

Elder,  53,  14 — brother,  27,  5 — sis- 
ter, 85,  16. 

Elderly  woman,  53,  15. 

Elect,  the,  38,  23— thy,  38,  22. 

Election,  an,  117,  2. 

Elk,  85,  24. 

Elm,  II,  3 — tree,  11,  3,  12;  148,  6. 

Else,  some  one,  115,  17. 

Elsewhere,  108,  6 — to  go,  108,  7 — 
to  put,  107,  24. 

Empty,  the  house  is,  89,  2;  93,  4. 

Encamped,  76,  i. 

Encourage,  to,  41,  20. 

End,  161,  22 — at  the,  161,  17,  iS — 
of  the  plain,  on  the,  161,  24 — of 
the  world,  31,  14;  157,  19 — the, 
79,  22 — the  extreme,  176,  2. 

Endurance,  power  of,  15,  2. 

Endure  pain,  to,  73,  i. 

Enemy,  129,  i. 

Engage  in,  to,  91,  19. 

Enjoy,  to,  22,  6 ;  89,  4 — a  benefit, 
to,  172,  8 — riches,  to,  61,  11. 

Enjoyable,  22,  10. 

Enjoyment,  22,  9. 

Enlighten,  to,  42,  10. 

Enlighten  somebody,  to,  8g,  10. 

Enlightening,  42,  9. 

Enmity,  128,24;   129,  II. 

Enough,  140,  20;  144,  23 — and  to 
spare,  156,  15,  16 — it  is,  140,  ci 
— of  them,  140,  19 — to  have,  140, 
17 — to  have  eaten,  44,  4. 

Enslaved,  to  be,  150,  5. 

Enter  a  canoe,  to,  120,  22 — in,  to, 
75.  20. 

Entire,  27,  11 ;  82,  4. 

Entirely,  78,  15,  16;  82,  14;  106, 
17;   144,  23. 

Entrails,  150,  21. 

Entrance,  35,  2. 

Entreat  somebody,  to,  78,  22. 


Envy,  81,  5 — some  one,  to,  74,  16. 

Epistle,  62,  24. 

Escape  to,  120,  23  ;  168,  17 — hither, 

to  fly  or,  114,  23 — to  cause  to, 

120,  23. 
Established,  146,  13. 
Esteem,  68,  i ;  163,  20 — great,  18, 

4 — to,  14,  23  ;  67,  19 — highly,  to, 

18,  3 — it  an  honor,  to   67,   19 — 

somebody,  to,  67,  12. 
Estimation,  high,  18,  4. 
Eternal,  47,  14. 
Eternally,  47,  14. 
European  shoes,  130,  22. 
Even,   143,    10,    13 — not,  50,  11 — 

there,  91,   2 — to  make,  60,   14; 

143.  "• 

Evening,  170,  17;  172,  17 — cool, 
142,7 — good,  45, 16 — in  the,  170, 
18 — last.  153,  24  —  moderately 
warm,  136,  22 — this,  172,  18. 

Ever,  48,  I. 

Every  bit,  82,  4. 

Everybody,  154,  8. 

Every  one,  80,  8. 

Everything,  that  which  is  above,  18, 
7 — to  prize  above,  18,  3. 

Everj-where,  32,  8 — 154,  8 — from, 
154,  8 — not,  81,  18. 

Evil,  78,  7 — against  somebody,  to 
design,  83,  14 — deed,  107,  13 — 
of  somebody,  to  speak,  80,  5 — 
one,  78,  8— spirit,  69,  25 — to 
speak,  to  somebody,  80,  6. 

Exact,  125,  12. 

Examine,  to,  61,  12. 

Excavation,  150,  20. 

Excellent,  152,  25. 

Except,  41,  24. 

Excited,  to  be,  44,  7. 

Exclamation  of  approbation,  30,  8 
— of  approval,  45,  2;  52,  11 — 
of  grief,  50,  3,  9,  13— of  indig- 
nant surprise,  31,    16 — of  indig- 


INDEX. 


195 


nation,  44,  5,  6  ;  122,  21 — of  joy, 
48,  23,  24;  51,  4;  121,  9— of 
laughter,  47,  i ;  48,  8— of  pain, 
31,  15;  52,  23— of  surprise,  31, 
9,  12;  48,  22;  121,  8— of  vocif- 
eration, 48,  19;  49,  II  ;  103,  15 
— of  wonder,  52,  2 — used  in  an- 
swering, 103,  13,  14 — used  in 
calling,  51,  II. 

Excrement,  87,  12. 

Exert  one's  self,  to,  162,  18. 

Exhort,  to,  46,  14 — some  one,  to, 
41,  21. 

Exhortation,  46,  15. 

Expect,  to,  114,  12. 

Experienced,  65,  3  ;   168,  4. 

Expression,  a  strong,  159,  7. 

Extend,  to,  129,  19. 

Extended,  129,  18,  20. 

Extravagant,  to  be,  55,  9. 

Eye,  177,  15 — pupil  of  the,  the,  26, 
6 — to  raise  the,  23,  20 — wink  of 
an,  134,  I. 

Eyebrow,  72,  22;  84,  12. 

Eyebrows,  126,  6. 

Eyelid,  126,  6. 

Eyes,  broken,  166,  15 — to  shut  the, 
I33»  25. 


Face,  177,  15 — to,  177,  16. 

Fade,  to,  37,  20. 

Faded,  127,  i,  4. 

Fain,  160,  6. 

Faint,  to,  167,  16 — from  hunger,  to, 
126,  16. 

Faintness,  167,  17. 

Faints,  it,  126,  21. 

Faith,  171,  10;  175,  6. 

Fall,  136,  7 — hunt,  136,  8 — in  the 

next,  136,  7,  10 — skin,  136,  9 — 

to,  82,  5  ;   83,  9 — and  burst  open, 

to,  29,  5 — down,  to,  112,  19 — off 

P 


to,  112,  19 — to  the  ground,  to, 
106,  10 — upon,  to,  122,  10. 

Fallen  off,  83,  13. 

Falls  in,  it,  65,  23 — in  price,  17,  6 
— off,  it,  112,  20 — the  water,  48, 
12 — upon,  it,  143,  12,  14. 

Falsehood,  a,  55,  17. 

Familiarity,  89,  5. 

Famine,  76,  II. 

Fanciful,  167,  18. 

Far,  85,  15;  150,  15 — as,  131,  20 
off — 85,  15 — so,  as,  131,  20 — to 
go  so,  131,  21 — to  seem  to  be, 
150.  16. 

Farm,  to,  47,  10. 

Farmer,  47,  11. 

Fast,  146,  7 — it  goes,  59,  20 — to  go, 
57,  14 — to  grow,  60,  I — to  make, 
146,  12 — to  run,  56,  22  — to 
speak,  16,  7 ;  59,  19 — to  stand, 
146,  15 — to  walk,  58,  2. 

Fat,  118,  14;  126,  9;  163,  2— in 
an  animal's  belly,  158,  12 — meat, 

159,  4- 
Fatness,  163,  3. 
Father,    155,    13,   14 — his   or   her, 

103,  12— my,  99,  7,  8,  9. 
Father-in-law,  85,  6. 
Fatherless,  129,  24. 
Father's,  at  his  or  her,  103,  II. 
Fathom,  half  a,  105,  20. 
Fathoms,  four,  95,  2. 
Fatten,  to,  162,  22. 
Fault,  144,  2. 
Favor,  40,   18;  147,   15 — to    show 

somebody,  140,  i. 
Favorably,  to  speak,  172,  15. 
Fawn,  72,  20. 
Fear,  16,   10;  161,    i — to,  162,  16 

— to  be  in,  161,  3. 
Fearful,  to  be,  161,  10. 
Fears  you,  he,  122,  20. 
Feast,  136,  4 — to  hold   a,    136,  5 ; 

141,  2  ;  157,  12 — to  hold  a  love. 


196 


INDEX. 


136,  5— to  keep  a,  95,  9;  161, 
II. 

Feathers,  84,  19 — of  a  bird's  tail, 
167,  10. 

February,  147,  14. 

Fed,  27,  4. 

Feebleness,  126,  15. 

Feed,  to,  100,  18. 

Feel,  to,  19,  5;  100,  18 — as,  to, 
31,  25 — better,  to,  31,  18 — equal 
to  it,  I  do  not,  loi,  13 — great 
pain,  to,  14,  5 — grief  and  pain, 
130,  5 — grief  or  sorrow,  130,  4; 
149,  8 — less  pain,  to,  31,  18 — 
love,  to,  14,  21 — painful,  to,  149, 
7 — sore  pain,  to,  162,  3 — sor- 
rowful, to,  149,7 — troubled,  to, 
123,  18,  19. 

Feeling,  19,  6 — new,  177,  17. 

Feet,  at  his,  131,  13 — at  thy,  131, 
12. 

Felicity,  41,  10. 

Fellow,  foolish,  38,  14 — to  be  a 
good-for-nothing,  55,  9. 

Fellowship,  89,  5;  163,  14 — to 
keep  in,  90,  21 — with  one  an- 
other, to  have,  163,  13 — with 
somebody,  to  be  in,  163,  12. 

Female  genitals,  67,  11 — of  beasts, 
103,  4 — of  fowls  and  birds,  103, 

5- 

Fence,  80,  21 — is  finished,  the,  42, 
22 — over  or  behind  the,  25,  12 — 
rail,  80,  22 — the  end  of  the,  161, 
20 — to  jump  over  the,  10,  20  ; 
118,  4. 

Fern,  13,  12;  63,  19 — swamp,  103, 
10. 

Fervent,  131,  6;  133,  6. 

Fetch,  90,  9 — to,  91,  II — a  load, 
to,  92,  I — over,  to,  91,  16 — 
somebody,  to,  176,  5 — somebody 
over  in  a  canoe,  to,  91,  17 — 
wood,  to,  91,  9. 


Fetched,  91,  8  —  to   be,  90,   11 — 

across,  he  wants  to  be,  102,  i. 
Fetches  wood,  he,  91,  7. 
Fetching,  91,  14. 
Few,  but,  139,  2 — times,  a,  52,  7. 
Fickle,  157,  14. 
Fiddle,  12,  11. 
Field,  47,  9 — large,  77,    15 — old, 

77.  26. 
Fifth,  107,  7. 
Fifty,  107,  8. 
Fight,  to,  64,  16;  69,  7;  70,  10 — 

a  battle,  to,  70,    10 — with  each 

other,  to,  70,  10. 
Fighting,  69,  8 — to  stop,  16,  2. 
Figure,  33,  12. 
File,  a,  29,  15. 
Fill,  to,  106,  4,  6;  116,  18. 
Filled,  106,  3,  5. 
Finally,  90,  20;    137,  15. 
Find,  to,  86,  14 — somebody  out,  to, 

94.  6. 

Fine,  25,  23;  120,  5;  128,  12; 
172,  I  ;  175,  3— day,  172,  I  ; 
^74.  9 — morning,  172,  5 ;  to 
look,  174,  23 — word,  172,  11. 

Fineness,  175,  4. 

Finery,  iii,  9. 

Finger,  64,  25 — first,  142,  12 — lit- 
tle, 138,  13;  141,  4 — middle,  62, 
7 — nail,  to  bruise  the,  20,  14 — 
-ring,  126,  12. 

Fingers,  157,  15 — fork  of  the,  60, 
10 — tips  of  the,  167,  12. 

Finish,  to,  43,  14 — a  discourse,  to, 
106,  14 — a  work,  to,  42,  13. 

Finished,  106,  19 — the  canoe  is,  42, 
15 — the  fence  is,  42,  22 — to  be, 

43.3- 
Fire,  142,  1 1 — coal  of,  68,  11 ;  78, 

17 — off,  to,  106,  7 — to  make,  142, 

10 — to  quench,  23,  26. 
Firebrand,  118,  3. 
Firefly,  124,  20;   152,  15. 


INDEX. 


197 


Fireplace,  a  plastered,  133,  i. 

Firewood,  82,  20 — the  cutting  of, 
73,  16 — to  use  for,  139,  7. 

Firm,  146,  13. 

First,  94,  15,  16,  17 — at,  95,  26; 
102,  10;  123,  9 — place,  in  the, 
94,  17 — the,  94,  15,  16;  95,  26. 

Fish,  90,  19;  127,  7 — black,  134, 
9,  10. 

Fish-chop,  63,  II — dam,  a,  11,  10 
— hawk,  97,  11 — large,  19,  10 — 
like  a  sucker,  78,  11 — pike,  54, 
5;  121,17;  I45i  " — scale,  149, 
17 — with  a  bushnet  to,  13,  8 — 
with  hook  and  line,  to,  154,  15. 

Fisher  bird,  little,  142,  16. 

Fishing,  bushnet  for,  12,  22 — line, 
I9»  3>  4 — J^o*!*  a>  60,  4 — spear,  a, 
100,  9. 

Fist,  the,  117,  23. 

Fit,  to  have  a,  145,  23. 

Fits,  to  get,  145,  23. 

Five,  107,  5 — hundred,  107,  6. 

Fix,  to,  48,  7 — upon,  to,  21,  20. 

Flag,  68,  22. 

Flame,  it  burns  in  a,  66,  17. 

Flashes  lightning,  it,  124,  18. 

Flat  country,  a,  129,  5 — rock,  128, 
20. 

Flea,  12,  10. 

Fleas,  full  of,  12,  15. 

Flee,  to,  128,  16. 

Flesh,  103,  17;  150,11 — to  become, 
104,  4. 

Fleshy,  163,  2. 

Flies  away,  it,  118,  22 

Flies,  large  stinging,  82,  10. 

Flight,  128,  16. 

Flint,  71,  IS;  72,  12. 

Flinty,  35,  5. 

Float,  a,  89,  13. 

Flour,  66,  3. 

Flow  out  of,  to,  149,  4. 

Flower,  166,  19. 


Flows  out,  it,  147,  21. 

Flute,  12,  II. 

Flux,  bloody,  79,  11. 

Fly,  149,  14 — to,  17,  7;  168,  17 — 
or  escape  hither,  to,  114,  23 — sort 
of  stinging,  72,  21. 

Flying  squirrel,  26,  lO. 

Foam,  117,  22. 

Fog,  25,  5. 

Foliage,  55,  20. 

Follow,  to,  92,  1 1 ;  100,  6 — some- 
body, to,  169,  13 — some  one,  to, 
92,  8 — the  straight  road,  to,  125, 
18. 

Food,  86,  7,  12;  126,  7 — to  live 
upon,  156,  21 — to  prepare,  148, 
21. 

Fool,  a,  37,  3 ;  40,  4. 

Foolish,  behaved,  56,  16 — fellow, 
38,  14- 

Foolishness,  56,  17. 

Foot,  168,  23 — ball  of  the,  39,  27 ; 
40,  I — ^joint  of  the  foot,  26,  13 — 
sole  of  the,  148,  i — to  tread  under, 

29,  7. 

For,  16,  14;  18,  22;  100,  19;  loi, 

I,  2 — good  and  all,  15,  11 — that 

reason,  51,  6 — the  most  part,  45, 

3- 

Forbiddance,  122,  3. 

Force  somebody,  to,  13,  21. 

Forcible,  14,  10. 

Ford,  to,  143,  9 ;   147,  2. 

Forefathers,  86,  15. 

Forefinger,  65,  25. 

Forehead,  166,  22 — middle  of  the, 

62,  6 — my,  88,  22. 
Foremost,  96,4;   123,  9 — the,  96, 

6 — to  stand,  96,  5. 
Forerunner,  a,  128,  5. 
Foreshoulder,  49,  8. 
Forget,  to,  151,  5  ;   167,  20. 
Forgetfulness,  151,  5;   167,  21. 
Forgive,  to,  86,  8,  10 — each  other, 


198 


INDEX. 


to,  io5,  25 — somebody,  to,  86,  9 ; 

106,  24. 
Forgiveness,  86,  11 ;  107,  i. 
Forgot,  it,  I,  150,  5. 
Fork,  62,  10— a  tree  with  a,  62,  II 

— of  a  river,  62,  9 — of  a  road,  62, 

12 — of  the  fingers,  60,  10 — of  the 

toes,  60,  9. 
Form,    an   old,    100,    16 — modern, 

100,  16. 
Forsake,  to,  loi,  5 — somebody,  to, 

loi,  6. 
Fort,  80,  21. 

Forth  the  hand,  to  put,  129,  22. 
Fortunate,  41,  9 — the,  153,  23. 
Forty,  94,  25. 
Foundation,  34,  16. 
Fountain,  30,  24. 

Four,  94,  26 — fathoms,  95,  2 — hun- 
dred, 95,  I — times,  94,  23. 
Fourfold,  94,  21. 
Fourth,  94,  22. 
Fowl,  24, 12;  142,13 — or  bird,  bill  of 

^>  ^57>  5 — 'he  young  of  a  bird  or, 

21,  9 — with  young  ones,  a,  41,  12. 
Fowls  and  birds,  female  of,  103,  5 

— plume  of,  84,  9. 
Fox,  black,  170,  20 — skin,  166,  21 

— the  gray,  165,  13. 
Fraud,  11,  8. 
Free,  96,  17 — to  be,  96,  18 — from 

trouble,  to  be,  55,  21 — to  make, 

96,  15,  20. 
Freedom,  96,  21. 
Freeman,  96,  19. 
Freeze,  to,  138,  17 — to  death,  to,  22, 

16. 
Frequent  traveler,  86,  2. 
I>eshet,  77,  3 — abates,  the,  132,  2. 
Friend,  31,  27  ;  99,  3  ;   147,  6 — my, 

32,  I ;   99,  5  ;    147,  6 — my  little, 

99.  6. 
Friendly,  to  be,  141,   14 — to  look, 

60,  19 — to  treat,  173,  2. 


Fright,  161,  9. 

Frightened,  162,  14 — to  be,  102,  11  ; 

124,  4. 
Frog,  147,  13. 
From,  149,  3;  177,  II — a  place,  to 

be,  155,  2 — descended  or  sprung, 

14,  12 — hence,  5, 16 — thence,  88, 

I ;  91,  2. 
Frost,  white,  103,  i ;   143,  7. 
Froth,  117,  22. 
Frow,  104,  12. 
Frozen,  44,  8;    136,  i  ;    138,  18 — 

hard,  146,  6 — over,  56,  13 — shut, 

56,  13- 
Fruit,  to  produce,  43,  8. 
Fruition,  22,  9. 
Frying  pan,  131,  15. 
Full,  106,  3,  17;    144,23;    167,7; 

168,    I — grown,    140,    22 — it    is, 

150,  7 — of  fleas,  12,  15 — of  holes, 

12,  6 — of  rocks,  37,  II. 
Fully,  106,  17. 
Fulfil,  to,  106,  20. 
Funnel,  116,  22. 
Further,  50,  7 ;    52,  5 — a  little,  50, 

8— still,  50,  7, 
Fury,  24,  9. 


Gadding,  to  go  a,  85,  19. 

Gain,  168,  20 — to,  109,  18;   168,  22 

— a  wager,  to,  168,  21. 
Gall,  the,  162,  21. 
Gape,  to,  124,  21;   147,  20. 
Garden,  81,  8. 
Gardener,  81,  15. 
Garfish,  151,  14. 
Gather,  to,  76,  6,  10. 
Gaze,  to,  100,  4. 
Gear,  horse,  153,  20. 
Generously,  to  treat  somebody,  158, 

23- 
Genitals,  male,  158,  19. 
Gensi,  root,  166,  3. 


INDEX. 


199 


Gently,  141,  ig — it  goes,  171,  8. 

Genuine,  63,  12. 

Get,  to,  85,  18;   109,  18. 

Ghost,  145,  18. 

Giddy  in  the  head,  to  be,  36,  20. 

Gift,  85,  8. 

Gimlet,  118,  i. 

Gird,  to,  90,  10. 

Girdle,  a,  39,  i. 

Girl,  103,  8 — a  coquettish,  104,  7 — 
little,  103,  7  ;    122,  2. 

Girth  of  a  saddle,  44,  10. 

Give,  to,  85,  7 — away,  to,  79,  21  — 
back,  to,  46,  26 — honor,  to,  20, 
2 — suck,  to,  100,  2 — to  be  un- 
willing to,  152,  20 — to  somebody, 
to,  85,  3 — up,  to,  16,  4;   65,  19; 

.170,7- 
Gives  to  me,  he  who,  85,  5. 
Giving  the,  85,  4. 
Glad,  85,  13 — to  be,  173,  12 — to  see 

somebody,  to  be,  106,  9. 
Gladly,  160,  6. 
Gladness,  41,  10. 
Glittering,  122,  22. 
Glorify  some  one,  to,  67,  13. 
Glory,    67,    15;    152,    26 — to  give, 

73,  9- 

Glorying  in,  176,  17. 

Glossy,  168,  10,  II. 

Gloves,  157,  2. 

Glue,  82,  19;  130,  13. 

Go,  to,  9,  2 — all  around,  to,  164, 
17 — all  away,  to,  154,  12 — all 
out,  to,  154,  II — and  tell,  75,  25 
— asunder,  to,  16,  8 — away,  to, 
18,  17 — away  weeping,  to,  18, 
14 — by  water,  to,  118,  16  -from 
some  place  secretly,  to  ,  54,  2 — 
home,  to,  75,  5 — hunting,  to,  75, 
24 — in  a  canoe  with  somebody, 
to,  156,  20 — or  cross  over  one 
another,  to,  23,  6 — out,  to,  58,  21 
— so  far  to,  131,  21 — to  let,  119, 


7 — to  like  to,  160,  13 — througli, 
to,  34,  24 — to  venture  to,  13,  20 — 
to  war,  to,  76,  9 — wherever  or 
whither  I,  31,  8 — with,  to,  163, 
18,  21 — with  somebody,  to,  164, 
3— up,  to,  23,  19. 

God,  40,  II;  74,  I;  no,  I — above 
all,  33,  24 — Holy,  56,  26 — Lamb 
of,  139,  24 — mild,  139,  24 — the 
good,  gracious,  153,  21. 

Goes  fast,  it,  59,  20 — with  him,  he 
who,  164,  4. 

Going,  hard,  14,  24. 

Gone,  it  is  all,  91,  10;   154,  10. 

Good,  25,  23;  141,  15  ;  141,  17; 
154.3;  159.  24;  174,  20;  175, 
3,  7 — again,  he  makes,  174,  6 — 
and  all,  for,  15,  11 — be  so,  15, 
12 — evening,  45,  16 — for  noth- 
ing, 94,  I — for-nothing  fellow, 
to  be  a,  55,  9 — gracious  God, 
153,  21— it  is,  174,  3,  II  — 
morning,  165,  21 — morrow,  151,9 
— natured,  to  be,  141,  14 — physic, 
153,  22 — tasted,  159,  23 — the, 
174,  12 — the  supremely,  34,  35, 
— to  be,  141,  14;  174,  18 — to 
do  somebody,  174,  10 — very,  49, 
16. 

Goodness,  103,  24  ;   174,  19. 

Goods,  61,  10. 

Goose,  wild,  52,  i. 

Gooseberries,  38,  13. 

Gospel,  173,  14. 

Gourd,  a,  171,  13. 

Government,  38,  28. 

Governor,  38,  27. 

Grace,  172,  3. 

Gracious,  141,  15 — one,  the  most, 
34.  2. 

Grain,  his,  158,  28. 

Grandfather,  87,  lo. 

Grandmother,  103,  16. 

Grant,  to,  63,  3. 


200 


INDEX. 


Grapes,  wild,  162,  6. 

Grass,  23,  13;  74,  23;  133,  11— 
any  creature  that  lives  upon,  iii, 
24 — cabin  covered  with,  84,  8 — 
dry,  78,  2 — old  dry,  28,  2 — scour, 
60,  II — wet  with  dew,  125,  21. 

Grasshopper,  59,  i ;  105,  24 — 
green,  52,  22;  57,  19. 

Grateful,  39,  17. 

Grave,  70,  19  ;   118,  11. 

Gravel,  62,  18. 

Gray,  161,  14 — fox,  the,  165,  13 — 

hair,  166,  7 headed  man,  161, 

14. 

Grease,  126,  9,  10. 

Great,  19,  13;  54,  9 ;  68,  5;  76, 
26  ;  77,  7 — buck,  27,  20 — city, 
55.  3— 'leal,  a,  27,  14— depth, 
77,  20 — esteem,  18,  4 — it  looks, 
77,  18 — king,  54,  16 — many,  77, 
9,  10 — river,  54,  17 — sea,  54,  15 
— ships,  55,  2— the,  77,   13,  17. 

Greater,  18,  8 — power,  17,  10. 

Greed,  127,  13. 

Green,  23,  9,  14 — it  is,  23,  9 — 
grasshopper,  52,  22  ;  57,  19 — 
snake,  23,  10. 

Greeting,  152,  11. 

Gridiron,  30,  12. 

Grief,  153,  16 — exclamation  of,  50, 
3,  9,  13 — to  be  put  to,  126,  13; 
130,  10 — to  feel,  130, 4,  5  ;  149,  8. 

Grieve  to  death,  to,  22,  17. 

Grieved,  to  be,  149,  11. 

Grievous,  56,  21. 

Grind,  to,  53,  3;  59,4;   135.  21. 

Grindstone,  53,  4;  54,  4. 

Ground,  47,  7 — fine,  171,  7 — hog, 
86,  19 — hole  in  the,  165,  14 — 
middle  of  a  piece  of,  61,  18 — 
squirrel,  21,  8;  47,  16 — to  fall  to 
the,  106,  10 — to  plant  a  large 
piece  of,  77,  16— wet,  124,  24; 
133.  3.  4- 


Grounded,  43,  4. 

Grow  better,  to,  53,  9 — better  in 
health,  to,  65,  9 — dark,  to,  117, 
10 — fast,  to,  60,    I — out   of,  to, 

155.  3- 

Grows  dark,  it,  106,  22;  117,  12 — 
well,  it,  174,  13. 

Grub,  161,  8. 

Grubbing  hoe,  72,  5. 

Grudge,  to,  152,  20. 

Guard,  156,  4 — a,  102,  8. 

Guide,  a,  52,  19. 

Guilt,  107,  15. 

Guiltless  person,  a,  11 1,  20. 

Gulley,  a,  105,  16. 

Gum  tree,  135,  20. 

Gun,  106,  8 — breech  of  a,  56,  15; 
158,  9 — drawer,  58,  23 — lock, 
124,  12 — lock,  battery  of  a,  30, 
17 — lock,  cock  of  a,  71,  16 — the 
hind  sight  of  a,  34,  7. 

Gunpowder,  120,  21. 

Guts,  150,  21. 


Habit,  29,  14. 

Habitation,  his,  30,  11. 

Hail,  49,  13;  79,  8;  151,13 — stone, 
a,  151,  13 — to,  82,  16. 

Hails,  it,  136,  13. 

Hair,  84,  11 ;  85,  2 — deer's,  14,  2 
gray,  166,  7 — red,  78,  10. 

Half,  105,  21 — a  fathom,  105,  20. 

Halfway,  63,  2. 

Hallow,  to,  106,  12. 

Halo  of  sun  or  moon,  157,  21. 

Halve,  to,  105,  19. 

Ham,  118,  5. 

Hammer,  104,  16 — a,  19,  20. 

Hand,  88,  21— at  the  right,  63,  10 
— his,  176,  I — it,  63,  13 — it  here, 
148,  16 — left,  81,  3 — my,  88,  21 
— on  the  right,  169,  18 — palm  of 
the,  148,  2 — the  flat  of  the,  108, 


INDEX. 


201 


20 — the  time  is  at,  143,  12,  14 — 
thou,  175,  24 — to  bruise  the,  26, 
17 — to  lend  a,  164,  6 — to  Hft  up 
the,  23,  18 — to  put  forth  the,  129, 
22 — to  reach  forth  the,  64,  15— 
to  the,  81,  3 — towards  the,  169, 
8 — weak,  126,  22. 
Handle,  168,  24 — some  one,  to,  85, 

17- 

Hands  tied  up,  157,  2 — to  create 
with  the,  43,  7 — to  shake,  123,  5 
— to  something,  to  lay,  64,  14 — 
to  warm  the,  21,  18. 

Handsome,  174,  12;   175,  3,  7. 

Hang  down  the  head,  to,  92,  6 — 
up,  to,  127,  20. 

Hangs,  it,  127,  17 — there,,',i27,  17. 

Happens,  as  it,  32,  4. 

Happiness,  41,  10;   172,  22. 

Happy,  41,  9;  172,  23 — he  who 
makes  me,  171,  2,  3 — to  be,  171, 
I,  6;  172,  21 — to  cause  to  be, 
171,  4 — to  make,  61,  16 — to  rest, 
15,  18. 

Hard,  11,  24;  14,  8;  58,  11 — 
going,  14,  24 — to  beat,  56,  20 — 
to  deal  with,  to  be,  24,  7 — to 
labor,  II,  23. 

Hardly,  13,  19;  58,  11. 

Hare,  a,  87,  7;   144,  12. 

Harmonizes,  it,  71,  26. 

Harrow,  60,  2. 

Harsh,  53,  2,  5. 

Haste,  to  make,  126,  19. 

Hat,  17,  21. 

Hatch  or  meditate  something  good 
or  bad,  to,  42,  20. 

Hatchet,  140,  7. 

Hate,  to,  129,  9;  133,  7 — each 
other,  to,  128,  23 ;  129,  10 — ex- 
cessively, to,  129,  16 — somebody, 
to,  128,  21. 

Hatred,  128,  24. 

Haughty,  to  be,  173,  16. 


Have,  to,  89,  4;  103,  22 — a  bad 
dream,  to,  70,  17 — bad  travel- 
ling, to,  II,  22 — one  object,  to, 

95.  14- 

Having,  48,  5. 

Hawk,  78,  9. 

Hay,  84,  14. 

Hazel  nut,  the,  40,  10. 

He,  93,  9,  10 — has,  48,  6 — is  said 
to  have  said,  66,  iS — that  is  love, 
14,  20 — who  gives  to  me,  85,  5 — 
who  is  merciful,  41,  4 — who  is 
there,  34,  17 — who  sits  here,  63, 

5- 

Head,  158,  18 — at  his,  33,  4 — ^chief, 
38,  27 — crown  of  the,  61,  22 — 
lice,  49,  14 — middle  of  the,  122, 
17 — of  a  creek,  the,  161,  16 — 
tied  about  the,  39,  6 — to  be  giddy 
in  the,  36,  20 — to  hang  down  the, 
92, 6 — to  knock  somebody  on  the, 
118,  2 — to  shake  the,  138,  23. 

Headache,  159,  2 — to  have,  159, 
I. 

Health,  to  grow  better  in,  65,  9 — to 
mend  in,  53,  9. 

Hear,  to,  112,  12 — by  chance,  to, 
lOQ)  3 — one  another,  to,  112,  16 
— privately,  to,  139,  6 — some- 
body, to,  112,  17 — somebody,  to 
dislike,  to,  129,  15 — to  cause  to, 
112,  13 — to  dislike  to,  129,  14 — 
to  like  to,  160,  14 — somebody, 
160,  15 — well,  to,  174,  26 — will- 
ingly, to,  160,  12 — wrong,  to, 
144,  10. 

Heard,  it  is,  112,  14. 

Hearing,  to  be  quick  of,  11,  4— 
wrong,  144,  II. 

Hearken  to,  44, 13 — to  one  another, 
to,  93,  24 — to  somebody,  to,  177, 

4- 
Heart,  153,  5,  6 — and  mind,  to  be 
of  an  indifferent,  58,  6 — it  pene- 


202 


INDEX. 


trates  my,  34,  25 — of  a  tree,  159, 

6 — to  be  of  one,  95,  18. 
Heartily,  153,  7. 
Heartless,  126,  3. 
Heathen,  93,  20 — to  be  a,  93,  19. 
Heathenish  life,  90,  18 — life,  to  lead 

a,  93.  19- 

Heaven,  25,  7. 

Heavens,  the,  iii,  25. 

Heavy,  58,  1 1 — in  a  manner,  58,  10 
— not,  60,  17. 

Hedgehog,  the,  38,  11. 

Heedless,  90,  12. 

Heel,  gi,  4;   151,  6. 

Hell,  69,  21. 

Help  along,  to,  164,  7 — each  other, 
to,  163,  6 — one  another,  to,  164, 
6 — somebody  to,  40,  17;  164,  2 
— somebody  through,  to,  34,  23. 

Helped  to  accuse  him,  one  who, 
164,  I. 

Helplessness,  21,  2. 

Hemp,  wild,  47,  13. 

Hen,  142,  13. 

Hencoop,  142,  14. 

Hence,  from,  51,  6. 

Henceforth,  51,  13. 

Herb,  74,  23 — "  colt's  foot,"  the, 
19,  17. 

Herbs,  23,  13. 

Here,  17,  i;  51,6,  19;  148,  14; 
178,  8 — as  many  as  are,  34,  9 — 
take  it,  67,  10— till,  88,  i. 

Hereafter,  90,  20. 

Hew  well,  to,  175,  9. 

Hiccough,  76,  23. 

Hickory  nut,  82,  8 — nut,  white,  142, 
2 — shiver,  141,  3 — tree,  bitter, 
142,  17 — upland,  54,  6. 

Hide,  myself  in  the  earth,  I,  37,  6 
—to,  37,  6,  23. 

High,  45,  24;  46,  2 — bank,  a,  51, 
I — bank  of  a  river,  14,  II — esti- 
mation, 18,  4 — minded,  to  be,  68, 


2  ;  173,  16 — mindedness,  173,  17 
— priced,  27,  10 — to  be,  46,  I — 
value,  68,  i — water,  27,  22;    28, 

4  ;  77.  3- 

Highly,  to  esteem,  18,  3. 

Hill,  150,  6 — a  round,  175,  23— on 
the  north  side  of  a,  17,  4 — or 
mountain,  top  of,  123,  7 — over  or 
beyond  the,  25,  6 — round,  154, 
2 — side,  126,  5 — south  side  of  a, 
145,  14— top  of  the  166,  28 — 
under  the,  16,  17 — up,  154,  14 — 
where  the  road  goes  down  the, 
155,  6 — where  the  road  goes  up, 

154.  13- 
Hills,  a  creek  between  two,  118,  10. 
Hilly,  150,  8,  10. 
Himself,  49,  2. 
Hinder,  to,  59,  13. 
Hip,  66,  2. 

Hit  somebody,  to,  43,  2. 
Hither,   51,   6,  8,  13;;  148,  18— to 

come,  115,  2. 
Hoarse,  to  be,  26,  4. 
Hobble,  44,  10. 
Hobbled,  44,  11. 
Hoe,  13,  4 — grubbing,  72,  5. 
Hog,  45,  II — ground,  88,   19 — sty, 

45.  12. 
Hold  a  feast,  to,  141,  2;   157,  12 — 

somebody   fast,    to,    146,    8 — to 

take,  39,  8. 
Holds  much,  it,  117,  6. 
Hole,  70,  19;  150,  20 — a,  118,   II 

— he  is  digging  a,    150,   25 — in 

the    ground,    165,    14 — so    deep 

the,  123,  8 — to  dig  a,  165,  15. 
Holes,  full  of,  12,  6. 
Holiest,  34,  I. 
Holiness,  57,  l ;   115,  22. 
Hollow,   120,    16;  174,   7 — in   the 

ground,  a,  118,  11 — tree,  a,  150, 

26. 
Holy,  40,  5,  6— Ghost,   154,   5 — 


INDEX. 


203 


God,  56,  26 — the  most,  34,  i — to 
believe  to  be,  57, 4 — to  think  that 
one  is,  57,  3. 

Home,  there  is  no  one  at,  89,  2 — 
to  be  at,  12,  7 — to  be  seldom  at, 
85,  19 — to  bring  somebody,  75, 
3— to  go,  75,  5. 

Honest,  125,  4. 

Honey  locust  tree,  117,  20. 

Honor,  67,  18 — some  one,  to,  67, 
12 — the  receiving  of,  67,  14 — to, 
67,  19 — to  give,  20,  2 — to  look 
upon  as  an,  176,  16. 

Honorable,  67,  16;   172,  6. 

Honored,  he  that   is,  67,  17 — the, 

77,8. 

Hoop-ash,  35,  16. 

Hope,  95,  24 — to,  89,  18;  95,21, 
23 — to  give  in,  95,  22. 

Horn,  104,  I ;   168,  18. 

Horned  cattle,  155,  16 — snake, 
127,  6. 

Hornet,  a,  151,  17. 

Horse,  93,  25 — gear,   153,  20. 

Horseback,  to  ride  on,  93,  26. 

Hot,  38,  19;  57,  24;  133,  6— 
weather,  57,   18. 

House,  50,  15;  158,  14 — behind 
the,  25,  8 — cold,  142,  5 — he  has 
a,  158,  II — his,  158,7 — in  order, 
to  put  a,  43,  10 — in  the  little, 
158,  15 — is  empty,  the,  89,  2 ; 
93,  4 — log  for  a,  12,  3 — master 
of  the,  155,  23 — my,  157,  22 — of 
prayer,  no,  7 — on  the  top  of 
the,  167,  I — outside  corner  of  a, 
132,  12 — rafter  on  the  roof  of  a, 
64,  3 — ready,  to  make  a,  43,  10 
— thy,  158,  I — to  come  out  of 
the,  59,  5 — to  finish  a,  43,  10 — 
warm,  44,  i. 

How,  134,  19;  138,  II— is  it,  134, 
19 — large,  134,  19 — long,  52,  10 
— many,  134,  19 — much,  52,6,  8  ; 
Q 


134,    19 — soon,    134,     19 — then, 

134.  19;   135.  6— to  feel,  31,  25 

will  it  be,  134,  19. 
However,  16,    14;   24,   17;  50,   4, 

II ;   121,  3. 
Howling,  124,  5. 
Huckleberry,  84,  23 — bread,  84,  24 

— swamp,  74,  22. 
Huckleberries,  85,  9. 
Hulls  of  the  corn,  the,  127,  25. 
Humble,  40,  22 ;    135,    10,    11,13; 

138,   4,   9 — being,  83,    2 — one's 

self  before  somebody,  to,  40,   21 

— one  that  is,  40,  20 — to  be,  40, 

19;   138,  I. 
Humbly,  to  go,   loi,  15 — to  walk, 

138,  2. 
Humility,  101,  14;   138,  8. 
Humor,  to  be  out  of,  121,  19. 
Hundred,  five,  107,  6 — four,  95,  i 

— one,  46,  21  ;     95,    13 — seven, 

97,  24 — six,  46,  23 — two,  97,  22. 
Hunger,   to,  38,  6 — to  faint   from, 

126,  16 — to  suffer,  161,  19. 
Hungry,  to  be,  38,  6. 
Hunt,  to,  17,  3 — by  the  way,  to,  92, 

12;   168,2 — in  company,  to,  112, 

7 — wiUingly,  to,  159,  21. 
Hunter,  32,  2. 
Hunting,  lover  of,  159,  20 — to  come 

from,  21,  23 — to  go,  75,  24. 
Hurry,  to  be  in  a,  126,  19. 
Hurts  me,  it,  162,  8. 
Hush,  131,  9. 
Hut,  50,  15. 
Hymn,  88,  16. 
Hypocrisy,  71,  4. 
Hypocrite,  71,  3. 


I,  95,  27 — also,  94,  9 — am,  95,  7 — 

too,  94,  9. 
Ice,  79,  7 — the  river  drifts,  75,   i ; 


204 


INDEX. 


82,  17 — to  break  in  the,  76,  25 — 

to  go  over  the,  100,  5. 
Idle,  to  go  about,  109,  8. 
Idler,  80,  20. 
Idol,  an,  82,  9. 
If,  15,  12;  35,  14;  41,24— but,  15, 

12 — only,  15,  12. 
Ill,  70,   13,  14 — flavored,  71,   5 — 

natured,  80,  10 — pleased,  to  be, 

75,  6 — to  speak,  69,  9 — to  take, 

75,  6 — to  treat  somebody,  59,  17 

— to   use   somebody,   56,  23 — to 

use  some  one,  44,  15. 
Imagine,  to,  153,  9. 
Immediately,  127,  12. 
Impatience,  to  wait  with,  23,  1 1. 
Impeachment,  42,  5. 
Impotent,  167,  18^ — to  be,  167,  16. 
Imputation,  73,  21. 
In,  50,  12;   149,2 — some  place,  81, 

12,    18 — the    bargain,   47,    21 — 

there,  16,  19;  22,  23. 
Inability,  15,  17. 
Inadvertently,  117,  24. 
Inanimate,  25,  23. 
Incapable  of  doing,  to  be,  16,  9. 
Incapacity,  15,  17. 
Incite  one  to  do  something,  to,  147, 

23- 
Inclination,  to  be  against  one's,  129, 

4- 
Increase,  to,  43,  8. 
Indeed,  9,1 ;  18,  23  ;  26,  7,  8;  30,  7. 
Indian,  63,  7 — bedstead,  an,  143, 

21 — corn,  27,  7 — cradle,  an,  19, 

18 — language,  to  speak  the,  48, 

9 — shoes,  63,  8 — thou,  32,  16. 
Indians  of  the  same  nation,  64,  23 

— northern,  66,  12. 
Indiff"erence,  15,  7,  8;  58,  7. 
Indifferent,  to  be,  15,  6 — heart  and 

mind,  to  be  of  an,  58,  6. 
Indignation,  exclamation  of,  44,  5, 

6;   122,  21. 


Indisposed,  69,  18 — in  mind,  to  be, 
144,  20. 

Inferior,  it  is,  17,  19. 

Infirm,  58,  14. 

Inform  each  other,  to,  150,  22. 

Information,  10,  10  ;   169,  9. 

Inhabitant,  34,  17. 

Ink,  30,  22. 

Innocence,  57,  l;   107,  il. 

Innocent,  one  that  is,  in,  20— suf- 
ferer, 102,  17 — to  be,  107,  10,  i(-i. 

Inquire,  to,  91,  18 — 176,  6 — of  e.;cli 
other,  to,  92,  19. 

Instruct,  to,  10,  8;   17,  17. 

Instruction,  48,  17. 

Instrument,  to  tune  an,  60,  24. 

Insult  somebody,  to,  72,  16. 

Insulted,  the  being,  72,  16. 

Intercession,  no,  5. 

Interpret,  21,  7. 

Invisible,  99,  17. 

Invitation,  155,  4. 

Inwardly,  170,  i. 

Ipecacuanha,  78,  12. 

Iron,  134,  7 — pot,  132,  22;  157,  17 
— splitting,  104,  12 — wedge,  105, 
6 — wood,  72,  9. 

Iroquois,  an,  81,  14. 

Irresolution,  11,  21. 

Is,  as  it,  32,  4. 

Island,  81,  6 — the  point  of  an,  157, 
6. 

It,  93,  9,  10 — is  as  it  should  be,  71, 
25  ;  72,  2 — is  so,  63,  27 — is  so 
much,  90,  13 — is  there,  48,  6. 

Itch,  one  that  has  the,  57,  22  — to 
have  the,  57,  21. 


January,  21,  II. 

Jaw  bone,  the,  29,  il. 

Jealous,  53,  2,  5 — of  somebody,  to 

be,  74,  16. 
Jealousy,  73,  18;  81,  4. 


INDEX. 


205 


Jesting,  II,  2. 
Jocular,  to  be,  lo,  25. 
Joined  together,  138,  19. 
Joins  close  together,  it,  136,  2. 
Joint,  134,  2 — of  the  foot,  26,  13. 
Journey,  to  make  a  provision  for  a, 

97,  10. 
Joy,   173,    13 — exclamation  of,  48, 

23.  24;  51,  4;   121,  9. 
Joyful,  173,  15 — to  be,  173,  12. 
Judge  somebody,  to,  42,  4. 
Juice,  177,  10. 
July,  50,  14. 
Jump  hither,  to,  148,  13 — over,  to, 

60,  7 — over  the  fence,  to,  10,  20; 

118,  4. 
Jumps,  it,  65,  15. 
June,  54,  II. 
Junk  of  fire,  118,  3. 
Just,  172,  6— alike,  143,  10,  13 — 

here,  51,  6 — now,  40,  3 — so,  125, 

8 — to  be,  125,  5. 


Keep  a  feast  in  Indian  style,  to,  95, 
9 — a  servant,  to,  17,  14 — each 
other  in  remembrance,  to,  73,  12 
— holy  day,  to,  87,  9 — in  fellow- 
ship, to,  go,  21 — one's  promise,  to 
171,  18 — or  preserve  unto  some- 
body, to,  135,  16 — somebody,  to, 
173,  21 — watch,  to,  IQ2,  7. 

Keeper,  gg,  ir. 

Keg,  bottom  of  a,  158,  9. 

Kettle,  49,  5 — to  burn  the,  11,  17. 

Key,  139,  13  ;   143,  2. 

Kidney,  4g,  6. 

Kill  a  bear,  to,  g6,  8 — each  other, 
they,  9,  8 — somebody,  to,  g6,  13 
— to  seek  to,  36,  13  ;  38,  5. 

Kind,  141,  17;  174,  20 — to  be, 
141,  14 — to  each  other,  to  be,  41, 
I — to  speak,  141,  16. 


Kindle,  to,  89,  11 ;  151,  21  —  a 
flame  within  one,  to,  89,  10. 

Kindness,  147,  15;   174,  19. 

Kindred,  60,  22. 

King,  123,  13 -great,  a,  54,  16— to 
make  to  a,  123,  14. 

Kingdom,  123,  15. 

Kinsman,  60,  18. 

Kiss,  to,  87,  6. 

Knee,  46,  18;   iii,  2. 

Kneel  down  to,  98,  7 — to  some- 
body, to,  98,  8. 

Knife,  57,  15;  105,  12 — drawing, 
60,  13 — to  cut  with  a,  43,  18. 

Knock,  to,  iig,  17 — at  the  door,  to, 
109,  6 — down  to,  112,  21 — in,  to, 
118,  12 — off,  to,  ig,  I — out,  to, 
118,  12 — somebody  on  the  head, 
to,  118,  2. 

Knoll,  a,  154,  2. 

Knot,  a,  38,  18. 

Know,  I  don't,  136,  24;  137,5,17; 
to,  52,  20;  91,  13;  100,  13; 
104,  6;  155,  17;  166,  20 — how 
to  do  it,  to,  98,  27 — somebody, 
to,  100,  12 — 104,  5 — well,  to, 
175,  II,  13 — when,  I  don't,  137, 

5- 
Knowledge,  155,  18. 
Known,  160,  17 — to  make,  58,  19; 

112,  IX. 


Labor,  84,  25,  27 — hard,  to,  11,  23 
— in  vain  to,  139,  16 — to  be  bur- 
thened  with,  149,  11. 

Laborer,  84,  26. 

Ladder,  30,  21. 

Laden,  ready,  43,  24. 

Ladle,    scum,  77,  23 — stirring,    35, 

13- 

Lake,  81,  20;  128,  6 — a,  76,  20 — 

over  the,  25,  13. 
Lamb  of  God,  139,  24. 


206 


INDEX. 


Lame,  45,  20;  121,  11 — he  that  is, 
121,  12 — the,  128,  4 — to  be,  45, 
19. 

Lamp,  94,  2 — to  carry  a,  94,  3. 

Lancet,  a,  113,  15. 

Land,  bottom,  fine,  good,  170,  12 
— rain,  16,  13 — to,  25,  17 — turtle, 
136,  II. 

Language,  64,  6 — to  speak  the  In- 
dian, 48,  9 — to  use  bad,  70,  i  — 
wicked,  72,  15. 

Large,  19,  13;  68,  5  ;  77,  7,  12, 
17 — fish,  19,  10 — it  appears,  77, 
18. 

Lasciviousness,  12,  23. 

Last,  at,  73,  14;  169,  23 — day,  the, 
79,  22 — evening,  153,  24 — sum- 
™^r>  35t  7 — time,  the,  73,  13  ; 
83,  16 — will,  36,  16;  101,4 — 
winter,  35,  6. 

Lasting  peace,  14,  6. 

Lastly,  73,  13  ;   169,  23. 

Lately,  65,  16;   175,  15. 

Lath,  118,  25 ;   119,  3. 

Latterly,  177,  20. 

Laugh,  they,  44,  19 — to,  41,  22 — at 
somebody,  to,  10,  23 — at  some 
one,  to,  12,  16. 

Laughs,  he,  44,  19. 

Laughter,  exclamation  of,  47,  I ; 
48,  8. 

Law,  64,  12. 

Lay  hands  to  something,  to,  64,  14 
— on,  to,  26,  18 — up  one  treasure 
only,  to,  95,  12. 

Laziness,  99,  20. 

Lazy,  99,  19 — he  is,  41,  13 — miser- 
ably, 98,  20 — to  be,  41,   13. 

Lead,  136,  20— to,  123,  4 — a  hea- 
thenish life,  to,  93,  19 — each 
other,  to,  123,  3. 

Leaf,  28,  16;  177,  7 — over  the,  25, 
II. 

Leaks,  it,  176,  20. 


Leanness,  17,  20. 

Leap  over,  to,  60,  7. 

Leaps,  it,  65,  15. 

Learn,  17,  19;  149,  18 — to  become, 

166,  26. 

Leather,  27,  15 — breeches,  27,  17 
— string,  71,  2;  83,  I ;   129,  12. 

Leave,  loi,  5 — behind,  to,  95,  10 
— off,  to,  16,  4;  119,  7 — out,  to, 
64,  3 — over,  to,  18,  6 — some  one 
to,  loi,  6. 

Leaves,   55,     20 — come    out,    the, 

167,  19 — grow  red,  the,  68,  26 — 
it  is  full  of,  28,  16 — of  a  tree,  28, 
16 — turn  red,  68,  21. 

Left  hand,  81,  3— to  the,  81,  3. 
Leg,  157,   16 — the   main  smew  of 

the,  93,  23. 
Leisure,  to  be  at,  58,  4. 
Lend    me,   55,    18 — to,  53,    12 — a 

hand,  to,  164,  6. 
Length,  12,  i,  13;   131,  10. 
Lenni  Lenape,  one  of  the  three  tribes 

of  the,  148,  12. 
Leprous,  to  be,  31,  26. 
Less,  31,21;   loi,   16;    loi,  20 — 

to  be,  135,  15. 
Let  alone,  50,  1 1 — it  alone,  52,  4 — 

'O)  ^Si  3 — '^^>  to>  iiQ)  9 — blood, 

to,    105,  9 — somebody   have  the 

preference,  to,  49,  18 — somebody 

in,  to,  75,  19. 
Letter,  26,  l  ;  62,  24;  72,  19. 
Level,  129,  5. 
Levity,  39,  5. 
Liar,  a,  10,  14 — to  make  to  a,  37, 

I. 
Liberate,  to,  96,  15. 
Liberty,  96,  21. 
Lice,  head,  49,  14. 
Lick,  to,  99,  10. 
Lid,  a,  56,  9,  14. 
Lie,  a,  55,  17 — an  abominable,  98, 

12 — to,  10,    13;  42,  20 — abomi- 


INDEX. 


207 


nably,  to,  98,  11 — down,  to,  64, 
5;  127,  22 — down  to  sleep,  to, 
38,  10 — to  have  told  a  ready,  82, 
21 — on  the  back,  to,  151,  18 — 
sick  in  a  poor  condition,  to,  58, 
15 — still,  to,  28,  13 — with  each 
other,  to,  161,  5. 

Lies,  it,  127,  21;  169,  5 — to  tell, 
36,  I?. 

Life,  53,  10;  61,  17;  62,  l6;  118, 
18— he  who  giveth,  62,  14 — he 
who  is  the,  118,  19 — heathenish, 
90,  18 — miserable,  58,  13 — sor- 
rowful, 149,  9 — to  depart  this,  34, 
19 — to  lead  a  heathenish,  93,  19 
— troublesome,  123,  17;  149,  9 
— word  of,  112,  2. 

Lift  it  up,  35,  I— up,  to,  23,  15; 
118,  9 — up  the  hand,  to,  23,  18. 

Lifted  up,  to  be,  23,  16. 

Light,  42,  II;  60,  17;  149,  16; 
151,  20;  152,  2,  3;  164,  20,  23 — 
giving,  114,  8 — he  who  is  the, 
164,  22 — it  is,  42,  12 — minded- 
ness,  55,  8 — to,  89,  11 — to  be, 
164,  21 — to  make,  22,  26 — to 
somebody,  to  give,  114,  9. 

Lighten,  to,  151,  21. 

Lightens,  it,  124,   14. 

Lightning,  124,  15 — afar  off,  123, 
I — bug,  124,  20;  152,  15 — it 
flashes,  124,  18. 

Like,  135,  7 — as,  32,  18 — it,  I,  102, 
18 — manner,  32,  18 — manner,  in, 
169,  15 — that,  32,  18 — to  be  in 
some  place,  to,  159,19 — to  go,  to, 
160,  13 — to  hear,  to,  160,  14 — 
somebody,  160,  15 — unto,  64,  17, 
18;  72,  7 — what  is  it,  134,  19. 

Likely,  it  is,  156,  3. 

Likes  it,  he,  174,  21. 

Likewise,  33,  11 ;   169,  15. 

Liking,  160,  2. 

Lime,  165,  24. 


Linden  tree,  63,  15;   136,  19. 
Line,  a,  53,  i — boat,  44,  22 — fishing, 

.19.  3.4- 

Linen,  coarse,  19,  12 — fine,  172,  20. 

Linni  Lenape,  one  of  the  three 
tribes  of  the,  85,  14. 

Lip,  168,  15. 

Listen,  17,  i ;  44,  13 — privately,  to, 
139,  5 — to  each  other,  to,  93, 
24. 

Little,  135,  10,  II,  13;  138,  10; 
139,  l;  140,  12,  13— a,  52,  9; 
135,  3 — and  little,  by,  20,  26  ;  21, 
I;  141,  18 — canoe,  20,  10 — dog, 
18,  1 1 — further,  a,  50,  8 — longer, 
a,  47,  18 — man,  63,  18 — one,  141, 
5— owl,  45,  5— pig,  45,  13— tree, 
48,  16 — very,  70,  16;  139,  2,3 — 
while,  a,  63,  16 — while  ago,  a,  40, 
3;  41,  24;  155,  10. 

Live,  he  who  makes,  iii,  27 — he 
who  makes  me,  61,  15 — to,  61, 
14;  62,  15;  118,  17 — blameless, 
to,  152, 17 — by  what,  to,  154, 18 — 
from,  to,  148,  20 — on,  to,  148,  20 
— or  dwell  with  each  other,  to, 
163,  16 — orderly,  to,  152,  17 — so 
long,  to,  131,  8 — to  cause  to,  112, 
I — to  make,  61,  16;  112.  i — 
until  now,  to,  114,  10 — until  now, 
to  cause  to,  114,  11 — willingly, 
to,  160,  7 — with,  to,  163,  4. 

Lively,  I  am,  95,  6 — to  be,  10,  25 
— to  cause  to  be,  61,  16. 

Living,  1x8,  20 — thing,  one,  75,  23. 

Lizard,  38,  20;  86,  17. 

Lo!   127,  15. 

Load,  164,  II — to  carry  a,  90,  7; 
164, 12 — to  fetch  a,  92,  i — some- 
body with  a  burden,  to,  164,  10. 

Loaded,  116,  19. 

Loaf,  small,  12,  18. 

Loathe,  to,  98,  19;   133,  7. 

Loathsome,  to  be,  133,  9. 


208 


INDEX. 


Lock,  cock  of  a  gun,  71,  16 — to,  83, 
II. 

Locked  up,  56,  7. 

Locust,  a,  147,  3 — tree,  honey,  117, 
20. 

Locusts,  109,  10. 

Lodge  at  one's  house,  to,  163,  22. 

Log,  building,  81,  24— for  a  house, 
12,  3 — or  tree,  over  the,  25,  10. 

Logs,  pine,  59,  7. 

Long,  20,  4 ;  45,  24 ;  46,  2,  8  ;  122, 
II — ago,  62,  2  ;  65,  17 ;  171,  14 
— as,  131,  20 — for,  to,  37,  22; 
38,  2 — how,  52,  10— so,  131,  II, 
20 — timber,  13,  lO — to  be,  46,  I 
— to  stay  out,  45,  21 — to  think  a 
thing,  46,  7 — while,  a,  46,  10; 
122,  II. 

Longer,  a  little,  47,  18. 

Look,  33,  12 — painful,  149,  12 — 
sorrowful,  149,  12 — to,  10,  12; 
64,  24;  112,  24 — at  each  other, 
to,  113,  5 — at  somebody,  to,  113, 
I — back,  to,  44,  16;  46,  16 — 
beyond,  to,  175,  19 — fine,  to,  174, 
23 — for,  to,  92,  I — for  something, 
to,  92,  3 — friendly,  to,  60,  19 — 
hither,  to,  114,  17 — over,  to,  175, 
19 — steadfastly  at  something,  to, 
100, 4 — upon  as  an  honor,  to,  176, 
16. 

Looking-glass,  113,  18. 

Looking  poorly,  10,  22. 

Looks  black,  it,  134,  li — cleanly, 
it,  116,  2 — disagreeable,  it,  145, 
21 — great,  it,  77,  18 — otherwise, 
it,  115,  18 — quite  otherwise,  147, 
10 — strange,  he, 147,  11 — strange, 
it,  145,  21  ;  147,  5 — well,  it,  174, 
22 — white,  it,  166,  4. 

Loose,  to,  169,  8 — to  cut,  66,  6. 

Loosen,  to,  40,  13;  59,  15. 

Loosening,  59,  14. 

Lord,  96,  1 1 — the,  93,  5. 


Lose,  to,  21,  13. 

Loss,  21,  12 ;   169,  12. 

Loss  what  to  do,  to  be  at  a,  122,  4. 

Loud,  to  speak,  19,  14;   68,  8. 

Love,  14,  19 — he  that  is,  14,  20 — if 
you,  14,  16 — better,  to,  51,  3 — to 
feel,  14,  21 — one  another,  to,  14, 
18 — somebody,  to,  14,  16. 

Lover,  my,  31,  7 — of  hunting,  159, 
20. 

Loving,  14,  22. 

Low,  135,  10,  II,  13,  14 —  -minded 

person,   83,  2 priced,  137,  21 

— spirited,  to  be,  loi,  13 — water, 
36,  22. 

Lower,  to  be,  135,  15. 

Lowliness  of  mind.  138,  3. 

Lowly-minded, to  be,  138,  i. 

Luck,  to  miss  one's,  108,  21. 

Lucky,  99,  13 — the,  153,  23. 

Lukewarm,  43,  23. 

Luminous,  87,  3. 

Lunch,  97,  10. 

Lust,  to,  36,  15. 

Lying,  98,  26. 


Madman,  a,  37,  3. 

Majestic,  the  most,  34,  6. 

Majesty,  17,  10. 

Make,  I,  73,  23 — bread,  I,  12,  17 — 
to,  42,  21 ;  73,  23—85,  I — a 
great  noise,  to,  37,  15 — a  house 
ready,  to,  43,  10 — an  offering,  to, 
157,  13 — even,  to,  60,  14 — easy, 
to,  22,  26 — free,  to,  96,  15 — 
light,  to,  22,  26 — ready,  to,  43,  14 
— somebody,  to,  157,  10 — some- 
thing, to,  43,7 — something,  to  be 
able  to,  98,  27 — to  a  chief  or 
king,  to,  123,  14 — to  a  liar,  10,37, 
I — use  of,  to,  22,  6  ;  24,  13  ;  35, 
II — well  to,  175,  10 — wet,  to,  56, 
18. 


INDEX. 


209 


Maker,  74,  i. 

Makes  a  terrible  noise,  it,  37,  16. 

Male,  genitals,  158,  19 — of  beasts, 

63,  20 — of  birds   and  fowls,  63, 

21. 
Maltreat  somebody,  to,  44,  15. 
Mamma,  45,  15. 
Man,  51,  6;  63,   17;   112,  5;   155, 

15,  19 — a  rich,  14,  14 — a  single, 

53,   6 — chief,    53,     14— cunning, 

63,    26— little,  63,    18— old,  84, 

22. 
Man's  cousin,  a,  175,  16. 
Manfully,  63,  22. 
Manifest,  86,  4 — to  make,  58,   19; 

86,4. 
Manifested,  to  be,  93,  6. 
Manifold,  27,   18 — in   the  belly  of 

animals,  113,  14. 
Mankind,  112,  5,  6. 
Manner,  29,  14 — in  a  heavy,  58,  10 

— in    another,   58,   12 — then,    in 

what,  138,  II — to  be    in  a  like, 

141,  9 — to  preach  in  such  a,  65,  8. 
Many,  28,  7  ;  68, 4 — as,  as,  34,  1 2 — 

as  are  here,  as,  34,  9 — nights,  28, 

8 — there  were,  28,  7. 
Maple  sugar,  13,  17 — tree,  128,  10. 
March,  the  month,  77,  25  ;   127,  7. 
Mark,  a,  52,  19;  53,  i — to  shoot  at 

a,  12,  24 ;   15,  22. 
Marks,  one    who  understands  the, 

52.  19- 
Marriage,  158,  3 — his   relation  by, 

155.  7— my,  155,  8. 
Married,  he  is,  158,  5 — people,  158, 

4 — person,  158,  6. 
Marry,  to,  158,  5. 
Marshy,  23,  22 — deeply,  46,  6. 
Marten,  a,  166,  2. 
Martyr,  102,   17. 
Master,  96,  1 1 — of  the  house,  155, 

23 — of,  to  be,  96,  22 — to  be  one's 

own,  96,  18. 


Mat  made  of  rushes,  20,  20. 

Material,  corporeal,  79,  4. 

Matter,    78,    5;  79,    23;    80,    2 — 

stands,  thus  the,  91,  2. 
Mattery,  80,  3. 
Mature,  to,  43,  5. 
Maul,  104,  16. 
May,  139,  12 — apple,  74,    19 — be, 

30,  6. 
Me,  lend,  55,  18. 
Meadow,  bog,  129,  2. 
Meager,  to  grow,  166,  26. 
Meal,  parched,  120,  6;    135,  18. 
Mean,  135,  10. 
Meaning  of  the  word,  61,  5. 
Means,  by  no,  24,  4,  6  ;   139,  20. 
Meat,    103,    17 — a   little  piece  of, 

103,   18 — a  piece   of,   103,  17 — 

salt,  130,  19 — to  cut,  105,  II. 
Mediator,  35,  10. 
Medicine,  26,  3. 
Meditate  something  good  or  bad, 

to  hatch  or,  42,  20. 
Meek,  the,  139,  24— to  be,  141,  14. 
Meet,    to,  76,    5;     89,    21 — each 

other,  to,  89,   23 — somebody,  to, 

89,  22 — somebody,  to  go  to,  117, 

13- 

Meeting  house,  76,  7. 
Melancholy,  to  be,  123,   21  ;  130, 

8. 
Melt,  to,  65,  2. 
Melted,  65,  i. 
Melts,  it,  64,  20. 
Member,  134,  2. 
Men,  wise,  63,  25. 
Mend,  to,  29,  i  ;  65,  9 — in  health, 

to,  53,  9- 
Mended,  27,  21. 
Mental  anguish,  58,  9. 
Mention,  to,  159,  16. 
Mentioned,  159,  17. 
Merchandise,  61,  10;  78,  19. 
Merchant,  80,  18. 


210 


INDEX. 


Merciful,  lo,  21  ;  39,  3;  41,  5 — he 
who  is,  41,  4 — to  be,  40,  2 — to- 
ward one  another,  to  be,  41,  i. 

Mercy,  39,  4;  41,  3. 

Merit,  110,  8;   169,  17. 

Merry,  173,  15— to  be,  44,  7;  173, 

12. 

Message,  178,  i. 

Messenger,  33,  19;  42,  2. 

Messengers,  33,  18 — his,  155,  12. 

Middle  finger,  62,  7 — in  the,  63,  2 
— of  a  piece  of  ground,  61,  18 — 
of  the  forehead,  62,  6 — of  the 
thigh,  61,  13 — of  winter,  62,  4 — 
the,  62,  3. 

Midnight,  62,  5. 

Midst,  62,  3 — in  our,  152,  18;  169, 
II. 

Might,  152,  24. 

Mighty,  17,  22;  18,1;  46,12 — the, 
30,  16. 

Mild,   106,   I;     141,   15,   18 — God, 

139.  24. 
Mildness,  169,  4. 
Milk,    99,    21 — skim,    81,    19 — to, 

M7.  7- 

Mill,  135,  19. 

Milt,  152,  7. 

Mind,  calmness  of,  15,  8;  55,  12 — 
contrary,  22,  13 — lowliness  of, 
138,  3 — made  up,  to  have  one's, 
125,  10 — of  one,  71,  22 — put  me 
in,  84,  17 — the  being  of  one,  95, 
19 — to  be  in  anguish  of,  58,  8 — 
to  be  indisposed  in,  144,  20 — to 
be  of  a  calm,  55,  1 1 — to  be  of  an 
indifferent,  58,  6 — to  be  of  one, 
71,  18,  23;  95,  14 — to  be  of  one 
heart  and,  95,  18 — to  be  settled 
in,  72,  3 — to  be  troubled  in,  ii, 
20;  59,  10;  75,  18;  123,  22 — 
to  create  with  the,  42,  18 — to 
have  made  up  one's,  43,  12 — to 
make  of  one,  71,  19. 


Minded,  as  he  is,  33,  21 — to  be 
high,  68,  2 — to  be  lowly,  138,  1. 

Minister,  115,  4. 

Mink,  160,  20. 

Miracle,  to  perform  a,  37,  17. 

Mire,  deep,  46,  5. 

Miry,  98,  17. 

Misbehavior,  144,  2. 

Miscarry,  to,  130,  14. 

Mischief,  to  make,  75,  7. 

Miserable,  41,  6;  58,  14;  149,  10 — 
life,  58,  13 — to  be,  41,  8;  58,  17 — 
slave,  to  be  a,  41,  7. 

Miserably,  to  perish,  31,  26. 

Misfortune,  177,  i. 

Misled,  those  who  have  been,  141, 

7- 

Miss  one's  luck  or  chance,  to,  108, 
21 — the  time,  to,  107,  22. 

Mist,  25,  5. 

Mistake,  to  make  a,  117,  21. 

Misunderstand,  to,  144,  8. 

Misunderstanding,  144,  9. 

Mix  clay,  to,  23,  25. 

Mixed,  156,  18. 

Moan,  to,  130,  8. 

Mock  or  laugh  at  somebody,  to,  10, 
23 — somebody,  to,  12,  16;  90, 
22;    153,  19. 

Mocking,  11,  2. 

Modest,  135,  13;   138,  4,  9. 

Moisleneth,  he  that,  155,  11. 

Money,  45,  i. 

Month,  43,  21 — in  which  the  deer 
begin  to  turn  gray,  123,  10 — in 
which  the  frogs  begin  to  croak, 
the,  147,  14 — of  August,  the,  159, 
15 — of  falling  leaves,  the,  119,  13 
— of  March,  the,  127,  7 — when 
cold  makes  the  trees  crack,  the, 

77,  I- 
Moon,  the,  143,  17. 
More,  18,  8 — by  degrees,  21,  15  — 

powerful,   17,    16 — still,  50,  7 — 


INDEX. 


211 


the,    more    and   more,   20,    26 ; 
21,  I. 

Moreover,  24,  5. 

Morning,  165,  22 — cold,  137,  13  ; 
142,  9 — early  in  the,  15,  10;  16, 
6;  131,  2,  3 — fine,  172,  5 — good, 
165,  21 — this,  31,  22;  127,  23 — 
unpleasant,  6g,  23. 

Mortal,  21,  6;  76,  24. 

Mortar,  135,  19. 

Mosquito,  123,  16. 

Moss  on  trees,  84,  10. 

Most,  33,  25 — gracious  one,  the,  34, 
2 — holy,  the,  34,  i  —  majestic,  the, 
34, 6 — part,  for  the,  45,  3 — power- 
ful, 33.  23;  34,  6. 

Mostly,  45,  3. 

Moth,  a,  103,  19. 

Mother,  45,  15;  36,  23 — the  (of 
breast),  53,  7. 

Motherin-law,  85,  6. 

Motherless,  129,  24. 

Mould,  bullet,  18,  20. 

Mound,  a,  154,  2. 

Mountain,  150,  6 — top  of,  123,  7. 

Mountainous,  150,  9. 

Mouse,  12,  20;  21,  8;   118,  8. 

Mouth,  the,  153,  13 — tied  in  the, 
44,  14 — to  open  the,  142,  23; 
147,  20 — to  shut  the,  124,  10. 

Moved,  116,  II. 

Moves,  it,  58,  25 — swiftly,  it,  59, 
20. 

Mow,  to,  29,  9 ;  74,  8. 

Much,  27,  13;  28,  7;  68,  4;  77, 
10,  1 1 — almost  too,  36,  10 — as, 
as,  34,  12 — as  one  owes,  as,  34, 
10 — how,  52,  6,  8 — more,  18,  8 
— so  as,  32,  18 — too,  168,  8,  9 — 
so    very,  49,   17 — very,  49,    i6, 

17- 
Mud,  23,  21 — deep,  46,  5. 
Muddy,  23,  22;  98,    17 — creek  in 

a  swamp,  74,  21. 
R 


Mulberry,  165,  4. 

Multitude,  77,  9. 

Murder,  53,  21  —  to,  96,  25 — se- 
cretly, to,  53,  20. 

Murderer,  16,  26 — a  secret,  53,  22. 

Murderous,  97,  i. 

Muscle,  31,  2;  118,  13 — a,  145,  25 
— little,  146,  I. 

Musical  instrument,  12,  II. 

Muskrat,  29,  10. 

Must,  23,  12. 

My,  85,  16. 

Myself,  95,  25. 

Mystery,  38,  i. 


Nail,  87, 15 — my,  157, 15 — on  hand 
or   foot,  157,   15 — to  drive  in  a, 

39.  19- 
Naked,  82,  18;  87,  3;   133,  22 — to 
be,  133,  23 — to  make  somebody, 

133.  24- 
Name,  153,  10;   169,  19 — a,  66,  16 

— the,  67,  9 — to,  157,  8. 
Named,  67,  8  ;   159,   17 — so  he  is, 

32,  17- 
Names,  one,  he,  157,  8. 
Narrowly,  154,  21. 
Nasty,  98,    21 — smelled,   71,    5 — 

talk,  98,  26— to  talk,  98,  25 — to 

taste,  98,  16 — work,  98,  15. 
Nature,  to  be  by,  89,  7. 
Naughty,  72,  14. 
Navel,  the,  99,  2;  163,  17. 
Near,   38,   4;    no,    18;    22,    26; 

113,    25— by,  41,  14;    no,   19; 

167,  24 — somebody,  to  be,  no, 

24 — the   time  is,  no,  25 — very, 

36,    18. 
Nearly,  45,  3  ;  almost,  36,  10. 
Nearness,  41,  15. 
Necessary,  9,  10. 
Necessitated,  23,  12. 
Neck,  45,  6;  103,6;   156,11. 


212 


INDEX. 


Need,  to  be  in,  loi,  17. 

Needle,  a,  30,  5. 

Negro,  94,  1 1 ;   134,  6. 

Neighbor,  no,  20. 

Neither,  165,  i. 

Nephew,  66,  7,  23. 

Nest,  a,  13,  II — bird's,  150,  i. 

Net,  of  yarn,  50, 16 — to  catch  some- 
thing with  a,  13,  7. 

Nettle,  157,  I. 

Never,  24,  4;    134,  18. 

Nevermore,  24,  4. 

Nevertheless,  16,  14;  50,  4,  11  ; 
121,  3. 

New,  177,  22 — it  is,  177,  23 — shoe, 
177,  21. 

News,  good,  172,  II;  174,  17. 

Next  year,  36,    12. 

Nice,  128,  12. 

Nigh,  no,  22 — it  draweth,  in,  15. 

Night,  117,  II — at  or  by,  97,  16 — 
by,  117,  9;  cold,  142,  18 — 
-hawk,  117,  3 — it  was,  117,  9 — 
last,  143,  16;  153,  24 — moder- 
ately warm,  136,  23 — one,  loi, 
8 — only  one,  loi,  9 — sets  in, 
117,  12 — to  go  by,  97,  17 — walk- 
er,  102,   12. 

Nights,  three,  88,  23. 

Nimble,  to  be,  162,  18. 

Nine,  113,  22 — hundred,  113,  23. 

Ninety,  113,  24. 

No,  24,  4,  6 ;  75,  8,  9  ;  .134,  18. 

Nobody,  24,  4. 

Noise,  it  makes  a  terrible,  37,  16 — 
to  make  a  great,  37,  15 — to  make 
an  ugly,  98,  13. 

Noisy,  98,  26 — to  be,   10,  25  ;  98, 

25- 
Noon,  105,  4. 
Nor,  165,  X. 
North,    66,  12 — side   of  a  hill,  on 

the,  17,  4 — wind,  66,  11. 
Northerly,  66,  12. 


Northward,  66,   12,  13. 

Nose,  158,  8 — to  bleed  at  the,  79, 

12 — to  blow  the,  124,  II — to  run 

at  the,  132,  I. 
Not,  24,4;   75,  8;   134,  iS — at  all, 

24,4;   134,    18;   139,20 — even, 

50,  II — unly,  130,  15 — too  dear, 

140,    16— yet,   35,  3,  4;  93,  15, 

16,  17;  94,  14. 
Notch,  to,  37,  21 — a  tree,  to,  162, 

20. 
Nothing,  24,  4. 
Notice  of,  to  take  no,  175,  20. 
Nourishment,  126,  7. 
November,  160,  18. 
Now,  51,  10,  13,  20;  64,  8;   178,8 

— and  then,  136,  15;   137,   15 — 

just,  40,  3 — till,  51,  13 — until,  88, 

I. 
Nowhere,  75,  8. 
Nurse,  92,  24 — a,  102,  14 — child's, 

102,  3 — to,  100,  I  I. 
Nut,  white  hickory,  142,  2. 


0,164,19 — my!  31,  15 — that!  178, 

9- 
Oak,  black,  162,  7 — Spanish,  19,  ix 
— swamp,    109,   13 — white,   161, 

13- 
Oar,  145,  7 — paddle,  136,  16. 
Obedience,  25,  21. 
Obedient,  25,  22. 
Obey,  to,  25,  20. 
Object,  to  have  one,  95,  14. 
Obliged,  23,  12. 
Oblique,  116,  5 — it  is,  116,  8. 
Ocean,  54,  15. 
October,  119,  13. 
Odd,  it  seems,  147,  5. 
Oddness,  145,  17. 
Odoriferous,  160,  9. 

Of,  149.3;   177.  II- 

Off,  to  break,  35,   17;   105,  13— to 


INDEX. 


213 


fire,  io6,  7 — to  leave,  i6,  4  ;   119, 
7 — to  take  or  pull,  46,  25  ;  64, 4; 
68,  20. 
OfFering,  157,  11 — to  make  an,  157, 
13 — to   somebody,   to    make  an, 

157.  lo- 

Office,  an,  64,  11 — one  holding  an, 
64,   II. 

Often,  20,  3;  136,  15;  138,  22 — 
as,  32,  18 — as,  as,  34,  11 — so,  32, 
18;   135,  3- 

Oh!  24,  16;  164,  19;  167,  8 — 
that!  51,  14,  15. 

Oil,  118,  14 — to  beat,  118,  15. 

Old,  53,  II;  78,  I,  2,  3  ;  83,  10 — 
field,  77,  26 — from  use,  78,  4 — 
man,  84,  22 — of,  164,  i8 — to  be, 
53,  13;  84,  21 — tree, 77,  24;  122, 
I — woman,  27,  8. 

Older  people,  53,  11. 

On,  50,  12;  149,  2. 

Once,  137,  15 — more,  61,  2;  101, 
7 ;  146,  24. 

One,  71,  24;  75,23;  76,4;  79,  17; 
95,  16,  17 — a  certain,  79,  17 — 
another,  to  love,  14,  18 — eyed, 
93,  14 — holding  an  office,  64, 
II — hundred,  46,  21 ;  95,  13 — 
living  thing,  75.  23— night,  95, 
20;  loi,  8— of  these  days,  32,  13 
— only,  loi,  7 — person,  71,  21  ; 
79,  19 — that  is  humble,  40,  20 — 
thousand,  140,  5 — to  become,  79, 
20. 

One's  own  person,  96,  24. 

Onion,  148,  11 — an,  160,  24. 

Only,  130,  15,  17 — if,  15,  12 — one, 
71,  24;  76,  4;  loi,  7 — one,  the, 
93.  12. 

Oozes  out,  it,  176,  20. 

Open,  139,  10;  140,  14;  143,  3— 
arms,  139,  11 — burst,  140,  14 — 
to,  139,  15;  143,  I — to  fall  and 
burst,   29,   5 — the  door,  to,  142, 


25 — the  mouth,  to,  142,  23 ;  147, 

20. 
Openly,  87,  3. 
Opinion,  65,  6 — to  be  of,  39,  7  ;  44, 

9;  91,  19. 
Opossum,  87,  II ;  166,  10. 
Opposite,    143,    13;     156,     10 — he 

lives,  156,  10. 
Or,  128,  7  ;  130,  2. 
Order,  to  put  a  house  in,  43,  10. 
Orderly  person,  an,  153,  25. 
Orderly,  to  do,  72,  i — to  live,  152, 

17- 

Original,  63,  12. 

Ornament,  173,  20. 

Orphan,  an,  128,  15. 

Other,  136,  21 ;  137,  4 — side,  on 
the,  25,  14,  15. 

Otherwise,  58,  12 ;  85,  15;  107,25; 
108,  6;  115,  17;  144,  14 — by  far, 
85,  15 — it  looks,  115,  18. 

Otter,  45,  23. 

Out  of,  50,  12;  149,  2 — of  doors, 
56,  6 — of  this  place,  56,  6 — to 
drive,  40,  12 — to  go  all,  154,  11. 

Outrun  some  one,  to,  96,  7. 

Outstretched,   129,    17 — arms,  129, 

23- 

Oven,  an,  38,  17. 

Over,  25,  14,  15;  143,  13 — frozen, 
56,  13  — or  beyond  the  hill,  25,  6 
— the  fence,  25,  12 — the  lake, 
25,  13 — the  leaf,  25,  11 — the  log 
or  tree,  25,  10 — the  rain  is,  66, 
14 — the  water,  37,  5 — there,  25, 
14,  15;  37,  5;  50,  5— to  leave, 
18,  6 — to  look,  175,  19. 

Overcome,  to,  18,  5  ;  109,  19. 

Overflowed  with  water,  120,  8. 

Overgrown  with  weeds,  65,  10. 

Overhead,  131,  7. 

Overlook,  to,  175,  20. 

Overseer,  39,  13. 

Overset,  to,  44,  21. 


214 


INDEX. 


Owes,  as  much  as  one,  34,  10. 
Owl,  45,  4— little,  45,  5. 
Own,  to,  96,  22. 
Oysters,  132,  20. 


Packed,  ready,  43,  24. 

Paddle,  145,  7 — to,  145,  10. 

Pail,  water,  153,  17. 

Pain,  159,  13 — bitter,  162,  4 — ex- 
clamation of,  31,  15;  52,  23 — in 
the  breast,  153,  15 — sorrowful, 
130,  6 — to  endure,  73,  I — to 
feel,  130,  5;  159,  11,  12— to 
feel  great,  14,  5 — to  feel  less, 
31,  18 — to  feel  sore,  162,  3 — to 
suffer,  24,  20. 

Painful,  II,  24;  25,  3;  149,  5,  6, 
10;  168,  16 — death,  24,  2 — look, 
149,  12 — to  feel,  149,  7. 

Pale,  166,  14. 

Palm  of  the  hand,  148,  2. 

Panther,  12,  15,  16. 

Papaw  tree,  70,  21. 

Parable,  34,  14 — to  speak,  a,  31,  l ; 

34.  13- 
Pardon,  to  ask,  78,  23. 
Parent,  154,  24. 
Partaker,  the  being  made,  22,  8 — to 

be  made,  22,  7. 
Partridge,  119,  18. 
Pass  by,  to,  17,  7  ;  66,  15. 
Pastime,  11,  i. 

Pasture,  good,  172,  19 — to,  100,  18. 
Patch,  a,  29,  2 — to,  29,  i. 
Patched,  27,  21. 
Path,  21,  3;  56,  25. 
Patience,  115,  3. 
Patient,  109,  4— the,  139,  24. 
Paw,  pretty  little,  174,  8. 
Pay,    109,  20 — to,    30,    3,   4 — one 

another,  to,  30,  I. 
Payment,  30,  i. 
Peace,    60,     20 — lasting,    14,    6 — 


treaty,  of,  173,  3 — with  one  an- 
other, to  be  at,  172,  2. 

Peaceable,  60,  21 — very,  14,  7. 

Peaceful,  60,  21. 

Peach,  115,  19. 

Peal  off  the  rind  of  a  tree,  to,  26, 
16, 

Pea-vines,  124,  2. 

Penetrates  my  heart,  it,  34,  25. 

Pent  house,  117,  18. 

People,  96,  9 — among  white,  130, 
23 — married,  158,  4 — older,  53, 
II. 

Perceive,  to,  91,  13 — somebody,  to, 
loi,  10. 

Perdition,  73,  15. 

Perform  a  miracle,  to,  37,  17 — to 
be  unable  to,  16,  9;  107,  18. 

Perhaps,  30,  6 ;  88,  i ;  117,  15,  19; 
136,  24;  137,  15,  17;  156,  2— 
then, III,  19. 

Perish  miserably,  to,  31,  26. 

Permit,  to,  63,  3,  4. 

Perplexed,  to  be,  58,  8. 

Perplexity,  58,  9;  122,  5. 

Persecute,  to,  36,  13  ;  38,  5. 

Persevere,  to,  146,  20. 

Person,  a  blind,  38,  25 — a  deaf,  38, 
24 — an  orderly,  well-behaved, 
153,  25 — an  upright,  125,  6 — 
low-minded,  83,  2 — one,  71,  21; 
79,  19 — pious,  154,  4 — white, 
151.  15— young,  177,  19. 

Personal,  150,  12. 

Persons,  double  plural  termination 
denoting  deceased,  91,  i. 

Persuade  somebody,  to,  13,  21. 

Petition,  160,  26. 

Petticoat,  149,  19. 

Pewter  spoon,  13,  15. 

Pheasant,  a,  104,  9. 

Physic,  26,  3 — good,  153,  22;  170, 

9- 
Physician,  53,  8. 


INDEX. 


215 


Pick  up,  to,  76,  10. 

Pickled,  132,  5. 

Piece,  a,  108,  15 — of  bread,  12,  18 

— to  cut  a,  108,  14. 
Pieces,  rent  in,  115,  9 — to  tear  in, 

66,4. 
Pierced,  140,  10 — through,  126,  11 ; 

140,  II. 
Pig,  little,  45,  13. 
Pigeon,  ig,  24. 

Pike  fish,  54,  5  ;  121,  17  ;  145,  II. 
Pilgrim,  86,  2. 
Pillow,  80,  I. 

Pincers,  47,  20 — pair  of,  136,  3,  12. 
Pine,  59,  6 — logs,  59,  7 — nuts,  164, 

9 — swamp,  81,  2 — tree,  28,  19 — 

white,   116,    15 — wood,   28,    19; 

.59,  17- 

Pious  person,  154,  4. 

Pipe  for  smoking,  a,  49,  9 — pump- 
kin-stem, 119, 25. 

Pismire,  33,  8. 

Piss,  to,  130,  12. 

Pitch  dark,  14,  9. 

Pity,  'tis  a,  15,  23. 

Place,  30,  10;  139,  18 — an  unin- 
habitated,  139,  8 — his,  30,  10, 
II — in  some,  81,  12 — in  the 
second,  98,  6 — out  of  this,  56, 
6 — to,  48,  7 — to  be  in  a  good, 
174,  2 — to  belong  to  a,  and  to 
be  from  a,  155,  2— to  like  to  be 
in  some,  159,  19 — to  sleep  on, 
12,  9— to  watch,  a,  102,  9. 

Places,  in  some,  81,  18. 

Plain,  80,  17 — a  wide,  62,  i;  78, 
14 — on  the  end  of  the,  161,  24 — 
without  trees,  a,  73,  4. 

Plainly,  to  speak,  174,  5. 

Plant,  to,  47,  10 — a  large  piece  of 
ground,  to,  77,  16 — unwillingly, 
to,  129,  7. 

Plantation,  47,  9 — that  side  of  the, 
25.  9- 


Planter,  47,  11. 

Planting,  to   be   done,  42,    26 — to 

come  from,  21,  21. 
Play,  to,  10,  25  ;  108,  18. 
Please,  15,  12. 

Pleased  with,  to  be,  160,  il. 
Pleases  him,  it,  174,  21. 
Pleasure,  to  do  a,    160,  4 — to    do 

somebody,  a,    160,   8 — to  travel 

with,  160,   13. 
Plenty,  156,  15,   16,    19 — of  bears, 

69,  3 — of  deer,  14,  4 — to  have, 

156,  17- 
Pliable,  169,  2. 
Plough,  60,  23. 
Plum,  the  wild  red,  105,  5  ;    132, 

16. 
Plume  of  fowls,  84,  9. 
Plural    termination    denoting     de- 
ceased persons,  91,  i. 
Pocket-book,  26,  2. 
Point,  161,  22 — a  sharp,  176,  2 — of 

an  island,  the,  157,  6. 
Pointed,  106,  i. 
Poison  vine,  121,  2. 
Pole,  setting,  37,  7. 
Pole-cat,  a,  130,  II. 
Polish,  to,  59,  4;  60,  12. 
Pond,  a,  109,  I. 
Poor,  17,  19;  23,  8;  41,  6;   58,  13, 

14 — to  be,  41,  8;  58,  17. 
Poorly,  looking,  10,  22 — to  be,  58, 

17- 
Poplar,  20,  II. 

Porch  in  front  of  a  house,  117,  18. 
Possess,  to,  61,  II ;   89,  4;   103,  22 

— some  one,  to,   103,   20;    170, 

II. 
Pot,  23,  23 ;   49,  5 — with  feet,  an 

iron,  157,  17. 
Potato,    48,    20,    21 — wild    white, 

166,  II. 
Pothook,  49,  3. 
Pound,  to,  118,  9;  135,  21. 


216 


INDEX. 


Pour  out,  to,  133,  15. 

Powder,  119, 10. 

Power,  146,  9,  17  ;  153,  24 — greater, 
17,  10 — of  endurance,  15,2 — over 
another,  to  have,  17, 17 — spiritual, 

74,  II. 

Powerful,  17,  16;  30,  16 — more, 
17,  16 — most,  33,  23  ;  34,  6. 

Prairie,  a,  73,  4. 

Praise,  20,  6  ;  25,  19;  67,  15  ;  73,  8 
— the  being  elated  by,  19,  8 — the 
receiving  of,  67,  14 — to,  20,  2 ; 
25.  17;  73,  6,  9 — somebody,  25, 
18  ;  67,  12,  13. 

Praised,  the  being,  73,  7;  170,  14 
— to  be,  170,  13. 

Pray,  to,  109,  21 — for,  to,  176,  10 
— for  one  another,  no,  4 — for 
somebody,  to,  no,  2 — to  some- 
body, to,  109,  22. 

Prayer,  no,  6 — house  of,  no,  7. 

Preach,  to,  112,  3,  9 — in  such  a 
manner,  to,  65,  8. 

Preacher,  115,  4. 

Precious,  67,  16  ;  152,  25;   158,  22. 

Prefer,  to,  49,  19;  51,  3. 

Preference,  to  let  somebody  have 
the,  49,  18. 

Pregnant,  to  be,  118,  6. 

Prepare,  to,  43,  14 — food,  to,  156, 
21. 

Prepared,  to  be,  42,  23. 

Presence  of,  in,  33,  13. 

Present,  at,  112,  8 — to  be,  in,  23. 

Presently,  41,  24;  51,  13;  83,  12. 

Preserve,  to,  169,  6 — one's  life  until 
this  time,  to,  n4,  11. 

Preserver,  39,  13. 

Press,  to,  132,  7,  8. 

Prettiness,  175,  4. 

Pretty,  25,  23;  120,5;  128,  12; 
174,  12;  175.3,7- 

Prevaricate,  to,  107,  14. 

Prevent,  to,  12,  14. 


Price,  61,  21 — fair,   140,   16 — falls 

in,  17,  6 — to  set,  a,  61,  20. 
Pride,  28,  5  ;  68,  3  ;    173,  17 — self, 

77,  19- 
Prison,  56,  il. 
Prisoner,  to  take  some  one,  91,  6; 

136,  17;  142,  3. 
Prisoners,  139,  21. 
Privately,  to  hear,  139,  6 — to  listen, 

139,  5 — to  steal  away,  54,  3. 
Privilege,  96,  23. 
Prize  above  everything,  to,  18,  3. 
Probable,  156,  3. 
Procreation,  43,  9. 
Produce  fruit,  to,  43,  8. 
Profit,  168,  20. 
Profits  little,  it,  73,  22. 
Progress,  not  to,  55,  13. 
Promise,  to  keep  one's,  171,  18. 
Pronounce  well,  to,  174,  5. 
Proper,  71,  25. 
Properly,  to  do,  72,  I. 
Prosperity,  172,  10. 
Prostrate,  to,  106,  11. 
Protect,  to,  170,  5. 
Proud,  to  be,  68,  2  ;  173,  16. 
Proved  true,  it  has,  43,  1 1. 
Provision,  86,  12 — for  a  journey,  to 

make,  97,  10 — scarcity  of,  76,  11, 
Prudent,  156,  6. 
Puckery,  142,  i. 
Pull,  to,  105,  23 — apart,  to,  66,  4 — 

off,  to,  46,  25  ;  68,  20 — somebody 

out  of  the  water,  to,  35,  20. 
Pulsation,  the,  44,  24. 
Pulse,  the,  44,  24. 
Pumpkin,  40,  9;  68,  6 — seeds,  158, 

21 — stem-pipe,  119,  25. 
Punk,  105,  15. 
Pup,  18,  n. 

Pupil  of  the  eye,  the,  26,  6. 
Purchase,  78,  20 — to,  15,  14. 
Pure,  40,  5,  6  ;  63,  12  ;   115,  16,  21 

— to  be  made,  115,  15. 


INDEX. 


217 


Purely,  78,  15. 

Purity,  115,  22. 

Purpose,  it  answers  the,  140,  21  — 
to  be  fixed  in,  72,  3 — to  no,  102, 
16. 

Pursue  each  other,  to,  92,  9 — some- 
body, to,  92,  8. 

Push,  to,  41,  25 — back,  to,  45,  10. 

Put,  to,  48,  7 — elsewhere,  to,  107, 
24 — in,  to,  116,  18 — in  a  bag,  to, 
116,  20 — me  in  mind,  84,  17 — 
on,  to,  116,  24 — on  clothes,  to, 
13,  2 — to  death,  to,  96,  25 — 
under,  to,  139,  18 — up,  to,  103, 
22  ;  172,  24. 

Putrid,  80,  3. 


Quarrel,  37,  2;  55,  16— to,  55,  15. 
Quench  fire,  to,  23,  26. 
Question  each  other,  to,  loi,  3. 
Quick,  be,   131,  9— of  hearing,  to 

be,  II,  4. 
Quickly,  to  die,  22,  22. 
Quickness,  17,  2. 
Quiet,  to  be,  55,  10. 
Quill,  84,  19. 
Quit,  to,  16,  4;  119,  6 — each  other, 

to,  95,  8. 
Quite,  78,15;  82,  14;  85,  15;  139, 

20 — different,  85,    15 — too,   50, 

II. 


Rabbit,  87,  18  ;    145,  g. 
Raccoon,  88,  12 — a,  34,  26. 
Raft,  23,  5. 
Rafter,   54,    14 — on  the   roof  of  a 

house,  64,   13. 
Ragged,  117,  25. 
Rail,  fence,  80,  22. 
Rain  is  over,  the,  66,  14 — land,  16, 

13 — showers  of,  113,  19 — warm, 

49.  15- 


Rains,  it,  133,  17 — by  showers,  it, 
119,  16 — hard,  it,  57,  16 — now 
and  then,  it,  113,  19;  119,  16. 

Rainy,  16,  13 — weather,  98,  18. 

Raise,  to,  97,  15 — somebody  up,  to, 
20,  17 — the  eye,  to,  23,  20. 

Rakish,  to  be,  55,  9. 

Ramrod,  116,  21. 

Ransom,  96,  14. 

Rapidly,  the  water  flows,  57,  20 — 
to  come  from  somewhere,  149,  4. 

Rare,  92,  14. 

Rarely,  92,  14. 

Raspberry,  31,  17  ;  79,  13. 

Rat,  19,  9. 

Rather,  18,  8;  50,  i. 

Rattlesnake,  162,  15. 

Raven,  a,  160,  5. 

Raw,  23,  9,  14. 

Rays  of  the  sun,  43,  22. 

Reach  forth  the  hand,  to,  64,  15. 

Read,  to,  11,  5,  19;  137,  i. 

Ready,  43,  i  ;  83,  7 — all  is,  104,  15 
— laden,  43,  24 — packed,  43,  24 
—to  be,  42,  23 ;  43,  I,  12;  83,  4 
— to  make,  43,  14. 

Real,  63,  12. 

Reap,  to,  74,  8. 

Reason,  for  that,  51,  6 — for  this,  91, 
2;  155,  I— for  what,  55,  19. 

Reasonable,  140,  16. 

Rebounding,  the,  44,  24. 

Receive,  to,  85,  18;  91,  13. 

Received,  91,  15. 

Receiving  of  honor  and  praise,  the, 
67,  14. 

Reception,  gi,  14;  154,  19. 

Reconciled  to  one  another,  to  be, 
172,  13- 

Reconciliation,  76,  8. 

Red,  68,  21 — bank  of  a  river,  68,  10 
— bird,  79,  10 — cedar,  79,  6 — 
hair,  78,  10 — headed  wood- 
pecker,   80,   9 — looking,  68,   19 


218 


INDEX. 


— one,  the,  78,  13 — root,  14,  3 
— squirrel,  59,  8;  162,  li — the 
leaves  grow,  68,  26 — thread,  68, 
23 — to  dye,   71,    12 — yarn,    68, 

23- 
Redeem,  to,  96,  15. 
Redeemer,  my,  96,  l6. 
Redemption,  96,  14. 
Refuse,  to,  45,  10. 
Reign,  to,  38,  26. 
Reject,  to,  45,  10. 
Rejected,  to  be,  23,  2. 
Rejoice,  to,  173,  12. 
Rejoicing,  word  of,  173,  14. 
Relate  to  somebody,  to,  24,  i. 
Relation,  31,  27 — by  marriage,  his, 

155.  7— my,  155,  8. 
Relatives,  60,  22. 
Release,  59,  14. 
Relieve  somebody,  to,  159,  7 — some 

one,  to,  40,  17  ;  163,  5. 
Rely  upon,  to,  89,  16. 
Remain,  to,  119,  9. 
Remember,   to,  82,   3 — somebody, 

to,  73,  10. 
Remembered,  the  being,  73,  11. 
Remembrance,    73,     11 — to     keep 

each  other  in,  73,  12. 
Remind  each  other,  to,  84,  20. 
Rend  in  two,  29,  4. 
Rent,  117,  26 — in  pieces,  115,  9. 
Repair,  to,  61,  i  ;  106,  15. 
Repeat,  to,  61,  3. 
Repeatedly,  165,  i. 
Repel,  to,  45,  10. 
Repentance,  130,  9. 
Repentant,  to  be,  16,  15. 
Replace,  to,  61,  i. 
Replant,  to,  60,  25. 
Report,  bad,  10,  15 — of  somebody, 

good,  170, 15. 
Reproach  some  one,  to,  72,  16. 
Reproduction,  43,  9. 
Reproof,  122,  3. 


Repulse,  to,  45,  10. 

Request,  160,  26. 

Residence,  12,  8. 

Residents,  old,  12,  13. 

Resolved,  to  have,  42,  17. 

Rest,  15,  17 — the,  137,  4 — to,  15, 
19;  64,  5;  65,  13— happy,  to, 
15,  18 — well,  to,  175,  12. 

Restore,  to,  61,  I. 

Restraint,  31,  20. 

Rests  on  something,  28,  9. 

Resurrection,  20,  19. 

Return,  to,  22,  3 — something,  to, 
46,  26. 

Revealed,  to  be,  86,  5. 

Revile  somebody,  to,  72,  16. 

Revolves,  it,  147,  22. 

Reward,  30,  i. 

Rhubarb,  wild,  77,  2. 

Rib,  49,  7— a,  47,  17. 

Ribbon,  30,  20. 

Rich,  158,  22 — man,  a,  14,  14 — per- 
son, no,  II — to  be,  no,  10 — 10 
make,  no,  12 — woman,  158,  24. 

Riches,  no,  13 — to  enjoy,  61,  11. 

Ride  on  horseback,  to,  93,  26. 

Rifle,  106,  8;  141,  n. 

Right,  71,  25;  96,  23;  125,  12; 
171,  17;  175,  7 — hand,  at  the, 
63,  10 — it  is,  71,  26;  72,  2 — on 
the,  169, 18 — towards  the,  169,  18 
— tasted,  94,  5 — to  make  it,  143, 
II — to  the,  63,  ID. 

Righteous,  125,  4. 

Righteousness,  125,  7. 

Ring,  finger,  126,  12 — the  bell,  to, 
124,  6. 

Ripe,  40,  8;  140,  22;  160,  23,  27 — 
when  it  is,  160,  19. 

Ripen,  to,  43,  5. 

Rise  up,  to,  105,  22. 

Rises,  it,  109,  17 — the  sun,  58,  22. 

River,  132,  14. — a  straight  course 
in  a,  125,  I — bank,  on  the,  178, 


INDEX. 


219 


7 — drifts  ice,  the,  75,  l — drifts 
with  ice,  the,  82,  17 — fork  of  a, 
62,  9 — great,  54,  17 — high  bank 
of  a,  14,  II — in  the  bend  of  the, 
32,  14 — large,  77,  14 — mouth  of 
a,  124,  3 — on  the  other  side  of 
the,  37,  5 — or  creek,  crooked, 
120,  10 — red  bank  of  a,  68,  10 — 
side,  on  the,  50,  18 — somebody 
calls  from  the  other  side  of  the, 
102,  I — subsides,  the,  132,  2 — 
up  the,  90,  16 — which  swells 
the  water  of  a  creek,  a  rising, 
112,  15. 

Road,  21,  3 — along  the,  32,  11 — 
beaten,  56,  25 — crooked,  165,  9 
— fork  of  a,  62,  12 — goes  down 
the  hill,  where,  155,  6 — goes  up 
the  hill,  where,  154,  13 — higher, 
119,  19 — is  crooked,  the,  150,  19 
— one  who  leaves  the,  105,  3 — 
straight,  125,  2 — to  follow  the 
straight,  125, 18 — to  go  a  crooked, 
100,  14;  165,  12 — to  go  from  the 
right,  105,  I — to  leave  the,  105, 
3 — to  run  off  the,  105,  3 — to  turn 
out  of  the,  105, 2 — turns  off,  where 
the,  104,  18. 

Roads,  cross,  75,  li. 

Roar,  to,  37,  15. 

Roast,  to,  12,  21. 

Roasted  corn,  12,  19;  35,  15. 

Roasting  spit,  144,  21. 

Robber,  78,  21. 

Robin,  146,  3. 

Rock,  III,  26 — big,  37,  10 — flat, 
128,  20 — in  the  cleft  of  a,  29,  12 
— somebody,  to,  16,  25. 

Rocks,  full  of,  37,  II. 

Rocky,  37,  II, 

Roll,  to,  169,  22 — along,  to,  17,  9. 

Rolls,  it,  147,  22. 

Room,  corner  of  a,  I21,  I — little, 
158,17- 
5 


Root,  113,  13;    147,4;    157.   8— 

red,  14,  3. 
Rope,  19,  3;    129,    12 — canoe,  44, 

22. 
Rotten,  16,  12;  174,  7. 
Rotten  wood,  161,  6. 
Rough  speaking,  72,  15. 
Roughly,  to  speak,  13,  23 — to  talk, 

75.  13- 
Round  about,  164,  16,  24;  165,  3 

— about,  to  go,  164,  17 — all  the 

world,   33,    I— hill,  a,    154,    2; 

175,  23. 
Row,  straight,  125,  3 — to,  145,  10. 
Rub,  to,  60,  12. 
Rubbed  out,  146,  2. 
Rule,  38,  28;  64,  12 — to,  38,  26. 
Ruler,  38,  27. 
Rum,  16,  25. 
Run  at  the  nose,  to,  132,  i — before 

somebody,  to,  96,  7 — fast,  to,  56, 

22 — off,  to,  168,  17. 
Runs  out,   it,   147,  21 — up,  it,  60, 

16. 
Rushes,  132,  6 — mat  made  of,  20, 

20. 
Rusty,  68,  13. 

Sack,  81,  21. 

Sacrifice,  157,  li — to,  157,  13. 

Sad.  to  be,  123,  21  ;    130,  8. 

Saddle,  47,  19 — bag,  27,  12. 

Said,  66,   19 — to  have  said,  he  is, 

66,  18. 
Sail  down  the  stream,  to,  90,  3 — up 

the  water,  to,  90,  14. 
Saith,  as  he,  33,  22. 
Salt,  132,  4 — meat,  130,  19. 
Salted,  132,  5. 
Saltish,  130,  21. 
Salutation,  178,  13. 
Salute   one    another,   to,    151,  4 — 

somebody,  to,  i52,|io— somebody 

with^a  present,  to,  89,  3. 


220 


INDEX. 


Saluted,  the  being,  152,  11. 

Sanctified,  to  be,  115,  15. 

Sand,  62,  18 — flies,  full  of,  119,  II 

—fly,  119,  8. 
Sap  of  trees,  167,  22 ;  168,  25. 
Sarsaparilla,  17,  8 — great,  77,  21. 
Sassafras,  159,  8. 
Satisfaction,  to   give,   174,    14 — to 

have  received,  140,  23. 
Satisfied,   to   be,   44,  4;    140,    17; 

23- 
Satisfy,  to,  141,  i — each  other,  to, 

30,  I — somebody,  to,  140,  24. 
Sausage,  116,  21, 
Save,  to,  i6g,  6 ;   172,  24. 
Saviour,  no,  21  ;   in,  27  ;   156,  9. 
Savory,  159,  22, 
Saw,  43,  15 — to,  43,  16 — broad  and 

board,  105,  17. 
Say,  to,  66,  20 — among  themselves, 

to,  65,   7 — on,  to,  18,  10,  18 — 

over,  to,  61,  3 — to  each  other,  to, 

65.  7- 

Saying,  66,  21 — his,  33,  32 — up- 
right, 125,  14. 

Scalp,  a,  27,  19 — to,  74,  6. 

Scalped,  74,  7. 

Scar,  162,  19. 

Scarce,  92,  14. 

Scarcely,  13,  19. 

Scarcity,  loi,  12 — of  provision,  76, 
II. 

Scatter,  to,  13,  13  ;   124,  22. 

Scattered,  those  who  live,  86,  I, 

School,  to  keep,  133,  12. 

Scissors,  pair  of,  135,  22. 

Scold,  to,  70,  15  ;  75,  13 — each 
other,  to,  75,  12. 

Scour  grass,  60,  11  ;    132,  6. 

Scourge  some  one,  to,  131,  17. 

Scourging,  131,  18. 

Scrape  something,  to,  60,  12. 

Scraped,  146,  2. 

Scruple,  144,  4— to,  144,  3. 


Scum  ladle,  77,  23. 

Scythe,  43,  17  ;  74,  9 — a,  29,  8. 

Sea,  81,  20 — great,  54,  15 — on  the 

other  side  of  the  great,  37,  4. 
Seafarers,  in,  10. 
Search,  to,  61,  12 — after,  to,  176,  6. 
Searcheth,  he  that,  31,  23. 
Seashore,  126,  4. 
Seat,  47,  19. 

Sea-tortoise,  large,  117,  4. 
Second,  98,  4 ;    137,    4 — crop,  73, 

17- 

Secret,  38,  I — murderer,  a,  53,  22. 

Secretly,  53,  19 — to  go  from  some 
place,  54,  2 — to  murder,  53,  20, 

See,  65,  14;  66,  9 — to,  93,  21 ; 
112,  22,  24 — at  a  glance  or  for  a 
moment,  to,  61,  8 — each  other, 
to,  93,  8;  94,  20 — there,  127,  15, 
19,  24 — very  well,  to  174,  25. 

Seed,  166,  24. 

Seeds,  pumpkin,  158,  21. 

Seek,  to,  92,  2,  18 — for  somebody, 
to,  92,  5 — to  come,  to,  114,  2 — 
to  kill,  to,  36,  13  ;  38,  5. 

Seeker,  31,  23. 

Seem  to  be  far,  to,  150,.  16. 

Seen,  to  be,  93,  6— well  to  be,  172, 

4- 
Seize  somebody,  to,  91,  6. 
Seldom,  92,  14. 
Self,  47,  5  ;  96,  24 — pride,  77,  19 — 

shame,  84,  3 — suspended,  24,  il. 
Sell,  to,  71,  14;  78,  18. 
Send  somebody,  to,  17,  il  ;  42,  3. 
Senses,  out  of  one's,  167,  18 — to  be 

out  of  one's,  167,  16. 
Sensitive,  19,  7. 
Sent,  to  be,  17,  12. 
Sentiment,  65,  6. 
Separate,  to,  16,  8;  144,  15,  17. 
Separated  from  one  another,    141, 

10. 
Separately,  147,  9,  12. 


INDEX. 


221 


Separation,  62,  10, 

September,  54,  12. 

Sermon,  33,  15. 

Serpents,  ye,  29,  20. 

Servant,  17,  13 — to  keep  a,  17,  14 

— wicked,  69,  14. 
Set,   a    price,    to,    61,    20 — about 

wrongly,  to,  107,  17 — at,  to,  147, 

23 — off  by  water,   to,    18,   12 — 

on,  to,  147,  23 — something  up,  to, 

21,20— up,  to,  97,  15. 
Setting  pole,  37,  7. 
Settled,  42,  6. 

Seven,  97,  23 — hundred,  97,  24. 
Seventy,  97,  25. 
Sew  to,  39,  9. 

Shad,  127,  7 — month,  77,  25. 
Shake,  of  the  head,  138,  23,  24 — to, 

91,  5 — hands,  to,  123,  5 — off,  to, 

137.  16. 
Shallow,  36,  22 — water,  139,  4. 
Shame,  84,  7 — for,  31,  13. 
Shameful,  84,  6. 
Share  with  each  other,  to,  10,  3. 
Sharp,  53,  2,  5 — tasted,  59,  18. 
Sharpen,  to,  53,  3 ;  59,  4. 
Sharpener,  a,  53,  4. 
Shave,  to,  87,  17. 
Shavings,  128,  14;   168,  14. 
Shawano  woman,  127,  10. 
She,  93,  9,  10 — bear,  loi,  24. 
Sheaves,  to  bind  up  into,  21,  17. 
Sheep,  79,  24;  80, 14 — skin,  80,  15. 
Shell  corn,  to,  no,  14. 
Shepherd,  102,  5,  6. 
Shepherds,  99,  12. 
Shilling,  45,  17. 
Shin,  48,  II. 
Shin-bone,  his,  48,  II. 
Shine  unto  some  one,  to,  114,  9. 
Shines  brightly,  it,  122,  23. 
Shineth  from  thence,  it,  154,  17. 
Shining,  42,  9 — hither,  114,  8. 
Ships,  great,  55,  2, 


Shiver  hickory,  141,  3 — to,  101,  21, 

22. 
Shoe,    71,    6 — a   new,    177,    21 — 

somebody,  to,  72,  4 — string,  21, 

14. 
Shoes,  bad,  69,  13 — European,  130, 

22 — Indian,  63,  8. 
Shoot,  to,  106,  7 — amiss,  to,  107, 

19 — at,  to,  15,  22 — at  a  mark,  to, 

12,  24 — forth,   to,   22,   IX;  123, 

II. 
Shore,  along,  50,  18. 
Short,  138,  6;   141,  21. 
Shorts,  66,   5. 
Shot  bag,  18,  21. 
Shout,  to,  106,  12. 
Show,  to,    17,    18 — somebody,   to, 

66,   I — somebody  favor,  to,  140, 

I — to  somebody,  to,  176, 8 — unto, 

to,  113,  8. 
Showers,  it  rains  by,    119,    16 — of 

rain,  113,  19 — of  snow  and  rain 

in  the  spring,  132,  19. 
Shrunken,  117,  5. 
Shut   close,   to,  45,  8 — frozen,  56, 

13 — the  door,  56,  8 — the  eyes,  to, 

133,  25 — the  mouth,  to,  124,  10, 

—up,  56,  7. 
Sick,  69,  17,    18 — to   be,  69,  17; 

108,    10;     159,    II — in   a    poor 

condition,  to  lie,  58,  15. 
Sickle,  43,  17. 
Sickly,  to  be,  108,  9 — to  be  very, 

108,  23. 
Sickness,  108,  12;  159,  10 — to  be  a 

common,  159,  9 — to  suffer  in,  14, 

5- 

Side,  34,  21 ;  49,  10 — of  the  great 
sea,  on  the  other,  37,  4 — of  the 
river,  on  the  other,  37,  5 — on  one, 
51,  2 — on  this,  178,  II — this, 
51.  6. 

Sides,  on  both,  156,  10. 

Sieve,  no,  16— to,  no,  15. 


222 


INDEX. 


Sight,  93,  22;  177,  15— good,  173, 

5 — to  have  good,  173,  4. 
Sign,  a,  52,  19,  21. 
Silent,  146,  22 — he  is,  146,  23 — to 

be,  146,  21. 
Silk  worm,  99,  18. 
Simple,  71,  25. 
Sin,  70,  8;  87,  19— to,  70,  7;  107, 

12;  144,  I. 
Sinew,  48,  4;  169,  26 — of  the  leg, 

the  main,  93,  23. 
Sinful,   70,    9 — behavior,   75,    4 — 

deed,  69,  15. 
Sing,  to,  88,  15 — in  company  with, 

to,  163,  7. 
Single,  93,    12;  95,   16;    140,  8 — 

man,  a,  53,  6 — one,  a,  95,   15 — 

thing,  140,  8 — thread,  46,    19 — 

woman,  a,  53,  16. 
Singly,  95,  16. 

Sinless,  to  think  one's  self,  57,  3. 
Sinner,  71,  i  ;  80,  7. 
Sister,  elder,  85,   16 — her,  163,  19 

in-law,  98,   I in-law,    my, 

97,  7 — younger    brother  or,  27, 

16. 
Sit,  to,   175,  22— down,  to,  63,6; 

81,  26 — still,  to,  28,  II  ;  55,  10. 
Sits  here,  he  who,  63,  5. 
Situated,  to  be  so,  65,  4. 
Six,  46,  22 — hundred,  46,  23. 
Sixty,  46,  24. 
Skilful,  168,  4. 
Skim  milk,  81,  19. 
Skimmed,  74,  15  ;  81,  16. 
Skin,  27,  15 — an  animal,  to,  26,  14 

—thick,  28,  18. 
Skunk,  a,  130,  II. 
Sky,  III,  25. 
Slackens,  it,  62,  8. 
Slanting,   60,     15;    116,    5,    6 — to 

make,  116,  7. 
Slave,  to  be  a  miserable,  41,  7. 
Sled,  138,  25;  145,  2. 


Sleep,  to,  38,  9 — on,  place  to,  12,  9 
— to  lie  down  to,  38,  lO — with, 
to,  163,  22 — with  one  another,  to, 
161,  5. 

Sleeper,  41,  il. 

Sleepy,  38,  8 — to  be,  36,  14. 

Sleet,  to,  10,  24. 

Slides,  it,  125,  20. 

Slip,  to,  82,  5;  168,  12 — in,  to  make, 
116,  24. 

Slipped  off,  143,  19. 

Slippery,  168,  il. 

Shps,  it,  125,  20. 

Slowly,  141,  18,  19. 

Small,  138,  6,  10 — loaf,  12,  18 — 
things,  in,  154,  23. 

Smallpox,  29,  17 — to  have  the,  29, 
16. 

Smell,  it  has  a  good,  pleasant,  160, 
10 — to,  80,  4. 

Smith,  134,  8. 

Smokes,  it,  121,  4. 

Smoking,  a  pipe  for,  49,  9. 

Smooth,  168,  10,  II — to  cut,  60,  14. 

Snake,  II,  II;  122,14 — black,  134, 
5— copper,  68,  7  ;  79.  15— green, 
23,  10  —  horned,  127,  6 — red- 
bellied,  68,  17 — striped,  72,  18 — 
water,  76,  16. 

Snakeroot,  black,  26  11. 

Snipe,  117,  14  ;  131,  I. 

Snow,  45,  14 — deep,  77,  5 — month, 
160,  18. 

Snows,  it,  159,  18 — very  thick,  it, 
58,1. 

Snuffers,  candle,  139,  22. 

So,  32,  18;  33,  5,  II  ;  64,  17;  89, 
24;  91,  2;  169,  20 — as,  32,  18; 
33,  10;  64,  8,  9,  17— as  I,  92, 
15 — far,  114,  21;  88,  I — far  as, 
131,  20 — far  as  here,  51,  6 — it  is, 
89,  24 — long  131,  II,  20 — long 
as,  94,  13 — much,  88,  I — much 
so,  169,   15— often,  32,  18;  135, 


INDEX. 


223 


3 — to  be,  65,  4;  169,  21 — to  do, 
65,  4;  169,  21 — very  32,  18. 

Soaked,  137,  3. 

Soft,  106,  i;  137,  3;  141,  18;  169, 
2,  5.7- 

Softness,  169,  4. 

Sole  of  the  foot,  148,  i. 

Some,  16,  II;  135,  3 — one  else, 
"5,  17- 

Somebody,  24,  14 — calls  from  the 
other  side  of  the  river,  102,  i — 
good  report  of,  170,  15 — I  tell, 
92,  16 — to,  104,  2 — to  accuse, 
69,  9 — to  admonish,  41,  21 — to, 
answer,  88,  17 — to  appoint  to  an 
office,  122,  15 — to  arrest,  136,  17  ; 
142,  3 — to  be  or  abide  in,  12,  12 
— to  be  brought  to,  114,  14 — to 
be  concerned  for,  59,  9 — to  be 
glad  to  see,  106,  9 — to  be  in 
fellowship  with,  163,  12 — to  be 
jealous  of,  74, 1 6 — to  be  near,  no, 
24 — to  beat,  105,  8;  118,  21 — 
to  betray,  40,  14;  58,  18 — to 
blame,  73,  19— to  bless,  172,  9 — 
to  bring  away,  18,  16 — to  bring 
home,  75,  3 — to  call  hither,  177, 
13 — to  carry,  90,  6— to  clothe, 
II,  16;  116,  17 — to  come  before, 
96,  7 — to  come  to,  100,  10 — 
to  come  up  with,  75,  10  —  to 
consider  about,  113,  2 — to  con- 
quer, 118,  21 — to  consider,  to 
be,  153,  8 — to  cover,  82,  23 — 
to  deceive,  11,  7 — to  design  evil 
against,  83,  14 — to  despise,  75, 
14 — to  destroy,  154,  9 — to  direct 
the  wrong  away,  69,  16 — to 
distribute  to,  10,  4 — to  do,  a 
pleasure,  160,  8 — to  do  so  to,  64, 
7 — to  draw  near  to,  82,  6 — to 
dress,  111,4 — to  drive  away,  107, 
26 — to  enlighten,  89,  10 — to  en- 
treat, 78,  22 — to  esteem,  67,  12 — 


to  fetch,  176,  5— to  fetch,  over  in 
a  canoe,  91,  17 — to  find  out,  94,  6 
— to    follow,  169,    13 — to   force, 

13,  21 — to  forgive,  86,  9;  106, 
24 — to  forsake,  loi,  6 — to  give 
fight  to,  114,  9— to  give  to,  85,  3 
— to  go  in  a  canoe  with,  156,  20 
— to  go  to  meet,  117,  13 — to  hate, 
128,21 — to  have,  103,  20;  170,  11 
— to  hear,  112,  17 — to  hearken 
fo — 177,  4 — to  help,  40,  17 — to 
help  through,  34,  23 — to  hit,  43, 
2 — to  hold  fast,  146,  8 — to  hum- 
ble one's  self  before,  40,  21 — to 
insult,  72,  16 — to  judge,  42,  4 — 
to  keep,  173,  21 — to  keep  or  pre- 
serve unto,  135,  16 — to  kill,  96, 
13 — to  kneel  to,  98,  8— to  knock 
on  the  head,  118,  2 — to  know, 
100,  12;  104,  5 — to  let  in,  75, 
19 — to  let,  have  the  preference, 
49,  18 — to  look,  113,  I — to  love, 

14,  16 — to  make  an  offering  to, 
157,  10 — to  make,  naked,  133, 
24 — to  maltreat,  44,  15 — to  mock, 
12,  16;  90,  22 — to  mock  at,  153, 
19 — to  mock  or  laugh  at,  10,  23 
— to  perceive,  loi,  10 — to  per- 
suade, 13,  21 — to  praise,  67,  12, 
13 — to  pray  for,  no,  2  —  to 
pray  to,  109,  22— to  pull  out 
of  the  water,  35,  20 — to  pursue, 
92,  8 — to  put  clothes  on,  116, 
23 — to  raise  up,  20,  17  —  to 
relate  to,  24,  i — to  refieve,  159, 
7 — to  remember,  73,  10 — to 
revile,  72,  16 — to  rock,  16,  25 — 
to  run  before,  96,  7 — to  salute, 
152,  10 — to  salute,  with  a  present, 
89,  3 — to  satisfy,  140,  24 — to 
seek  for,  92,  5 — to  seize,  91,  6 — 
to  send,  17,  11 ;  42,  3 — to  shoe, 
72,  4 — to  show,  66,  I — to  show, 
favor,  140,   I — to  show  to,  176, 


224 


INDEX. 


8 — to  speak  with,  41,  18 — to 
speak  evil  of,  80,  5 — to  speak 
evil  to,  80,  6— to  spit  upon,  124, 
23 — to  sprinkle,  82,  7 — to  stone, 
138,  21 — to  strengthen,  146,  19 — 
to  strike,  96,  12 — to  take,  91,  12 
— to  take  care  of,  39,  12;  113,  2 
— to  take,  in  care,  170,  16 — to 
take,  out  of  the  water,  121,  6 — to 
treat,  badly  ,74, 1 2 — to  treat  gener- 
ously, 158,  23 — to  treat,  ill,  59,  17 
— to  touch,  85,  17 — to  use  ill,  56, 
23;  70,  6 — to  use  well,  173,  I — 
to  visit,  55,  4 — to  wait  for,  iii,  11 
— to  waken,  142,  19 — to  watch, 
102,  4 — to  whip,  131,  17 — to 
write  to,  114,  13. 

Something,  55,  19  ;  140,  8 — else, 
115,  17 — to  be  able  to  make,  98, 
27 — to  be  concerned  for,  59, 10 — 
to  catch,  with  a  net,  13,  7 — to 
come  or  go  for,  148,  23 — to  do 
just  so,  143,  1 1 — to  lay  hands  to, 
64,  14 — to  look  for,  92,  3 — to 
look  steadfastly  at,  100,  4 — to 
make,  43,  7 — to  return,  46,  26 
— to  scrape,  60,  12 — to  set  up, 
21,  20 — to  spoil,  75,  7;  108,  3 — 
to  steal,  out  of  a  field,  56,  3 — 
without  doubt,  155,  20. 

Sometimes,  137,  15  ;  138,  22. 

Somewhere,  else,  108,  4,  5 — from, 
137.  7— perhaps,  137,  5— un- 
willingly, to  be,  128,  19. 

Son,  122,  13. 

Son-in-law,  92,  4 — his,  176,  7. 

Sons,  my,  100,  16. 

Soon,  35,  19;  83,  12;  no,  17,  18 
— as,  as,  58,  20. 

Soot,  161,  4. 

Sore,  159,  13. 

Sorrow,  123,  23;  153,  16  —  or 
trouble,  149,  li — to  feel,  130,  4; 
149,  8. 


Sorrowful  life,  149,  9 — look,  149, 
12 — pair,  130,  6— to  feel,  149,  7. 

Sorry,  to  be,  130,  8. 

Sort  of  stinging  fly,  72,  21. 

Soul,  83,  15. 

Sound,  to,  42,  I. 

Sounds,  it,  64,  i. 

Soup,  123,  6. 

Sour,  130,  21. 

South  side  of  a  hill,  145,  14. 

Southeast,  36,  i — towards  the,  36,  2. 

Southerly,  127,  8. 

Southward,  127,  8,9. 

Sow,  to,  124,  22. 

Span,  a,  151,  3. 

Spanish  oak,  19,  II. 

Spar,  54,  14. 

Spare,  enough  and  to,  156,  15,  16. 

Sparkling,  122,  22. 

Speak,  to,  22,  20 — a  parable,  to, 
31,  I;  34,  13 — bad  to  one  an- 
other, to  75,  12 — brokenly,  to,  19, 
15 — civil  J.0, 141, 1 6 — evil  of  some- 
body, to,  80,  5 — evil,  to  some- 
body, to,  80,  6 — fast,  to,  16,  7 ;  59, 
19 — favorably,  to,  172,  15 — good 
to  each  other  to,  172,  13 — ill  of 
some  one  to,  69,  9 — kind,  to, 
141,  16 — loud,  to,  19,  14;  68,8 
— of,  to,  176,  12 — otherwise  than 
the  truth,  to,  107,  14 — plainly, 
to,  174,  5 — roughly,  to,  13,  23 — 
the  exact  truth,  to,  125,  15,  16 — 
the  Indian  language,  to,  48,  9 — 
thereof,  to,  148,  19 — the  truth,  to, 
58,  19 — uncivil,  to,  75,  13 — un- 
civilly, to,  70,  I — with  each 
other,  to,  22,  19 — with  somebody, 
to,  41,  18. 

Speaking,  to  blunder  in,  117,  16 — 
to  break  off  in,  15,  16;  82,  25 — 
to  have  finished,  in,  16. 

Speaks  a  good  word  for  us,  172, 12 
— truly,  he,  171,  12. 


INDEX. 


225 


Spear,  137, 19,  20 — a  fishing,  100, 9. 
Speckled,  124,  17,  19. 
Spend  in  drinking,  to,  81,  10. 
Spent,  day  is,  15,  21 — it  is  all,  154, 

10, 
Spider,  83,  18. 
Spike  buck,  20,  15. 
Spill,  to,  133,  14. 
Spin,  to,  26,  5. 
Spins  up,  it,  60,  16. 
Spiral,  141,  II. 

Spirit,  83,  15;  145,  18;  170,  2. 
Spiritual,  170,  3 — power,  74,  11. 
Spirituous,  10,  i,  2;  14,  10. 
Spit,  roasting,  144,  21 — upon  some- 
body, to,  124,  23. 
Spittle,  131,  19  ;  134,  14. 
Spleen,  152,  7. 
Split,  104,  10;  137,  8;  144,  18— off, 

141,  10 — to,    105,    7 — wood,  to, 

104,  II. 
Splitting  iron,  104,  12. 
Spoil,  to,   108,  22 — something,  to, 

75.  7  ;  108,  3. 
Spoiled,  70,  18. 
Spoken  of,  to  be  ill,  69, 10 — well  of, 

to  be,  170,  13. 
Spoon,    29,    21 — little,    137,  23 — 

pewter,  13,  15. 
Sport,  II,    I — to  make,  44,    7 — of 

some  one,  to  make,  153,  19. 
Spotted,  124,  17,  19. 
Spread  out,  128,  9;  129,  18,  20 — 

to,  128,  8;  129,  19. 
Spring,  30,  24;    142,  4 — hunt,  132, 

18 — of  the   year,  132,   17 — this, 

32,  10 — up,  to,  123,  II. 
Sprinkle  somebody,  to,  82,  7. 
Sprouts,  it,  177,  6— out,  132,  13. 
Spruce,  128,  17— forest,  128,  18. 
Sprung  from,  14,  12. 
Square,  47, 23. 
Squat  down,  to,  175,  21. 
Squeeze,  to,  132,  7,  8. 


Squint-eyed,  116,  3. 

Squirrel,  a,  120,  3—  a  ground,  21,  8 ; 

47,    i6--flying,  26,  10 — red,  59, 

8;  116,  9;   162,  II. 
Stabbed,  140,  10. 
.Stable  cow,  87,  5. 
Stallion,  154,  I. 
Stammerer,  94,  4. 
Stand,   to,   97,   18 — all  around,  to, 

164,  15 — between,  to,  35,  9 — firm 

in  mind,  to,  146,  20 — foremost, 

to,  96,  5 — in  a  circle,  to,  165,  2 

—up,  97,  18. 
Star,  16,  24. 
Stay  out  from  home  so  long,  to,  123, 

12 — out  long,  to,  45,  21. 
Staying,  to  be  weary  of,  130,  3. 
Steadiness,  28,  12. 
Steal,  to,  56,  I — away  privately,  to, 

54,  3 — something  out  of  a  field, 

to,  56,  3- 

Steel,  74,  3 — trap,  13,  16;  28,  10. 

Steelyards,  120,  20. 

Steep,  14,  II — bank,  108,  16. 

Step,  between,  to,  35,  9. 

Stick,  to,  137,  18. 

Sticky,  it  is,  28,  19. 

Stiff,  136,  14;  145,  12. 

Still,  16,  14:50,2,4,11;  121,3; 
146,  24 — further,  50,  7— more, 
50, 7 ;  146,  24 — or  standing  water, 
28,  14 — to  be,  55,  13 — to  sit,  28, 
II ;  55.  10 — water,  55,  14. 

Stirred,  116,  11. 

Stirring  ladle,  35,  13  ;  116,  13. 

Stirs,  it,  58,  25. 

Stitch,  to,  39,  9. 

Stocking,  36,  21. 

Stolen,  28,  17;  56,  2. 

Stomach,  150,  4. 

Stone,  13,  14— a,  38,  17— a  large, 
28,  I — to,  138,  20 — to,  somebody, 
138,  21. 

Stony,  13,  18;  35,  5. 


226 


INDEX. 


Stool,  62,  17. 

Stop,  to,  12,  14;  65,  24 — fighting, 
to,  16,  2 — working,  to,  16,  3  ;  22, 

5- 
Stopped,  56,  12. 
Stopper,  56,  9. 
Stops,  it,  88,  14. 
Stormy,  16,  13 — weather,  69,  23. 
Story,  to  tell  a  straight,  125,  15. 
Stove,  a,  55,  12 — pipe,  30,  25. 
Straight,  71,  25;    125,   12 — course 

in  a  river,  a,  125,   i — road,  125, 

13 — to   go,    125,    18 — to    make, 

125,  II. 
Straightened  out,  143,  19. 
Straightway,  119,  20. 
Strainer,  131,  23. 
Strange,  145,   19,  20;    147,  9 — he 

looks,    147,   II — he  seems,  145, 

22 — it  looks,  145,  21  ;   147,  5. 
Strangely,   to  act,  13,  24 — to  talk, 

13,  23. 
Strangeness,  145,  17. 
Stranger,  144,  13. 
Straw,  82,  15. 
Strawberries,  i6g,  14. 
Stream,  down,  90,  i — of  a  reddish 

color,  68,  15 — to  go  down,  90,  5 

— to  go  up,  90,  17 — to  sail  down 

the,    90,     3 — up    the,    90,    15 — 

without  falls,  a,  170,  8. 
Strength,  17,  23;   146,  17 — he  who 

is,  146,  18. 
Strengthen,  to,  146,  16 — somebody, 

146,  19. 
Stretched,  129,  18,  21. 
Strike,    to,    119,     14 — each    other 

dead,   to,   97,    6 — somebody,   to, 

96,  12 — some  one,  to,  105,  8. 
Striking,  113,  11. 
String,   19,  3 — leather,  71,   2;    83, 

I;    129,   12 — of  Wampum,  127, 

18. 
Strip  one's  self,  to,  133,  23. 


Striped,  125,  9. 

Strong,  10,  I,  2;    14,   10 ;    15,  2; 

17,  16,   22;    18,  I;    146,  7,    10, 

II — current,  57,  20 — to  be,  146, 

14 — to  make,  146,  12. 
Strongest,  the,  34,  4. 
Strowd,  a,  14,  15. 
Struck  dead,  to  be,  97,  5. 
Stubbornness,  20,  I. 
Stumble,  to,  109,  16. 
Stump,  143,  iS. 
Stutterer,  94,  4. 
Subdue,  to,  18,  5  ;   109,  19. 
Subjects,  96,  9. 
Subsides,  the  river,  132,  2. 
Suck,  those  who  give,   99,   15 — to 

give,  100,  2. 
Sucking  babes,  100,  I. 
Suffer,   to,    19,  2;  63,    3;  73,    I  — 

hunger,  to,  161,  19 — in  sickness, 

to,  14,  5 — pain,  to,  24,  20. 
Sufferer,  innocent,  102,  17. 
Suffering,  25,  i  ;  73,  2. 
Sufficiency,  140,  18;  156,  19. 
Sugar,  maple,  13,  17. 
Suits,  it,  71,  26. 
Sulphur,  162,  12. 
Sultry  weather,  99,  16. 
Sumach,  27,  3;  44,  12. 
Summer,  54,    11  ;  57,    17;  97,  19 — 

beginning  of,  139,  12 — duck,  41, 

19 — hunt,  97,    20 — last,  35,   7 — 

this,  32,  10. 
Sun,  43,  21 — or  moon,  halo  of,  157, 

21 — rays  of  the,    43,    22 — rises, 

the,  58,  22. 
Sunbeams,  43,  22. 
Sunday,  39,  24,  26 — after,  15,  20. 
Sunfish,  68,  14. 
Sunset,  168,  19. 
Sunshine,    clear,    151,    19 — white, 

166,  I. 
Supper,  148,  9. 
Supple,  169,  7. 


INDEX. 


227 


Supplication,    i6o,    25 — for    each 

other,  no,  3. 
Supremely  good,  the,  34,  3,  5. 
Sure,  146,  13 — to  be,  26,  7,  8 ;  24, 

19 — of,  to  be,  100,  15 — of  a  thing, 

to  be,  125,  10, 
Surely,  125,  17. 
Surface,  on  the,  167,  2. 
Surly,  80,  10, 
Surprise,  exclamation  of,  31,9,  12 ; 

48,  22;    121,   8 — exclamation  of 

indignant,  31,  16 — to,  78,  6. 
Surprised,  to  be,  37,  14. 
Surprising,  it  is,  37,  18. 
Surrender,  to,  79,  21. 
Surrounded,  I  am,  164,  14. 
Suspicion,  81,  4. 
Swallow,  to,  46,  13. 
Swamp,  74,  20;  81,   I — fern,    103, 

10 — huckleberry,    74,    22 — oak, 

109,  13 — muddy  creek  in  a,  74, 

21 — pine,  81,  2. 
Swan,  a,  81,  13. 
Sweat  by  a   bath,    28,    15 — house, 

115,  8  ;  116,  10 — to,  115,7  ;  121, 

5- 
Sweep,  to,  145,  4. 
Sweet,  159,  22 — flag,  113,  12. 
Swell,  to,  69,  4. 
Swelled,  69,  6 — to  be,  69,  5. 
Swiftly,  it  moves,  59,  20 — to  go, 

57.  H- 
Swim, I,  23,  4 — to,  23, 4 — hither,  to, 

114,  7 — over  to,  44,  20. 
Swollen,  to  become,  118,  6. 
Sycamore,  the,  20,  1 1 . 


Table,  121,  14 — a,  30,  26. 

Take,  it,  15,  13 — it,  here,  67,  10 — 
to,  91,  13 — along,  to,  39,  10 — 
care,  to,  20,  22 — care  of,  to,  39, 
14;  59,  II — care  of  somebody, 
to,  39,  12 — care  of  some  one,  to, 
T 


173,  21 — down,  to,  64,  4 — from, 
to,  148,  22 — hold,  to,  39,  8 — ill, 
to,  75,  6 — no  notice  of,  to,  175, 
20 — off",  to,  46,  25;  64,  4;  68, 
20;  119,  26 — or  consider  some- 
body to  be,  to,  173,  7 — out  of  the 
water,  to,  45,  9 — somebody  in 
care,  to,  170,  16 — some  one 
prisoner,  to,  136,  17 — some  one 
to  be,  to,  153,  8— together,  to,  21 , 
16. 

Taken,  the  being,  128,  22. 

Tale,  an  amusing,  55,  7. 

Talk,  nasty,  98,  26 — nasty,  to,  98, 
25 — one  who  likes  to,  156,  i — 
roughly,  to,  70,  i ;  75,  13 — 
strangely,  to,  13,  23 — to  some 
one,  to,  41,  18 — vile,  72,  15. 

Tall,  45,  24 ;  46,  2— as,  as,  33,  2 — 
to  be,  46,  I. 

Tallow,  118,  14. 

Tame  beast,  152,  21 — creature,  29, 
6. 

Tapering,  106,  i. 

Tarry,  to,  152,  9. 

Taste,  84,  18 — it  has  a  fine,  175, 
2 — of  a  disagreeable,  71,  7 — to, 
46,  20;  82,  2. 

Tasted,  good,  159,  22 — ill,  71,  7 — 
sharp,  59,  18. 

Tax,  76,  3. 

Teach,  to,  10,  8,  9;   17,  17. 

Teacher,  a,  10,  11. 

Teaching,  10,  10. 

Tear,  to,  29,  4;  65,  24 — in  pieces, 
to,  66,  4. 

Tears,  134,  17. 

Teeth,  to  have  good  sharp,  41,  23. 

Tell,  go  and,  75,  25— a  straight 
story,  to,  125,  15 — lies,  to,  36, 
17 — somebody,  I,  92,  16. 

Temple,  no,  7. 

Temptation,  12,  26. 

Tempted,  to  be,  12,  25. 


228 


INDEX. 


Ten,  83,3;  140,4- 

Tender,  169,  2,  7. 

Tenderness,  40,  18. 

Tent,  a,  48,  10. 

Terrified,  to  be,  124,  4. 

Testament,  36,  16;   10 1,  4. 

Testify  to,  113,  8;   155,  20. 

Testimony,  113,9;   ^55>  21. 

Than,  32,  18. 

Thank,  39,  16 — to,  39,  15. 

Thank'e,  21,  10. 

Thankful,  39,  17. 

Thanks,  21,  10. 

That,  88,  I ;  90,  13,  20;  91,  2,  3 — 

1,  92,  17 — is  all,  90,  13 — is  the 
way  of  it,  91,  2 — one,  90,  13,  20 
— or  the  other,  64,  17 — way,  91, 
2. 

Thaws,  it,  64,  20. 

The,  88,  I ;  92,  20. 

Themselves,  to  say  among,  65,  7. 

Then,  23,  3  ;  33,  5  ;  i35,  2  ;  138,  n. 

Thence,  50,  5. 

There,  50,  5  ;  51,  17,  19;  137,  14; 
174,  I — from,  50,  5 — he  who  is, 
34,  17 — it  is,  48,  6;  67,  10 — 
over,  50,  5 — to  be,  12,  7. 

Thereabouts,  12,  i  ;  45,  7. 

Thereafter,  169,  23. 

Therefore,    51,6;  91,    2;  94,    24; 

149,  3;  155,  i;  177,  "• 

Therein,  16,  19,  22,  23. 
Thereon,  169,  23. 
Thereupon,  89,  9  ;   169,  23. 
These,  51,  12,  16,  18;  93,   18;  97, 

2,  3.  4- 

They,  93,  11 — also,  52,  16. 

Thick,  28,   18;  56,  4,  5 — 136,   14 

— bellied,  77,  4 — board,  28,  18 — 

skin,  28,  18. 
Thicket,  a,  9,  11 ;    161,  8. 
Thief,  a,  52,  18. 
Thigh,  118,5 — joint,  66,2 — middle 

of  the,  61,  13. 


Thin,  152,  4,  5;    166,  16  ;  168,  13. 

Things,  in  small,  154,  23. 

Think,  I,  100,  20 — to,  65,  5  ;  113, 
3;  153,  12;  169,  24 — a  thing 
long,  to,  46,  7— difficult  to,  11, 
25 — disagreeable,  to,  145,  16 — 
easy,  to,  22,  25 — it  a  long  time, 
to,  46,  7 — little  of  one's  self,  to, 
137,  24;  138,  7 — one's  self  near, 
to,  no,  23 — so,  to,  65,  5 — so  far, 
to,  115,  I — that  one  is  holy  or 
sinless,  to,  57,  3. 

Thinks,  as  he,  33,  14. 

Third,  88,  10;  92,  23 — time,  the, 
92,  22. 

Thirst,  to,  38,  7 — to  be  dry  for,  36, 
8. 

Thirsty,  to  be,  38,  7. 

Thirty,  88,  9. 

This,  91,  3;  167,  II;  178,  10 — 
day  past,  41,  17 — one,  51,  19; 
91,  2 ;   167,  II  ;   178,  10. 

Thither,  50,  6;  64,  2 — yonder  to, 
89,  12. 

Thitherward,  91,  2. 

Thorn  bush,  68,  25— the  white,  68, 
24. 

Those,  97,  2,  3 — that  had  been  with 
him,  157,  9 — who  live  scattered, 
86,  I — who  weep,  63,  23. 

Thou,  52,  17 — also,  52,  13 — hand  ! 
175,  24— too,  52,  13. 

Though,  50,  II. 

Thought,  65,  6. 

Thousand,  54,  18 — one,  140,  5. 

Thread,  116,  4 — black,  134,  13 — 
red,  68,  23 — single,  46,  19 — 
white,  166,  6. 

Three,  88,  2,  11 — different  sorts, 
88,  6— fathoms,  88,  4— fold,  88, 
5  ;  hundred,  88,  3 — nights,  88, 
23 — times,  88,  8. 

Threshold,  35,  2. 

Thrice,  88,  8. 


INDEX. 


229 


Thrives  well,  it,  174,  13. 

Throat,  46,  3. 

Through,  34,  22 — here,  51,  19 — 
there,  91,  2 — to  drive,  34,  24 — 
to  go,  34,  24 — to  help  or  carry 
somebody,  34,  23. 

Throw,  to,  18,  13 — away,  to,  107, 
2 — down,  to,  65,  22 — water,  to, 
98,  23. 

Thrust,  to,  137,  18. 

Thumb,  54,  22;  55,  I. 

Thunder  gust,  a,  114,  16. 

Thunders,  it,  in,  i. 

Thus,  169,  20. 

Thy,  85,  16. 

Thyself,  52,  3. 

Tide-ebb,  48,  13. 

Tiding,  glad,  173,  14 — good,  172, 
14. 

Tie  around,  to,  157,  4 — something, 
to,  124,  9 — well,  to,  171,  22. 

Tied,  42,  14 — about  the  head,  39, 
6 — fast,  146,  5  —  in  the  mouth, 
44,  14 — round,  157,  3 — together, 
135,  23. 

Tight,  120,  I. 

Till,  131,  1 1 — here,  88,  i — now,  51, 
13;   178,  8. 

Timber,  54,  14 — long,  13,  10. 

Time,  a  long,  20,  4 — about  that,  64, 
8 — about  the  present,  51,  13 — 
about  this  112,  8;  135,  5 — 
at  any,  48,  i — at  no,  24,  4 — at 
the  same,  164,  5 — at  this,  33,  7  ; 
51, 13 — at  what,  135,4 — at  which, 
30,  23 — bad,  69,  24 — in  a  little, 
no,  17 — in  former,  164,  13 — is 
at  hand,  the,  143,  12,  14 — is  near, 
no,  25 — it  is  a  good,  174,  17 — it 
is  a  troublesome,  14,  8 — the  last, 
73,  13,  14 — the  third,  92,  22— to 
miss  the,  107,  22 — to  think  it  a 
long,  46,  7 — to  this,  50,  2 — trou- 
blesome, 70,  22  ;  14,  8. 


Times,  139,  19 — a  few,  52,  7 — at 
3^11.  9.  3  ;  50,  1 7 — in  olden,  65,  1 7. 

Tinder,  105,  15  ;   120,  4. 

Tipple  with  one  another,  to,  80,  23. 

Tips  of  the  fingers,  167,  12. 

Tired,  126,  20;  128,  2 — to  be,  126, 
14;   161,  23 — of,  to  be,  129,  4. 

To,  64,  2. 

Tobacco,  56,  24 — pouch,  116,  14, 
16;  128,  3 — strong,  56,  24 — twist, 
163,  I. 

To-day,  33,  6;  51,  13;  178,8 — once, 
32, 10 — sometime, 32, 10;  155, 10. 

Toe,  173,  19;  the  great,  122,  19. 

Toes,  fork  of  the,  60, 9 — tops  of  the, 
167,  14. 

Together,  136,  6 — again,  to  come 
or  to  be,  61,  4 — it  does  not  join, 
144,  14 — ^joined,  138,  19 — to  be, 
163,  16 — to  bring,  76,  6— to  take, 
21,  16 — with,  88,  7;  89,  6. 

Toil,  to,  II,  23. 

Token,  52,  21. 

To-morrow,   16,   S;    151,   11 ;   165, 

23.  25. 
Tongue,  158,  20. 
Too,  big,  168,  7 — much,  168,  8,  9 — 

thou,  52,  13 — you,  52,  15. 
Tooth,  161,  7 — holes,  121,  18. 
Toothless,  80,  19;  87,  I. 
Top,   at  the   167,  4 — of  anything, 

the,  167,  13 — of  the  hill,  166,  28 

— of  the  house,  on  the,  167, i — 

or  the,  167,  2,  3. 
Tops  of  the  toes,  167,  14. 
Torch,  94,  2 — to  go  with  a,  94,  3. 
Torment,  73,  2. 

Tormented  to  death,  to  be,  9,  9. 
Torn,   115,9;   117.26;    143,  19 — 

violently,  143,  19. 
Touch  somebody,  to,  85,  17. 
Tough  tree,  169,  i. 
Toward,  41,  14;  65,  12 — here,  89, 

12 — where,  91,  2. 


230 


INDEX. 


Towards,  the  right  hand,  169,  18 — 
the  southeast, 36,  2 — where,  135,  i 

Town,  149,  13 — dilapidated,  78,  i. 

Towns  round  about,  the,  112,  il. 

Trader,  80,  18. 

Trail  of  an  animal,  the,  130,  18. 

Traitor,  40,  16. 

Transgress,  to,  144,  i. 

Transgression,  107,  15  ;  108,  2. 

Trap,  55,  6 — steel,  13,  16  ;  28,  10. 

Travel  about,  to,  86,  3 — alone,  to, 
92,  25 — at  night,  to,  97,  17 — 
badly,  to,  75,  21 — with,  to,  163, 
21 — with  pleasure,  to,  160,  13. 

Traveler,  frequent,  80,  20  ;  86,  2. 

Traveling,  difficult,  14,  24 — to  have 
bad,  II,  22. 

Tread  under  foot,  to,  29,  7 — upon, 
to,  21,  22. 

Treasure  only,  to  lay  up  one,  95, 
12. 

Treat,  to,  61,  9 — friendly,  to,  173,  2 
— somebody  badly,  to,  74,  12 — 
somebody  generously,  to,  158, 
23 — somebody  ill,  to,  59,  17 — 
some  one  badly,  to,  70,  6. 

Treatment,  kind,  170,  4. 

Treaty  of  peace,  173, 3. 

Tree,  48,  18;  79,  5— a  hollow,  150, 
26 — bark  of  a,  49,  I — barren,  79, 
3 — birch,  157,  7 — butt  end  of  a, 
158,  10 — gum,  135,  20 — heart  of 
a,  159,  6— leaves  of  a,  28,  16 — 
linden,  63,  15;  136,  19 — little, 
48,  16 — old,  77,  24;  122,  I  — 
pine,  28,  19 — red  beech,  126,  18 
— the  elm,  ii,  3 — to  notch  a, 
162,  20 — to  peel  oft'  the  rind  of 
a,  26,  16 — tough,  169,  I — with  a 
fork,  a,  62,  II — yellow  wood, 
162,  10. 

Trees,  moss  on,  84,  10 — sap  of, 
167,  22  ;  168,  25 — the  inner  bark 
of,  157,  18. 


Tremble,  to,  91,  5  ;   loi,  22. 

Trembling,  loi,  23. 

Trench,  150,  23. 

Trespass,  144,  2. 

Tribute,  76,  3. 

Trifle,  154,  22. 

Trifles,  in,  154,  23. 

Trouble,  122,  8;  123,  20,  23;   149, 

II — to,  131,  14. 
Troubled,  to  be,  85,  10 — to  be,  in 

mind,    11,   20;     59,  10;  75,  18; 

123,    22;  149,    II — to  feel,  123, 

18,  19. 
Troublesome,    11,    24;    56,    21  — 

it  is  a,  time,  14,  8 — life,  123,  17  ; 

149,  9 — time,   14,  8  ;   70,  22 — to 

come  in  a,  time,  124,  i. 
Trough,  46,  II — big,  28,  I. 
Trout,  74,  18. 
True,    62,   19;  63,27;   171,12,17 

— certainly,    125,     17  —  it    has 

proved,   43,    11 — it  is,  54,  10 — it 

is  certainly,  91,  2 — not  at  all,  24, 

4 — saying,   171,    21 — to  be,  125, 

5 — word,  171,  21 
Truly,    54,    9,    13;     171,    16 — he 

speaks,  171,  12. 
Trust,  89,  19— to,  89,    16;   95,21, 

23- 

Truth,  171,  19 — he  who  is,  171,  20 
— to  convince  of  the,  171,  15 — to 
speak  the,  58,  19;  107,  14 — to 
speak  the  exact,  125,  15,  16. 

Tub- washing,  39,  2. 

Tune  an  instrument,  to,  60,  24. 

Turbid,  86,  25. 

Turkey,  145,  3 — cock,  a,  26,  12; 
45,  18 — buzzard,  19,  16. 

Turn,  to,  59,  2 — about,  to,  44,  17 — 
back,  to,  59,  2 — out  of  the  road, 
to,  105,  2 — the  wrong  side  out, 
to,  22,  27. 

Turned,  116,  12 — about,  44,  18. 

Turnip,  48,  20, 


INDEX. 


231 


Turtle,  147,   16 — dove,    80,    11 — 

land, 136,  II. 
Twenty,  98,  5. 
Twice,  98,  3. 
Twig,  79,  2;  131,  5. 
Twilight,  68,  16;  69,  I. 
Twin,  36,  3. 
Twisted,  116,  12. 
Two,  97,    21 — days  ago,    98,  9 — 

days    hence,    98,    10 — hundred, 

97,  22 — sorts,  98,  2 — to  rend  in, 

29,4. 
Twofold,  98,  2. 
Tying,  36,  4. 


Ugly,  70,  II,  12. 

Unable  to  bear,  to  be,  129,  16 — to 

perform,  to  be,  16,  9  ;   107,  18. 
Unanimity,  95,  19. 
Unawares,  156,  22. 
Unbeliever,  93,  20;  iii,  21  ;   113, 

16. 
Unbending,  145,  12. 
Unburnt  brick,  165,  27. 
Uncertain,  122,  9 — to  be,  122,  6. 
Uncivil,  to  speak,  75,  13. 
Uncle,  an,  128,  11. 
Uncommonness,  145,  24. 
Unconcerned,  to  be,  15,  6. 
Under,   34,    18 — 47,   12 — the   hill, 

16,  17. 
Understand,  to,  112,  12 — each  other, 

to,  100,  8 — well,  to,  174,  26. 
Understanding,  94,  7  ;    100,   7 — to 

be  of  good,  156,  5;   175,  13. 
Uneasiness,  123,  20. 
Uneasy,  to  be,  75,  18. 
Unexpectedly,  156,  22. 
Unforeseen,  117,  24. 
Unfortunate,  107,  23 — to  be,  70,  2. 
Unhappiness,  70,  3. 
Unhappy,  70,   5 — to  be,  70,   2 — to 

make,  70,  4. 


Uninhabited  place,  an,  139,  8 ;  140, 

2. 
Union,  71,  20. 
United,  71,  22. 
Unity,  71,  20. 
Unless,  41,  24. 
Unlike,  144,  16;  147,  9. 
Unlucky,  99,    13;    107,  23 — ^he  is, 

148,  24. 
Unpleasant,   morning,    69,    23 — to 

be,  145,  16. 
Unpleasing,  uncommonly,  145,  22. 
Unripe,  23,  i. 
Unruly,   56,    16;    156,   14 — to   be, 

156,  13- 
Unseen,  99,  17. 
Untie  to,  40,  13;  59,  15, 
Until,  114,  21  ;  131,  20 — here,  114, 

21 — now,  88,  I;  112,  8. 
Unto,  114,  21. 
Untractable,  24,  8. 
Untwisted,  46,  19. 
Unusual,  147,  9. 
Unwilling,  129,  6— to  be,  129,  3 — 

to  give,  to  be,  152,  20 — to  go,  to 

be,  129,  13. 
Unwillingly,    129,    6 — do    it,    100, 

17 — to  be  somewhere,  128,  19 — 

to  plant,  129,  7 — to  work,  129,  8. 
Unworthy,  94,  i. 
Up,  hill,   154,   14— lift   it,  35,  I— 

there,    167,    3 — to   give,    16,  4 ; 

119,  6 — to  rise,  105,  23. 
Upland,  63,   9;    64,    21 — hickory, 

54,  6. 
Upon  earth,  13,  I. 
Upright,  172,  6 — person,  an,   125, 

6 — saying,  125,  14 — to  be,  125,  5. 
Uprightness,  172,  7. 
Upward,  49,  4. 
Usage,  kind,  170,  4. 
Use,  bad   language,  to,  70,   I — for 

firewood,  to,  139,  7 — of,  to  make, 

22,  6 — 24,  13;  35,  II — old  from. 


232 


INDEX. 


78,  4 — somebody  ill,  to,  56,  23  ; 
70,  6 — somebody  well,  to,  173, 
I — some  one  ill,  to,  44,  15. 

Useful,  22,  10. 

Usual  with  one,  as  is,  33,  9. 


Vagabond,  80,  20. 

Vain,  in,  22,  i  ;  102,  16 — labor  in, 

139,  16. 
Vale,  a,  105,  16. 

Valley,  a,  105,  16 — in  the,  105,  18. 
Valuable,  18,  2;   158,  22. 
Value,  61,  19,  21 — high,  68,  i — to, 

14,  23;  67,  19 — some  one,  to,  67, 

12. 
Vanish,  to,  83,  9. 
Vein,  a,  86,  18. 
Venture  to  go,  to,  13,  20. 
Verily,  54,  9,  13. 
Very,  49,  16;  54,  9— good,  49,  16 

— little,  70,   16;   139,  2,  3 — long 

ago,   164,  13 — much,  49,   16,  17 

— much  so,  49,    17 — near,   no, 

19 — peaceable,  14,  7. 
Victuals,  86,  12. 
View,  to,  137,  10. 
Vile  talk,  72,  15. 
Vine,  poison,  121,  2. 
Violent,  14,  10. 
Viper,  122,  14. 
Virginian,  27,  23. 
Visible,  it  is  plainly,  174,  24. 
Visit,  to,  55,  5 — somebody,  to,  55,  4. 
Vociferation,  exclamation  of,  49,  11, 

19;   103,  15. 
Vomit,  to,  73,  3  ;  79,  25 — to  take  a, 

79.  26. 
Vomiting,  79,  27. 
Vouchsafe,  to,  138,  5. 


Wade,  to,  143,  9  ;  147,  2. 
Wages,  log,  20. 


Wagon,  141,  12. 

Wait,  to.  III,  12 — for  somebody, to, 
III,  II — for  with  much  concern, 
to,    29,   3 — with    impatience,  to, 

23,  II. 

Waited,  he,  114,  i. 

Waken  somebody,  to,  142,  19. 

Wakening,  142,  20. 

Walk,  to,  12,  2  ;  61,  14 ;  119,  2,  5 
— about,  to,  86,  3 — alone,  to,  92, 
25 — fast,  to,  58,  2 — humbly,  to, 
138,  2 — to  begin  to,  119,  I — to 
make,  61,  16 — with,  to,  163,  9. 

Walker,  112,  10 — night,  102,  12. 

Walketh,  he  that,  112,  10. 

Walking,  good,   175,    I — road,  21, 

3- 
Walnut,   120,  12 — black,  120,  13 — 

white,  104,  17. 
Wampum,  45,  i — belt  of,  103,  3 — 

string  of,  127,  18. 
Want,  loi,  12,18 — to,  37,  22;  loi, 

17- 

Wanting,  loi,   16,  19,  20. 

Wantonness,  156,  14. 

War,  69,  8  ;  94,  19  ;  143,  4 — chief, 
a,  50,  10 — time,  69,  24  ;  143,  6 — 
to  begin,  102,  13 — to  go  to,  76,  9 
— whoop,  the,  16,  21. 

Warm,  43,  23,  25  ;  57,  24 — house, 
43,  26  ;  44,  I — one's  self,  to,  25, 
16 — the  hands,  to,  21,  18 — thy- 
self, 159,  3. 

Warped,  150,  18. 

Warrior,  94,  18;  143,  5. 

Wash,  to,  40,7;  57,  5,  13 — one's 
self,  to,  57,  8. 

Washed,  40,  5. 

Washing  tub,  39,  2. 

Wasp,  20,  12. 

Wasp's  nest,  a,  150,  i. 

Watch  a  place,  to,  102,  9 — some- 
body, to,  102,  4 — to  keep,  102, 
7- 


INDEX. 


233 


Watchful,  to  be,  92,  21. 

Watchman,  99,  11  ;  102,  8  ;  156,  4. 

Water,  76,  15 — beech,  165,  19 — 
clear,  57,  1 1  ;  87,  4 — deep,  27, 
22 — deep  dead,  120,  17 — down 
the,  90,  4 — falls,  the,  48,  12 — 
flows  rapidly,  the,  57,  20 — from 
the,  44,  23 — high,  27,  22  ;  28,  4; 
77,  3 — is  rising,  the,  114,  6 — low, 
36,22 — overflowed  with,  120,8 — 
— over  the,  37,  5 — pail,  140,  6  ; 
I53»  17 — shallow,  139,4 — snake, 
76,  16 — still,  55,  14 — still  or 
standing,  28,  14 — this  side  the, 
148,  15 — to  boil,  in  till  dry,  48, 
14 — to  go  by,  118,  16 — to  go 
down  the,  90,  2 — to  make,  133, 
10 — to  pull  somebody  out  of 
the,  35,  20 — to  sail  up  the,  90, 
14 — to  set  off  by,  18,  12 — to  take 
out  of  the,  45,  9 — to  take  some- 
body out  of  the,  121,  6 — to  throw, 
98,  23 — tumbles  down  from  a 
precipice,  133,  21 — turtle,  147, 
16. 

Watereth,  he  that,  155,  il. 

Watermelon,  30,  19. 

Water-snake,  46,  4. 

Way,  a  little  this,  148,  17— by  the, 
22,12;  32,  12;  167,  23 — that, 
148,  18 — this,  51,  6;  148,  14,  18 
— to  hunt  by  the,  168,  2. 

We,  53,  17  ;  97.  8— also,  52,  14— 
94,  lo — too,  94,  10. 

Weak,  126,  20;  127,3,11;  128,1, 
2;  167,  18 — hand,  126,  22 — it 
is,  126,  21 — to  be,  126,  14  ;  167, 
16. 

Weakly,  72,  13;  126,  20 — look, 
126,  23 — to  be,  119,  12. 

Weakness,  126,  15,  23. 

Wealth,  no,  13. 

Weary  of  staying,  to  be,  130,  3. 

Weasel,  124,  13. 


Weather,  bad  morning,  69, 12 — 
clear,  87,  2  ;  172,  i — mild,  168, 
27 — rainy,  98,  18 — stormy,  69, 
23 — sultry,  99,  16 — ugly,  98,  18 
— very  hot,  57,  18 — warm,  172,1. 

Wedge,  iron,  105,  6. 

Weed,  the  bitter,  157,  i. 

Weeds,  65,  11 — overgrown  with, 
65,  10. 

Week,  39,  25 — this,  32,  10. 

Weep,  those  who,  63,  23. 

Weepers,  63,  23. 

Weeping,  63,  24;  124,  5 — to 
come,  114,  15 — to  go  about,  109, 
7 — to  go  away,  18,  14. 

Weigh,  to,  120,  19. 

Weighty,  most,  18,  7. 

Well,  9,  l;  18,  23;  30,24;  38,  3  ; 
51,  5,7,9;  142,4;  171,  5;  175. 
7 — behaved  person,  a,  153,  25 — 
cut,  175,  7 — hewn,  175,  7 — it 
goes,  171,  8 — squared,  175,  7 — 
to  be,  171,  I,  6 — to  be  always, 
152,  16 — to  be  seen,  172,  4 — to 
make,  171,  4;  175,  10 — to  use 
somebody,  173,  i. 

West,  176,  14— wind,  64,  19. 

Westerly,  176,  14. 

Westward,  176,  15. 

Wet,  98,  24;  133,  5;  137,  3— 
ground,  124,24;  133,3,  4 — 1° 
make,  56,  18;  98,  23  ;   131,  4. 

Whale,  76,  17. 

What,  33,  5  ;  55,  19— may  it  be,  55, 
19 — then,  55,  19 — to  do,  31,  24 — 
we  are  destined  for,  32,  7. 

When,  145,  13. 

Whence,  135,  I — he  came,  154,  20 
he  is,  from,  177,  12 — to  come 
from,  103,  25. 

Where,  31,  8;  34,  8;  135,  i,  6; 
138,  II — else,  108,  4 — I  am,  34, 
15 — it  is,  35,  8 — it  is  to  be  got 
from,  176,  18 — the  road  goes  up 


234 


INDEX. 


the  hill,  154,  13 ;  155,  6 — to- 
wards, 135,  I — we  are,  12,  8. 

Whereabouts,  135,  i. 

Wherefrom,  135,  i. 

Wherever  or  whither  I  go,  31,8. 

Whether,  35,  14. 

Which,  24,  14 — then,  135,  6. 

While,  a  little,  63,  16;  90,  8 — a 
long,  46,  10 — a  very  little,  141,  20 
— ago,  a  little,  40,  3;  171,  11 — 
in  a  little,  89,  15,  20 — yet  a  little, 
47,  18. 

Wliip  somebody,  to,  131,  17. 

Whippoorwill,  121,  lo. 

Whisper,  122,  16. 

White,  151,  8,  16;  166,  5,  13— 
frost,  103,  I — it  looks,  i65,  4 — 
oak,  161,  13 — person,  151,  15; 
166,  12 — thorn,  the,  68,  24 — 
thread,  166,  6 — walnut,  104,  17 
— yarn,  166,  6. 

Whither,  34,  8 — T  go,  31,  8. 

Whitherwards,  135,  i. 

Who,  24,  14 — I  am,  35,  12 — is 
it,  24, 15 — is  there,  24,  14 — then, 
24,  14 — was  with  him,  163,  15. 

Whole,  27,  II;  82,  4,  II,  14 — to 
make,  106,  15. 

Wholly,  78,   15,  16;  82,  13;  144, 

23- 
Whoop,  the  war,  16,  21. 
Whooping   cough,   9,    5 — to    have 

the,  9,  6. 
Whoredom,  12,  23. 
Why,    55,    19;   121,7 — n°',    ^21, 

7 — perhaps,  121,  7. 
Wicked,    78,    7,    8 — act,  69,   15 — 

language,  72,  15 — man,  82,  24 — 

servant,  69,  14. 
Wickedness,  71,  8. 
Wide,    10,   6;   150,15 — as,  as,  32, 

19 — as  the  world  is,  as  big  and, 

33,  I — plain,  a,  62,  i ;  78,  14. 
Widow,  128,  13,  15. 


Wife,  his  brother's,  163,  11 — my, 
158,  I. 

Wild,  24,  8 — apple,  142,  22 — bay, 
35,18 — cat,  a,  145,  15 — cherry, 
87,  13 — goose,  52,  I — hemp,  47, 
13 — red  plum,  the,  105,  5, 

Wilderness,    26,  9 — in  the,  139,  9. 

Will,  last,  36,  16;   101,  4. 

Willful,  15,  I. 

Willing,  be,  38,  3 — I  am,  102,  18 
— to  be,  64,  10. 

Willingly,  160,  6 — I  do,  102,  18 — 
to  go,  160,  13 — to  hear,  160,  12 
— to  live,  160,  7. 

Win,  to,  168,  22. 

Wind  blows  hard,  the,  56,  19 — 
ceases,  the,  15,  24 — comes  from 
a  particular  quarter,  177,  2 — 
comes  from  thence,  the,  176,  13 
— in  the  belly,  109,  9 — moder- 
ately warm,  168,  26 — north,  66, 
II — southerly,  127,  5 — the  east, 
12,  4 — west,  64,  19. 

Window,  31,  3. 

Wing,  175,  16,  17. 

Wink  of  an  eye,  134,  I. 

Winter,  66,  10 — last,  35,  6 — middle 
of,  62,  4 — this,  32,  10. 

Wipe  off,  to,  146,  4. 

Wiped  out,  146,  2. 

Write  to  somebody,  114,  13. 

Wisdom,  168,  5  ;   178,  2. 

Wise,  65,  3  ;  156,  6 — man,  156,  7; 
168,  6 — men,  63,  25  ;  156,  8 — to 
be,  156,  5. 

Wisely,  67,  I. 

Wish,  36,  13. 

Wished  for,  15,  5 — it  is  to  be,  36,  7  ; 

15,  3- 
Witch,  102,  12. 
Witchcraft,  72,  lO,  II. 
With,   89,    6;    149,   3;    164,   5 — it, 

47,  21. 
Withered,  127,  1,4. 


INDEX. 


235 


Withers,  it,  126,  21. 

Within,  16,  19,  22,  23;  148,  3; 
170,  I. 

Without,  56,  6. 

Witness,  to  bear,  113,  8. 

Wittiness,  67,  2. 

Wolf,  83,  6 ;   142,  8. 

Woman,  103,  9 — a  single,  53,  16 — 
elderly,  53,  15 — old,  27,  8 — rich, 
158,  24 — the  breasts  of  a,  loi, 
II — young,  177,  24. 

Woman's  cousin,  a,  103,  2. 

Womb,  16,  16. 

Wonder,  exclamation  of,  52,  2 — to, 
37,  14;   173,8. 

Wonderful, 33,  17;  52,2;  74,  10; 
145,  19;  173,  9— it  is,  173,  10— 
it  seems,  173,  11 — work,  37,  13. 

Wonderfully,  to  behave,  13,  24. 

Wonders,  to  do  great,  37,  12. 

Wood,  basket,  26,  15— boat,  20,  11 
— cutter,  74,  5 — full  of,  35,  9 — 
he  fetches,  91,  7 — piece  of,  135, 
8 — pine,  59,  7 — rotten,  161,  6 — to 
chop,  74,  4 — to  come  from  cut- 
ting, 22,  2 — to  fetch,  91,  9 — to 
split,  104,  II — white,  136,  19. 

Woodcock,  80,  16. 

Woodpecker,  108,  19;  red-headed, 
80,  9. 

Woods,  140,  2. 

Woody,  135,  9. 

Word,  22,  18 — fine,  172,  II — for 
us,  he  speaks  a  good,  172,  12 — 
meaning  of  the,  61,  5 — of  life, 
112,  2 — of  or  from  the,    154,  16. 

Work,  17,  15;  84,  27— good,  170, 
19 — nasty,  98,  15 — to,  84,  25 — 
to  come  from,  21,  24 — to  do 
dirty,  98,  14 — to  finish  a,  42,  13 
— unwillingly,  to,  129,  8 — with, 
to,  163,  8 — wonderful,  37,  13. 

Working,  to  stop,  16,  3;  22,  5. 

Works  well,  it,  174,  11. 
u 


World,  as  big  and  wide  as  the,  33, 
I — at  the  end  of  the,  31,  14 — 
end  of  the,  157,  19 — round,  all 
the,  33,  I— the,  112,  5. 

Worm,  86,  22 — little,  86,  23 — rain, 
49,  15 — silk,  99,  18. 

Worn  out,  83,  10. 

Worship.  110,  6 — to,  109,  22. 

Worth,  61,  19— nothing,  23,  8. 

Worthiness,  169,  17. 

Worthy,  to  be,  33,  3;   i6g,  16. 

Would  that!  51,  14- 

Wound,  12,  5;  82,  I — to  bind  up 
or  dress  a,  11,  18. 

Wounded,  12,  6. 

Wrangle,  to,  144,  19. 

Wrenched,  143,  19. 

Wrinkled.  117,  5. 

Write,  to,  62,  20,  25. 

Writer,  63,  I. 

Writing,  72,  1 9. 

Written,  62,  22,  23 — as  is,  32,  6. 

Wrong,  hearing,  144,  11 — side  out, 
to  turn,  22,  27 — to  do,  144,  5 — 
to  do  it,  108,  3— to  hear,  144,  10 
to  make,  107,  17;   144,  5. 

Wrongly,  to  set  about,  107,  17. 


Yarn,  black,   134,  13— net  of,  50, 

16— red,  68,  23— white,  166,  6. 
Yawn,  to,  124,  21. 
Ye,  53,  18— also,  52,  15. 
Year,  36,  11— next,  36,  12— spring 

of  the,  132,   17. 
Yearling,  20,  15. 
Yeasts,  109,  11. 
Yellow,  162,  12,  13. 
Yellow- wood  tree,  162,  10. 
Yes,  26,  7,  8;  29,  19;  30,  1\  45, 

2  ;  52,  1 1  ;   54,  10 — exclamation 

of  approval,  45,  2. 
Yesterday,  148,  10;   172,  16. 
Yet,   16,    14;   18,  22;    24,   17;  34, 


236 


INDEX. 


20;  45,  25;  50,  4,  II;  121,  3; 
146,  24;  178,  4 — a  little  while, 
47,  18 — more,  18,  8;  121,  3; 
not,  35,  3,4;  93,  15,  16,  17. 
Yonder,  50,  5  ;  174,  i — to  thither, 
8g,  12. 


You,  53,  18— too,  52,  15. 

Young  buck,  24,  18;  deer,  72,  20 

— of  a  bird  or  fowl,  the,  21,  9. 
Younger  brother  or  sister,  27,  16. 
Zealous,  133,  6. 


wp^ 


^  i>«l  -^ 


