
A Concise Dictionary
of Minnesota Ojibwe

The University of Minnesota Press
gratefully acknowledges
the generous assistance provided
for publication of this book
by
the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe Indians
and
Grand Casino, Inc.

A Concise Dictionary
of Minnesota Ojibwe
John D. Nichols and Earl Nyholm
Illustrations by Earl Nyholm
University of Minnesota Press
Minneapolis
London

Copyright 1995 by the Regents of the University of Minnesota
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.
Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290, Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520
http://www.upress.umn.edu
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
Fifth printing, 2002
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Nichols, John (John D.)
A concise dictionary of Minnesota Ojibwe / John D. Nichols and
Earl Nyholm.
p. 
cm.
Includes index.
Rev., expanded ed. of: Ojibwewi-Ikidowinan. 1979.
ISBN 0-8166-2427-5 (acid-free paper).—ISBN 0-8166-2428-3 (pbk. :
acid-free paper)
1. Ojibwa language—Dictionaries—English. 2. English language—
Dictionaries—Ojibwa. I. Nyholm, Earl. II. Ojibwewi-Ikidowinan.
III. Title.
PM853.N53 
1995
497'.3—dc20 
94-35219
The University of Minnesota is an
equal-opportunity educator and employer.

Contents
Preface 
vii
Key to Entries 
ix
Sounds and Orthography 
xxiii
Part I
Ojibwe-English 
3
Part II
English-Ojibwe Index 
133

This page intentionally left blank 

Preface
This dictionary of Anishinaabemowin, the Ojibwe or Chippewa language,
can be used by all interested in the linguistic and cultural heritage of the
Anishinaabe. It is intended primarily for students of Ojibwe as a second lan-
guage, and for speakers wishing models for spelling in a standardized or-
thography. Although, with just over seven thousand words, it contains but a
small part of the language's total vocabulary, the words included have been
selected to be representative of the everyday language of conversation and
of narration. To these have been added a rich sample of traditional cultural
vocabulary.
Anishinaabemowin is not spoken in a single standard form but varies
from place to place in sounds, vocabulary, and grammar. The words in this
dictionary represent the speech of several individuals belonging to the Mille
Lacs Band of Ojibwe at Mille Lacs Lake, near Onamia, Minnesota. Other
forms of the same words used there and elsewhere are equally valid. Teach-
ers will want to supplement the words listed here with those prevalent in
their home communities.
This book is an expansion and complete revision of Ojibwewi-Ikidowinan:
An Ojibwe Word Resource Book published in 1979. We have long felt the
need to revise that book and wish to thank Kent Smith, Director of Indian
Studies at Bemidji State University, for his encouragement and support for
the necessary editorial meetings. The Social Sciences and Humanities Re-
search Council of Canada supported the data collection and analysis by
John Nichols that underlies this book. The Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe pro-
vided technical support for database processing and manuscript prepara-
tion. Richard Rhodes's superb Eastern Ojibwa-Chippewa-Ottawa Dictionary
(1985), covering several of the more easterly dialects of Anishinaabemowin,

Preface 
viii
introduced a number of new conventions for Ojibwe dictionaries, some of
which we have adopted here.
The words are drawn largely from the stories and conversations of
Maude Kegg (b. 1904) and the late Jim Littlewolf (b. 1895), among others.
Many words were originally supplied by the late Selam Ross of Cass Lake
for the first student word list prepared at Bemidji State University, or by
Earl Nyholm. Others at Mille Lacs have supplied words or helped to deter-
mine meanings, among them Mildred Benjamin, James Clark, Jessie Clark,
Lucy Clark, Loretta Kalk, Betty Kegg, Darrell Kegg, Donald Kegg, Ernest
Kegg, Herman Kegg, Jesse Kegg, Matt Kegg, Batiste Sam, Frances Sam,
and Frank Sam. The language lessons of Rose Barstow, Angeline North-
bird, and Timothy Dunnigan (1977-80) of the University of Minnesota,
Mildred Benjamin (1991) of Neyashing School at Mille Lacs, and Richard
Gresczyk and James Clark (1992) of Minneapolis suggested many new
words to include. The total database from which the words were selected
has over 25,000 words. This will serve as the basis for a future reference
dictionary. Nearly all of the words have been rechecked with Maude Kegg,
to whom we owe the greatest debt.
John D. Nichols 
Earl Nyholm
Department of Native Studies/ 
Department of Modern
Department of Linguistics 
Languages
University of Manitoba 
Bemidji State University
Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Bemidji, Minnesota

Key to Entries
General Form of Entries
Each entry in the Ojibwe-English section begins with a head word, printed
in boldface, and is sequenced according to the position of this head word in
the Ojibwe alphabetical order:
a, aa, b, c, d, e, g, h, ', i, ii, j, k, m, n, o, oo, p, s, t, w, y, z
The head word is often only one of many inflected word forms sharing a
common word stem. The word stem carries the basic meaning of a word.
Inflections are prefixes, suffixes, or sound changes, applied to the core word
stem, which express grammatical ideas such as 'plural' or 'first person'. The
actual number of inflected word forms that share a stem can be large; for
example, the stem ganawaabam- ('looks at someone') can occur in well over
a thousand inflected forms, of which the following are only a few examples:
inganawaabamaa 'I look at someone'
giganawaabamaasizvaanaanig 
'we don't look at them'
oganawaabamaawaan 
'they look at someone'
inganawaabamigonaadog 
'someone must be looking at us'
ganawaabamagiban 
'had I looked at someone'
genawaabamajig 'the ones you look at'
The addition of prefixes called preverbs to indicate secondary ideas
such as time and direction creates thousands more possible word forms for
each word stem. A few examples related to the first of the examples above
are as follows:

Key to Entries 
x
ingii-kanawaabamaa 'I looked at someone'
ingii-pi-ganawaabamaa 'I came here to look at someone'
inga-ganawaabamaa 'I will look at someone'
niwii-kanawaabamaa 'I want to look at someone'
inga-gagwe-ganawaabamaa 'I will try to look at someone'
Since the number of actual forms of a given word stem is too large for all
of them to be in a dictionary, a single word form is selected as the head
word to stand in for all of the inflected forms sharing the stem.
The head word is followed by a class code, printed in italics, identifying
the kind of word the head word is, and a gloss, suggesting possible transla-
tions of the head word. The following illustrates a complete entry for a sim-
ple word:
Other kinds of information may be given in an entry. The following sam-
ple entry contains additional forms of the head word and a reference to an
alternate form of the head word or to a similar word in another local variety
of the language. These are printed in boldface. The labels that identify the
forms and introduce a reference word are printed in italics, as are any other
notes on the structure or use of the word:
Head words or reference words followed by an asterisk identify word
forms not used at Mille Lacs by the contributors, but which are known to
be used by others or in adjacent varieties of the language. For example, the
equivalent of 'those' (when referring to animates) in Mille Lacs Ojibwe is
ingiw, but two forms of the same word used in other varieties of Ojibwe are
also given and marked with the asterisk as igiw* and agiw*.
Some entries present the word stem after the head word when the form
of the stem cannot be determined by inspection of the head word. It ap-
pears in boldface and between slashes as a warning that it is not necessarily
a complete word by itself without inflections:

xi 
Key to Entries
In the English-Ojibwe Index, the words are grouped under English keys,
sequenced in English alphabetical order. The keys are important words or
phrases occurring in the gloss of one or more Anishinaabemowin words in
the dictionary. The keys are printed in capitals flush to the left margin.
Under each key appear one or more secondary keys, printed in small cap-
itals and indented from the left margin. These are English words or phrases
incorporating the key, but usually giving additional words to narrow down
the range of meaning of the target word. Anishinaabemowin words whose
gloss incorporates the meaning of the secondary key follow one by one, with
a gloss for each (unless it is the same as an immediately preceding secon-
dary key or the gloss for the previous word), a word stem or plural end-
ing for some entries, then the head word in boldface, and a class code in
italics:
Entries for the Different Word Classes
The major classes of words in Anishinaabemowin are verbs, nouns, pro-
nouns, and particles. The verbs and nouns occur in a number of sub-
classes, each coded differently and using a particular set of inflections.
Several kinds of pronouns exist, some with inflected forms. Particles are
uninflected words and can be divided into many sub-classes depending on
their structure and the way they are used in sentences. Major word-building
prefixes called preverbs are given separate entries although the head of
each entry is not a separate word by itself. The major forms of the inflec-

Key to Entries 
xii
Table I. Class Codes
Code
na
nod
na-pt
ni
nid
ni-pl
nm
pc
Pf
pn
pr
pvl
pv2
pv3
pv4
vai
vai2
vai + o
vii
vta
Word class
animate noun
dependent animate noun
animate participle
inanimate noun
dependent inanimate noun
inanimate participle
number
particle
prefix
prenoun
pronoun
preverb of class 1
preverb of class 2
preverb of class 3
preverb of class 4
animate intransitive verb
class 2 animate intransitive verb
animate intransitive verb
with object
inanimate intransitive verb
transitive animate verb
Description
noun of the animate gender that is not
obligatorily possessed
noun of the animate gender that is
obligatorily possessed
participle form of a verb functioning as
a noun of the animate gender
noun of the inanimate gender that is
not obligatorily possessed
noun of the inanimate gender that is
obligatorily possessed
participle form of a verb functioning as
a noun of the inanimate gender
uninflectable number particle
uninflectable particle (adverb,
conjunction, exclamation, etc.)
personal prefix appearing on nouns
and verbs
lexical prefix forming a particle from a
noun stem
pronoun (demonstrative, dubitative,
indefinite, interrogative, pausal, or
personal)
tense, aspect, mood, or syntactic
prefix appearing on verbs
directional prefix occurring on verbs
relative prefix occurring on verbs (and
on some nouns and particles)
lexical prefix occurring on verbs,
nouns, or particles
verb with an intransitive stem, an
animate subject, and no object
verb with a transitive stem (as for an
inanimate object), an animate subject,
and no object; inflected as intransitive
verb with an intransitive stem, an
animate subject, and an object
verb with an intransitive stem, an
inanimate subject, and no object
verb with a transitive stem and an
animate object

xiii 
Key to Entries
Table I. Class Codes (cont.)
Code
vti
vti2
vti3
Word class
transitive inanimate verb
class 2 transitive inanimate
verb
class 3 transitive inanimate
verb
Description
verb with a transitive stem, and an
inanimate object, and a characteristic
set of inflections
verb with an inanimate object but with
a different characteristic set of
inflections
verb with an inanimate object but with
a different characteristic set of
inflections
tional personal prefixes are also given entries of their own. The class codes
for words are interpreted in Table 1.
Entries for Nouns. The typical noun entry has the singular form of the
noun as the head word. The class codes identify the gender of the noun: na
for animate nouns and ni for inanimate nouns. Nouns in the animate gen-
der include a number of non-living things (e.g., mitts, nets, and playing
cards) as well as words identifying humans, animals, trees, and spirits.
Other words referring to nouns agree with them in gender.
The full plural form of a noun, labelled £/, is given in noun entries in the
Ojibwe-English section of the dictionary. A plural noun form contains the
noun stem and a plural suffix, and reveals the gender: plurals ending in g are
animate and those ending in n are inanimate. Although the stem of a noun
is abstract and not necessarily identical to the singular form, it is convenient
to view the plural form of most nouns as consisting of the singular form to
which a plural ending is added. In the English-Ojibwe Index, the singular
form of the noun is followed by this plural ending, cited with an initial hy-
phen.
In the Ojibwe-English section, certain other important inflected forms
are provided to help students, although they are usually predictable from a
comparison of the singular and plural forms, or from the abstract stem. The
locative form, labelled loc, is an adverbial form of a noun stem indicating
location 'in, at, to, from, etc.' or comparison. The locative forms of nouns
naming living things and abstractions are omitted here; although possible,
they are relatively uncommon. All the locative forms end in -ng. The
diminutive form, labelled dim, indicates relative small size: 'a small one
(small for the kind of thing named), a baby one'. The diminutive forms are
omitted for nouns naming abstractions and for others where a diminutive
seems to be uncommon. All of the productive diminutives cited end in a
long nasalized vowel followed by s, indicated in the orthography with the
long vowel followed by ns.
The following is a typical entry for a noun:

Key to Entries 
xiv
The head word of a typical entry for a dependent noun, an obligatorily
possessed noun always having a personal prefix before its stem, is a singular
form with a first-person possessor shown by the personal prefix. The class
codes also indicate gender: nod for animate dependent nouns and nid for
inanimate dependent nouns. The underlying stem, to which other personal
prefixes may be attached, is given between slashes and with preceding and
trailing hyphens:
The stem of a noun is given for dependent nouns and for those nouns
commonly occurring only in the plural form, which is then used as the head
word of the entry. The stem in such entries is given with a trailing hyphen
and between slashes, following the head word. The stem of other nouns
may be determined from the singular form and the plural form.
Entries for Verbs. The form of the inflected word selected as the head
word in entries for verbs varies according to the class of the verb. The
classes are distinguished on the basis of the stem class, reflecting transitivity
and gender, and the paradigm class of inflections used. Because of gram-
matical differences between Anishinaabemowin and English, it is conve-
nient to use certain gloss codes in the glosses for special types of verb
objects. Table 2 gives definitions of such codes.
Several additional inflected forms are supplied. Entries for the verbs
most likely to have a first-person subject are supplied with an independent
Table 2. Gloss codes
Code
s.o.
s.t.
(s.t.)
Expansion
someone
something
(something)
Description
the object is animate, either human or non-human
the object is inanimate
optional second object of either gender

xv 
Key to Entries
form (also called form A) word inflected for a first-person subject. Forms
using the independent or A order (paradigm) of inflections occur primarily
in main clauses. All verb entries also give a participle form inflected for a
third-person subject. A participle is a nominalized verb form similar to the
conjunct form (also called form B) of verbs appearing primarily in subor-
dinate clauses. Both share the conjunct or B order (paradigm) of inflections
to which participles may add noun-like plural or other inflections. The par-
ticiples occur in a variety of grammatical constructions including relative
clauses and who and what questions. The participle forms characteristically
show the ablaut process called initial change, which alters the first syllable
of the stem by a change in sounds, the insertion of a syllable, or the addition
of a prefix. Initial change may also appear on certain other conjunct verb
forms. The most common expressions of this process of initial change are
presented in Table 3.
Entries for Animate Intransitive Verbs (vai and vai2). These are
verbs that typically take an animate subject and make no inflectional refer-
ence to an object. The head word for an animate intransitive verb is a third-
person singular subject form in the independent or A (main clause) order of
inflections, meaning 'he, she, or it (something animate) is X, does X, is
doing X'. If the stem differs from the head word, it is given between slashes
and with a trailing hyphen. The class code and a gloss follow. The glosses
are given as English infinitives but without the 'to'. The independent form,
labelled Isg, is given for the verbs most likely to have a first-person singular
subject. It means 'I am X, do X, am doing X'. The participle, labelled prt,
Table 3. Initial change
Initial change is a process that affects the first syllable of a preverb or verb stem in
a conjunct verb or participle. In the regular process of initial change the first vowel
of the preverb or stem is replaced as follows:
Unchanged
a
aa
e
i
ii
0
oo
Changed
e
ayaa
aye
e
aa
we
waa
Certain stems beginning in dan, dazh, das, dash, or daa do not undergo regular ini-
tial change but rather prefix en. The main other irregular form is the change of the
direction prefix bi- 'here, hither' to ba-.

Key to Entries 
xvi
has a third-person singular subject and means 'one who is X, does X, is
doing X'. The following is a typical entry for such a verb:
For verbs most commonly used in a plural form, the head word is a
third-person plural independent form and the gloss may include a plural
pronoun. Many of these are reciprocal verbs, the reciprocal or mutual ac-
tion of which is typically expressed by translations such as 'they see each
other', and 'we run out together'. Other inflected forms in these entries are
also plural: the independent form labelled Ipl means 'we are X, do X, are
doing X', and the participle means 'the ones who are X, do X, are doing X'.
The word stem, stripped of all inflections, is presented with a trailing hy-
phen and between slashes following the plural head word. The following is
a typical entry for such a verb:
For some verbs commonly used in an impersonal form, the head word is
such a form with the ending -m. The stem follows.
Entries for Animate Intransitive Verbs with Objects (vai + o). Al-
though the animate intransitive (vai) verbs typically occur without objects,
many of them may take objects and some often do. The later are labelled
vai + o here. Their independent inflections may then be somewhat different
from those used when no object is present. The gloss in the entry for one of
these verbs includes the code (s.t.) to indicate an object may be present.
The form of the entry follows that of the animate intransitive verbs, but two
first-person singular subject independent forms are given, the first used
without an object and the second with an inanimate object and meaning 'I
do X to it, I am doing X to it'.

xvii 
Key to Entries
prt edaawed
PARTICIPLE FORM
Entries for Inanimate Intransitive Verbs (vii). These verbs take an inan-
imate or impersonal subject, but no object. The head word is a singular
subject independent order verb form, generally the same as the stem. The
gloss, following the class code, omits the English subject pronoun 'it' when
the subject is singular. Since the subject of such a verb is always inanimate
and thus third person, there are no first-person forms. The singular partici-
ple form follows the gloss. Inanimate intransitive stems, especially those
ending in a long vowel, may occur with an augment -magad with no appar-
ent change in meaning. For the long vowel-final stems, the augmented sin-
gular subject independent form is given after the label aug, followed by the
participle of'the augment, labelled as prt aug:
Where the verb is most commonly used in the plural, the head word is
given in the plural subject independent order form with the stem following.
The other forms are also given with plural subjects:
Entries for Transitive Inanimate Verbs (vti, vti2, vti3). These verbs
typically take an animate subject and an inanimate object. The head word is
a second-person singular subject on inanimate singular object form in the
imperative (command) order of inflections: '(you) do X to it!' The class
code and gloss follow. The position of the inanimate object is shown in the
gloss by the gloss code s.t., standing for 'something'. The first-person sin-
gular subject on inanimate singular object independent form, labelled Isg,
means 'I do X to it, am doing X to it'. The participle form has a third-per-
son singular subject and an inanimate singular object and means 'one who
does X to it, is doing X to it':

Key to Entries 
xviii
The underlying stem of each type of transitive inanimate verb can be
found by stripping the inflectional ending from the head word. For the vti,
the ending to remove is an; for the vti2, it is oon, and for most of the others
it is n. Thus the stem of the preceding example is /ganawaaband-/ found by
removing the ending -an from the head word.
Entries for Transitive Animate Verbs (vta). Transitive animate verbs
take animate objects. The typical head word is a second-person singular
subject on animate singular object form in the imperative (command) order
of inflections: '(you) do X to her, him, or it (animate thing)'. Where this
form is not identical to the stem, the word stem is given between slashes
and with a trailing hyphen. Three special symbols using capital letters may
appear in such word stems. They are explained in Table 4.
The class code and gloss follow. The position of the animate object in
the gloss is marked by the gloss code s.o., standing for 'someone', meaning
here 'him, her, or it (animate thing)'. This code indicates that the object is
grammatically animate, not that it is necessarily human or a living being.
Thus it stands for any animate noun object, including the non-living ones
(e.g., mitts, nets, and playing cards), as well as humans and animals. The
first-person singular subject on animate singular object independent form
follows, labelled Isg and meaning 'I do X to her, him, or it (animate thing);
I am doing X to her, him, or it (animate thing)'. All entries are given with a
third-person subject on animate singular object participle meaning 'one
who does X to him, her, or it (animate thing); one who is doing X to him,
her, or it (animate thing)'.
Some double-object verbs allow a second object of either gender in
addition to the primary animate object (often the recipient or benefici-
ary). This second object is indicated in the glosses with (s.t.), here indicat-

xix 
Key to Entries
Table 4. Special symbols in word stems
Symbol
N
S
nN
Meaning
The stem shows an alternation between n in certain inflected forms
arid zh in others, e.g., ImiiN-l in nimiinaa 'I give it to someone' and
miizh 'give it to someone!'
The stem shows an alternation between 5 in certain inflected forms
and sh in others, e.g., /mawadiS-/ in nimawadisaa 'I visit someone' and
mawadishishin 'visit me!'
The stem shows an alternation between n in certain inflected forms
arid nzh in others, e.g., IwiinN-l in wiinaad 'that he names him' and
wiinzh 'name someone!'
ing a noun of either gender. No inflectional reference is made to this
second object.
miizh /miiN-/ give (s.t.) to s.o.; hg nimiinaa; prt maanaad
A few verbs of this class commonly do not occur in the imperative forms
chosen as the head word. In these cases the head word is replaced by an un-
derlying stem., indicated as such by a trailing hyphen.
Reduplication on Verb Stems. Verb stems may be extended by a
process of reduplication in which a copy of all or part of the first syllable of
the stem, sometimes altered, is added to the front of the stem. A redupli-
cated stem may carry meanings of extension, distribution, or repetition in
time or space, or plurality, such as 'keep doing X', 'do X here and there',
'do X off and on', 'do X to or for each (of several)'. For example, the verb
stem /niimi-/ 'dance' has a reduplicated form /naaniimi-/ as in naaniimi
'he/she keeps dancing, dances here and there, dances off and on'. On stative
verbs it is commonly used by older speakers when the subject is plural: gin-
waa 'it is long', gagaanwaawan "they (inanimate) are long'. The most com-
mon regular strategies for reduplication are suggested in Table 5. However,
there are many stems that use an irregular pattern of reduplication. It has
not been possible to check all of the verbs in this dictionary with enough dif-
ferent speakers to establish all of the possible reduplicated forms of each
stem. To help those looking up Ojibwe words here, some irregular redupli-
cation strategies are shown in the Ojibwe-English section by cross-reference
entries, with the head of the entry being the start of an irregular redupli-
cated stem followed by a reference to the unreduplicated form. For exam-
ple, the entry indicating that stems beginning with gagaanw- (with the final
w of such entries to be treated also as o, so also gagaano-) may be based on
a stem beginning with ginw- (or gino-}:
gagaanw= < ginw=

Key to Entries 
xx
Table 5. Regular verb reduplication strategies
Reduplication is a process that prefixes a copy or partial copy of the first syllable of
a word stem to that stem, generally adding meanings of extension, repetition, dis-
tribution, or plurality. While verb stems can be reduplicated with a regular redupli-
cation strategy as suggested here, other stems require different strategies. Still
others seem to allow the use of more than one strategy, with the resulting forms,
perhaps, differing in meaning. In general, in the regular strategies, the length of the
initial syllable is preserved and repeated in the prefixed element. Except for initial
syllables with the vowel e the vowel of the prefixed element is a, or, if the vowel of
the initial syllable is long, aa. Initial o is treated as if initial wi- or wo-, apparently in
free variation. The cover symbol C stands for any initial consonant.
Unreduplicated initial sound
a=
aa=
e=
i=
o=
Ca=
Caa=
Ce=
Ci=
Cii=
Co=
Coo=
Reduplicated as
aya=
aayaa=
eye=
ayi=
wawo= or wawi=
CaCa=
CaaCaa=
CeCe=
CaCi=
CaaCii=
CaCo=
CaaCoo^
Some stems in initial Czv- retain the w in the prefixed element and others do not.
Stems that prefix en- in initial change may add a prefix in- before undergoing regu-
lar reduplication. In irregular reduplication strategies, the vowel of the initial sylla-
ble of the stem, the vowel of the prefixed element, or both may change in ways other
than those described above. The initial consonant may become fortis or appear as
the second member of a consonant cluster when the prefixed element is added.
In a few cases full entries are given for stems that have reduplication, ei-
ther regular or irregular. Several stems show a kind of frozen reduplication
that is not the result of the productive application of a reduplication strat-
egy. The common reduplicated forms of some of the particles are also given
separate entries.
Entries for Pronouns (pr), Particles (pc), Numbers (nm), and Pre-
verbs (pv). The entries for pronouns, particles, numbers, and preverbs
contain the head word (not actually a full word in the case of preverbs), the
class code, the gloss, and, in some entries, a note in italics providing some
explanation of the classification or use of the word:

xxi 
Key to Entries
Entries for Prefixes (ff). The entries for personal prefixes begin with a
prefix given with a trailing equal sign, indicating that the prefix is a word
part, not a word. When written in a full word, the personal prefix (or other
item so marked) is written without the equal sign and attached directly to
the rest of the word in which it occurs.
Notes on Glosses
The glosses for verbs may include qualifying words, sometimes enclosed
within parentheses, that indicate the nature or quality of the being or thing
described. For example, the gloss for the head word miskwaabikad is 'be red
(as something mineral)', showing that this verb is normally used only to de-
scribe things made of mineral substances such as metal, rock, or glass.
Other classifying phrases may limit the usual application of a verb to some-
thing stick- or woodlike (sticks, trees, people, etc.), sheetlike (cloth, cloth-
ing, bark, paper, etc.), or stringlike (rope, lines, snakes, etc.), among others.
There is usually a general verb for each meaning that is not limiting in this
way, and this is the one preferred by younger apeakers. In translating from
Ojibwe to English, such classifying phrases are not needed, but in translat-
ing from English to Ojibwe it is necessary to take these phrases into account
to make sure the appropriate verb for the material described is used, unless
the general form is preferred. In the traditional language, figurative use of
such classifying verbs will also be found.
There are few single-word equivalents in English for Ojibwe verbs of mo-
tion. Most types of motion are represented in Ojibwe not by a general verb
but by a word part, which combines with another word part or parts having
directional or descriptive meaning. For example, there is no general word
equivalent to English 'run' but rather a set of verb stems describing specific
ways of running, all containing a common word part meaning 'run', as in
biijibatoo 'run here', gizhiikaabatoo 'run fast', and maajiibatoo 'start off run-
ning'. The closest equivalents to English general motion verbs are forms
with initial bim(i)= meaning 'along, by' as in bimibatoo 'run along, run by'.
Verb stems ending in =bizo (vai) or =bide (vii) are often translated here
by phrases including English verbs such as 'drive, fly, operate, run, speed'.
The basic meaning of such verb stems is that the action is one of rapid mo-
tion or operation, and the selection of the appropriate English equivalents
requires the subject and situation to be taken into account. Similarly, verb
stems ending in =(i)se (but not =ose) may be translated with a wide range
of English words indicating smooth, rapid, and, often, uncontrolled or self-

Key to Entries 
xxii
initiated movement or action such as 'fly, fall, happen, pass (as time)'.
Again the subject and situation must be considered before the appropriate
translation can be selected.
The glosses for transitive verbs may include indications of the means or
instrument of execution of the action, or other qualifying words. For exam-
ple, the gloss for the head word bookoshkan is 'break s.t. in two by foot or
body', indicating the use of this verb is generally restricted to breaking done
by the body (as in sitting on or bumping against something) or by the feet
(as in kicking or stamping on something). Other common instrumental
phrases are 'by hand' (which might also indicate some abstract means),
'with the hands' or 'by pulling', 'by heat', 'by hitting', 'by throwing or drop-
ping' or 'in impact', and 'using something' (i.e., some tool). In translating
from Ojibwe to English it may not be necessary to include such qualifying
words, but in translating from English to Ojibwe it is necessary to look at
the full gloss to make sure the correct verb for a given means or instrument
is used.
Glosses containing the word 'certain' in phrases such as 'to a certain
place', 'from a certain place', or 'a certain number' translate words or per-
verbs containing (or acting as if they contained) word parts called relative
roots. Within a word these hold a place usually reserved for a part that
specifies location, direction, manner, extent, shape, size, number, or some
other adverbial idea. The relative roots classify the relative kind of specifi-
cation required but leave its exact nature open. They just tell that some
direction, way, extent, degree, amount, or number is to be specified. In sen-
tences they are used to point to some word or phrase (or even a gesture)
that specifies the adverbial idea more exactly. For example, the verb stem
izhaa 'go to a certain place' contains the relative root izh= (sometimes turn-
ing up in other stems as in=), which points to some place or direction. In a
statement this place or direction is specified with a separate word or phrase.
The word oodenaang 'to town' serves as the specifier in this example: Oode-
naang ingii-izhaa 'I went to town'. The relative root may also point to a
question word asking for the exact specification, as in this example with
aandi 'where?': Aandigaa-izhaayan? "Where did you go?'

Sounds and Orthography
There is no standard orthography shared by all of the local varieties of
Anishinaabemowin. Some speakers write in a kind of English folk phonet-
ics. Many speakers in Northern Canada write with the special characters of
the shorthand-based Northern Algonquian syllabary. The rornan orthogra-
phy used in the book is only one of many possible writing systems that have
been recently developed for Anishinaabemowin. Devised by Charles Fiero,
it has won wide acceptance among language teachers in the United States
and Canada. The main principles underlying it are that the letters or com-
binations of letters, although drawn from the same alphabet used to write
English, stand for Ojibwe sounds, not English sounds, and that only the
basic sounds (phonemes) of the language are written, not the predictable
phonetic variants of them.
As most speakers of Ojibwe familiar with this writing system are literate
in English, they often adopt English capitalization and punctuation conven-
tions. In this dictionary, however, capitalization is generally restricted to
place-names and personal names. Writers of Ojibwe should feel free to
follow English conventions of capitalization (and so capitalize names of na-
tionalities, days of the week, months, spirits and deities, etc.) and punctua-
tion if they find them helpful.
In the brief description of Ojibwe sounds and orthography given in this
section, some English words containing equivalents for Ojibwe sounds are
listed. These are only approximations as each language has its own system
of sounds arid pronunciations. The actual pronunciation of a speaker of
Minnesota G'jibwe should be followed.

Sounds and Orthography 
xxiv
Ojibwe Alphabetical Order
In this dictionary Ojibwe words are alphabetized in the following order:
a, aa, b, c, d, e, g, h, ', i, ii, j, k, m, n, o, oo, p, s, t, w, y, z
Note that the double vowels are treated as standing for unit sounds and
are alphabetized after the corresponding single vowels. The digraphs ch, sh,
and zh, although standing for unit sounds, are alphabetized as sequences of
two letters. The character ' stands for a glottal stop, which is a significant
speech sound in Minnesota Ojibwe.
Vowels
Basic Vowels. There are three short vowels: a, i, and o.
Table 6. Short Vowels
High
Low
Short Vowels
Front
i
Back
o
a
The four long vowels take more time to say than the short vowels. Three
of them are paired with corresponding short vowels and so are written dou-
ble: aa, ii, oo. The fourth long vowel is not paired with any short vowel and
so it is written without doubling: e.
Table 7. Long Vowels
High
Low
Long Vowels
Front
ii
e
Back
oo
aa
Each basic vowel is given below along with a phonetic transcription,
Ojibwe words containing it, and one or more English words containing
roughly equivalent sounds. The letters standing for the sounds focused on
are given in boldface in the examples.
Phonetic 
Ojibwe examples
a 
[3]~M 
agim 'count someone!'
namadabi 'sits down'
baashkizigan 'gun'
aa 
[a:] 
aagim 'snowshoe'
inaajaa 'goes away'
English equivalents
about
father

xxv 
Sounds and Orthography
e 
[e:]~[e:] 
emikwaan 'spoon' 
cafe
awenen 'who'
anishinaabe 'person, Indian,
Ojibwe'
i 
[I] 
inini 'man' 
pin
mawi 'cries'
ii 
[i:] 
niin T 
seen
googii 'dives'
o 
[o]~[U] 
ozid 
'someone's foot' 
obey, book
anokii 'works'
nibo 'dies, is dead'
oo 
[o:]~[u:] 
oodena 
'town' 
boat, boot
anookii 'hires'
goon 'snow'
bimibatoo 'runs along'
Nasal Vowels. Nasal vowels are indicated by writing the appropriate
basic vowel followed by nh. Before a y or a glottal stop ' the h may be omit-
ted in writing. In some earlier versions of this orthography, they were writ-
ten with a hook underneath or underlined. There are no direct English
equivalents:
aanh 
[a:] 
banajaanh 
'nestling'
enh 
[e:]~[e:] 
nisayenh 
'my older brother'
iinh 
[T:] 
awesiinh 'wild animal'
agaashiinyi, agaashiinhyi 
'(someone) is small'
oonh 
[6:]~[u:] 
giigoonh 'fish'
Nasalized Vowels. Vowels are nasalized before ns, nz, and nzh. The n is
then omitted in pronunciation. A few examples are:
gaawiin ingikendanziin 
'I don't know it'
jiimaanens 
'small boat'
oshkanzhiin 'someone's fingernail(s)'
Long vowels after a nasal consonant morn are often nasalized, especially
before s, sh, z, or zh. It is often difficult to decide whether to write these as
nasalized vowels or not. For example, while we write the word for 'moose'
without indicating the phonetic nasalization, many prefer to write it with an
n:
mooz or moonz 
'moose'

Sounds and Orthography 
xxvi
Consonants and Other Sounds
The non-nasal consonants occur in pairs with one member of the pair a
strong or fortis consonant and the other member of the pair a weak or lenis
consonant. The strong consonants do not occur at the beginning of words
(unless a vowel is left off), may sound long or double, and are voiceless. The
weak consonants can occur at the beginning of words and are often voiced,
especially in the middle of words.
Table 8. Consonants and other sounds
Stops and Affricates
Sibilants
Strong
Weak
Strong
Weak
Nasals
Other sounds
P
b
m
w
t
d
s
z
n
ch
j
sh
zh
y
k
g
V
Phonetic 
Ojibwe examples
b 
[b]~[p] 
bakade 
'is hungry'
nibi 'water'
gigizheb 
'in the morning'
ch 
[c:] 
michaa 'it is big'
miigwech 'thanks'
d 
[d]~[t] 
debwe 
'tells the truth'
biidoon 
'bring it!'
waagaakwad 
'ax'
g 
[g]~W 
giin 'you'
waagosh 
'fox'
ikwewag 
'women'
h 
[h] 
hay'
[?] 
bakite'an 'hit it!'
ode' 
'someone's heart'
English equivalents
big, spin
stitch
do, stop
geese, ski
hi

xxvii 
Sounds and Orthography
j
k
m
n
P
s
sh
t
w
y
z
zh
[j]~[c]
[k:]
[m]
[n]
fa] before g, k
[p:]
[s:]
[s:]
[t:]
[w]
[y]
[z]~[s]
[z]~[s]
jiimaan 'boat, canoe'
ajina 
'a little while'
ingiikaj 
'I'm cold'
makizin 
'moccasin, shoe'
amik 
'beaver'
miinan 'blueberries'
jiimaan 
'boat, canoe'
miijim 
'food'
naanan 
'five'
bangii 'a little bit'
opin 
'potato'
imbaap 'I laugh'
asin 'stone, rock'
wiiyaas 
'meat'
ashigan 'bass'
animosh 'dog'
ate '(something) is there'
anit 
'fish spear'
ivaabang 'tomorrow'
giivue 'goes home'
bizindaiiu 'listen to someone!'
wiiyaw 
'someone's body'
inday 
'my dog'
ziibi 'river'
ozid 
'someone's foot'
indaakoz 
'I am sick'
zhaabonigan 'needle'
azhigan 
'sock'
biizh 
'bring someone!'
jump
pick
man
name
hunger
rip
miss
bush
pit
way
yellow
zebra
measure
Consonant Clusters
The following consonant clusters occur:
sk 
[sk] 
miskozi 'is red'
shp 
[sp] 
ishpiming 
'up above, in heaven'

Sounds and Orthography 
xxviii
sht 
[st] 
nishtigwaan 'my head'
shk 
[sk] 
ishkode 
'fire'
gayaashh 'gull'
mb 
[mb] 
wiintbaa 'is hollow'
nd 
[nd] 
aandi 'where'
aanind 'some'
nj 
[nj] 
biinjise 
'flies in'
nininj 
'my hand'
ng 
[rjg] 
bangii 'a little bit'
waabang 'tomorrow'
A single consonant (except w, h, and y) or a consonant cluster may be
followed by w before a vowel. A few examples are bwaan TDakota', opwaa-
gan 
'pipe', gwiiwizens 
*boy', amikwag 
"beavers', nisiui 'three', bagi-
da'voaa 
'sets a net', miskivi 
TDlood', and bingvoi 'sand, ashes'.

Parti
Ojibwe-English

This page intentionally left blank 

3 
abanzh—adaawetamaazo
A
abanzh ni lodge pole, rafter; pi abanzhiin; lac
abanzhiing; dim abanzhiins
abashkwebiigininjiishin vai get a blister on one's
hand; hg indabashkwebiigininjiishin; pn
ebashkwebiigininjiishing
abashkwebiigizi vai have a blister; Isg
indabashkwebiigiz; prt ebashkwebiigizid
abashkwebiigizideshin vai get a blister on one's
foot; hg indabashkwebiigizideshin; prt
ebashkwebiigizideshing
abaabas /abaabasw-/ via cense s.o.; Isg
indabaabaswaa; pn ebaabaswaad
abaabasan vti cense s.t.; hg indabaabasaan; pn
ebaabasang
abaabaso vai cense oneself; hg indabaabas; prt
ebaabasod
abaagamide vii be warm (as a liquid); prt
ebaagamideg; aug abaagamidemagad; pn
aug ebaagamidemagak
abaagamizan mi warm s.t. (as a liquid); Isg
indabaagamizaan; pn ebaagamizang
abaasandeke vai bask in the sun; hg
indabaasandeke; prt ebaasandeked
abaaso vai warm up in the sun; hg indabaas; prt
ebaasod
abaate vii warm up (of the weather); prt ebaateg;
aug abaatemagad; prt aug ebaatemagak
abaawiganezo vai warm one's back; Isg
indabaawiganez; prt ebaawiganezod
abi vai be at home, be in a certain place, sit in a
certain place; hg indab; pn ebid
abininjiizo vai warm one's hands; hg
indabininjiiz; pn ebininjiizod
abinoojiinh na child; pi abinoojiinyag; dim
abinoojiiyens, abinoojiins
abinoojiinh-biizikaagan ra'item of children's
clothing; pi abinoojiinh-biizikaaganan; loc
abinoojiinh-biizikaaganing; dim abinoojiinh-
biizikaagaans
abinoojiinyikaazo vai pretend to be a child; hg
indabinoojiinyikaaz; pn ebinoojiinyikaazod
abinoojiinyiwi vai be a child; Isg
indabinoojiinyiw; prt ebinoojiinyiwid
abinoojiiyens na baby; pi abinoojiiyensag; also
abinoojiins
abiwin ni room, living room; pi abiwinan; he
abiwining; dim abiwinens
abiz /abizw-/ vta warm s.o. at the fire; hg
indabizwaa; pn ebizwaad
abizamaw vta warm (s.t.) for s.o. at the fire; Isg
indabizamawaa; pn ebizamawaad
abizan vti warm s.t. at the fire; hg indabizaan; pn
ebizang
abizidezo vai warm one's feet; hg indabizidez; pn
ebizidezod
abiichigaade vii be occupied; pn ebiichigaadeg;
aug abiichigaademagad; pn aug
ebiichigaademagak
abiitan utilive in s.t., occupy s.t.; hg indabiitaan;
pn ebiitang
abiitaw vta sit up with s.o. (e.g., the deceased at a
wake); hg indabiitawaa; pn ebiitawaad
abiiwigamig ni living room; pi abiiwigamigoon;
loc abiiwigamigong; dim abiiwigamigoons
abwaadan vti roast s.t., cook s.t. over a fire; hg
indabwaadaan; pn ebwaadang
abwaajigan na bread cooked over an open fire; pi
abwaajiganag; loc abwaajiganing; dim
abwaajigaans
abwaajigan ni roasted meat, roasted fish; pi
abwaajiganan; dim abwaajigaans
abwaajige vai roast things; hg indabwaajige; pn
ebwaajiged
abwaanaak ni drying rack for strips of meat over a
fire; pi abwaanaakoon; loc abwaanaakong;
dim abwaanaakoons
abwaazh /abwaaN-/ vta roast s.o., cook s.o. over a
fire; hg indabwaanaa; prt ebwaanaad
abwe vai+o roast (s.t.), cook (s.t.) over a fire; hg
indabwe, indabwen; prt ebwed
abweninjii vai have a sweaty hand; Isg
indabweninjii; pn ebweninjiid
abwewas /abwewasw-/ vta cure s.o. over a fire; hg
indabwewaswaa; prt ebwewaswaad
abwewasan vti cure s.t. over a fire; hg
indabwewasaan; prt ebwewasang
abwewasigan ni fire-cured meat or fish; pi
abwewasiganan; loc abwewasiganing; dim
abwewasigaans
abwewasige vai cure things over a fire; hg
indabwewasige; pn ebwewasiged
abwewin ni frying pan; pi abwewinan; loc
abwewining; dim abwewinens
abwezide vai have a sweaty foot; hg
indabwezide; pn ebwezided
abwezo vai sweat; hg indabwez; pn ebwezod
abwi HI paddle; pi abwiin; loc abwiing; dim abwiins
achaab ni bowstring; pi achaabiin; loc achaabiing;
dim achaabiins
achigaade vii be put in a certain place; pn
echigaadeg; aug achigaademagad; pn aug
echigaademagak
achigaazo vai be put in a certain place; pn
echigaazod
achige vai put things in a certain place, place a bet;
hg indachige; prt echiged
adaam vta buy (s.t.) from s.o.; hg indadaamaa;
prt edaamaad
adaawam vta borrow (s.t.) from s.o., rent (s.t.)
from s.o.; hg indadaawamaa; pn
edaawamaad
adaawange vai+o borrow (s.t.) from people, rent
(s.t.) from people; Isg indadaawange,
indadaawangen; pn edaawanged
adaawaagan ni fur for trade; pi adaawaaganan; loc
adaawaaganing; dim adaawaagaans
adaawaage vai+o sell (s.t.); hg indadaawaage,
indadaawaagen; pn edaawaaged
adaawe vai+o buy (s.t.); hg indadaawe,
indadaawen; pn edaawed
adaawetamaw vta buy (s.t.) for s.o.; hg
indadaawetamawaa; pn edaawetamawaad
adaawetamaazo vai buy (s.t.) for oneself; hg
indadaawetamaaz; pn edaawetamaazod

adaawewigamig—agaasaabiigizi 
4
adaawewigamig ni store; pi adaawewigamigoon;
loc adaawewigamigong; dim
adaawewigamigoons
adaawewinini na store clerk, trader; pi
adaawewininiwag
adaawewininiikwe na store clerk (female), trader
(female); pi adaawewininiikweg
adik na caribou, reindeer; pi adikwag; dim
adikoons
adikameg na whitefish; pi adikamegwag; dim
adikamegoons
adim via catch up to s.o., overtake s.o.; Isg
indadimaa; pn edimaad
adima* /adima'w-/ vta catch up to s.o. in a boat,
overtake s.o. in a boat; Isg indadima'waa; pn
edima'waad
adindan vti catch up to s.t., overtake s.t.; Isg
indadindaan; pn edindang
adoopowin ni table; pi adoopowinan; loc
adoopowining; dim adoopowinens
adoopowiniigin ni table cloth; pi
adoopowiniiginoon; loc adoopowiniiginong:
dim adoopowiniiginoons
agadendam vai2 be ashamed, feel shy; Isg
indagadendam; prt egadendang
agadendan vti be ashamed of s.t.; Isg
indagadendaan; pn egadendang
agadendaagozi vai be ashamed, be embarrassed;
Isg indagadendaagoz; pn egadendaagozid
agadendaagwad vii be shameful, be embarrassing;
pn egadendaagwak
agadenim vta be ashamed of s.o., be embarrassed
by s.o.; Isg indagadenimaa; pn egadenimaad
agaji vai be bashful, be shy; Isg indagaj; prt egajid
agaji' vta make s.o. ashamed, embarrass s.o.; Isg
indagaji'aa; prt egaji'aad
agajishki vai be a shy person; Isg indagajishk; pn
egajishkid
agajiitaw vta be shy in front of s.o., be ashamed
before s.o.; Isg indagajiitawaa; prt
egajiitawaad
agamiingpc on the shore, at the water, at the lake
agawaate'on ni umbrella; pi agawaate'onan; loc
agawaate'oning; dim agawaate'onens
agawaatese vai cast a shadow flying; prt
egawaatesed
agawaatese vii cast a shadow flying; prt
egawaateseg; aug agawaatesemagad; pn aug
egawaatesemagak
agawaateshin vai be in shade, be in shadow; Isg
indagawaateshin; prt egawaateshing
agawaateshkan vti shade s.t., cast a shadow on
s.t.; Isg indagawaateshkaan; pn
egawaateshkang
agawaateshkaw vta shade s.o., cast a shadow on
s.o.; Isg indagawaateshkawaa; pn
egawaateshkawaad
agawaatesin vii be in shade, be in shadow; pn
egawaatesing
agawaateyaa vii there is shadow, there is shade;
pn egawaateyaag; aug agawaateyaamagad;
pn aug egawaateyaamagak
agazom vta embarrass s.o. by speech; Isg
indagazomaa; prt egazomaad
agaamakiing pc overseas, in Europe
agaamashkosiw pc on the other side of the
meadow
agaamayi'ii pc on the other side of it, across it
agaamaakwaa pc on the other side of the clearing
agaami- pn on the other side of, across
agaamikanapL on the other side of the road or
trail, across the road or trail
agaamindesi pc other side of the lodge
agaamindesing pc on the other side of the lodge
agaamingpc on the other side of the lake, across
the lake
agaamishkode pc on the other side of the fire
agaasade' vta make s.o. narrow; Isg
indagaasade'aa; pn egaasade'aad
agaasademon /agaasademo-/ vii be narrow (as a
road or trail); pn egaasademog
agaasadengwe vai have a narrow face; Isg
indagaasadengwe; pn egaasadengwed
agaasadetigweyaa vii be narrow (as a river); prt
egaasadetigweyaag; aug
agaasade tigweyaamagad; prt aug
egaasadetigweyaamagak
agaasadetoon vti2 make s.t. narrow; Isg
indagaasadetoon; prt egaasadetood
agaasadeyaa vii be narrow; pn egaasadeyaag; aug
agaasadeyaamagad; pn aug
egaasadeyaamagak
agaasadeyaabikad vii be narrow (as something
mineral); pn egaasadeyaabikak
agaasadeyaabikizi vai be narrow (as something
mineral); pn egaasadeyaabikizid
agaasadeyaabiigad vii be narrow (as something
string-like); pn egaasadeyaabiigak
agaasadeyaabiigizi vai be narrow (as something
string-like); pn egaasadeyaabiigizid
agaasadeyiigad vii be narrow (as something sheet-
like); prt egaasadeyiigak
agaasadeyiigizi vai be narrow (as something sheet-
like); prt egaasadeyiigizid
agaasadeyoonagad vii be narrow (as a boat); pn
egaasadeyoonagak
agaasadezi vai be narrow; pn egaasadezid
agaasadinaa vii there is a small hill; pn
egaasadinaag; aug agaasadinaamagad; pn
aug egaasadinaamagak
agaasate vii be small (as a room or house); pn
egaasateg; aug agaasate magad; prt aug
egaasatemagak
agaasaa vii be small; prt egaasaag; aug
agaasaamagad; pn aug egaasaamagak
agaasaabaminaagozi vai appear small, look small;
pn egaasaabaminaagozid
agaasaabaminaagwad vii appear small, look
small; pn egaasaabaminaagwak
agaasaabikad vii be small (as something mineral);
pn egaasaabikak
agaasaabikizi vai be small (as something mineral);
prt egaasaabikizid
agaasaabiigad vii be small (as something string-
like), be fine (as something string-like); prt
egaasaabiigak
agaasaabiigizi vai be small (as something string-
like), be fine (as something string-like); pn
egaasaabiigizid

5 
agaasaakozi —agonjijigaade
agaasaakozi vai be small (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn egaasaakozid
agaasaakwad vii be small (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt egaasaakwak
agaasaatoon vti2 make s.t. small; Isg
indagaasaatoon; prt egaasaatood
agaasendan vti think little of s.t., consider s.t.
insignificant; Isg indagaasendaan; pn
egaasendang
agaasendaagozi vai be considered insignificant;
Isg indagaasendaagoz; pn egaasendaagozid
agaasendaagwad vii be considered insignificant;
pn egaasendaagwak
agaasenim ma think little of s.o., consider s.o.
insignificant; Isg indagaasenimaa; pn
egaasenimaad
agaashiinyi vai be small; hg indagaashiinh; pn
egaashiinyid
agaasi' vta make s.o. small; Isg indagaasi'aa; pn
egaasi'aad
agaasiminagad vii be small (as something ball-
like); pn egaasiminagak
agaasiminagizi vai be small (as something ball-
like); pn egaasiminagizid
agaasiigad vii be small (as something sheet-like);
prt egaasiigak
agaasiigizi vai be small (as something sheet-like);
pn egaasiigiztd
agaawaa pc hardly, barely
agaawaadan vti wish for s.t., desire s.t.; Isg
indagaawaadaan; pn egaawaadang
agaawaazh /agaawaaN-/ vta wish for s.o., desire
s.o.; Isg indagaawaanaa; pn egaawaanaad
agidajiw pc on top of a mountain; also ogidajiw*,
wagidajiw
agidakamig pc on top of the ground; also
ogidakamig*, wagidakamig
agidasin pc on top of a rock; also ogidasin*,
wagidasin
agidaabik /)t on something mineral (e.g., metal,
glass, rock); also ogidaabik*, wagidaabik
agidaajiwan pc upstream; also ogidaajiwan*,
wagidaajiwan
agidaaki pc on top of a hill; also ogidaaki*,
wagidaaki
agidaakiiwe vai go uphill; Isg indagidaakiiwe; pn
egidaakiiwed
agidaakiiwebatoo vai run uphill; Isg
indagidaakiiwebatoo; pn egidaakiiwebatood
agidibiigpc on top of the water; also ogidibiig*,
wagidibiig
agidigamigpc on top of the house; also
ogidigamig*, wagidigamig
agidiskwam pc on top of the ice; also
ogidiskwam*, wagidiskwam
agig na phlegm
agigokaa vai have a cold; Isg indagigokaa; pn
egigokaad
agijayi'ii pc on top of it; also ogijayi'ii*, wagijayi'ii
agiji- pn on top of; also ogiji-*, wagiji-
agim via count s.o.; Isg indagimaa; pn egimaad
agindamaw vta count (s.t.) for s.o., read (s.t.) for
s.o.; Isg indagindamawaa; pn egindamawaad
agindamaage vai count (s.t.) for people, read (s.t.)
for people; Isg indagindamaage; pn
egindamaaged
agindan vti count s.t., read s.t.; Isg indagindaan;
prt egindang
agindaaso vai count, read; Isg indagindaas; pn
egindaasod
agindaasoowigamig ni library; pi
agindaasoowigamigoon; he
agindaasoowigamigong; dim
agindaasoowigamigoons
aginjigaade vii be counted, be read; pn
eginjigaadeg; aug aginjigaademagad; pn aug
eginjigaademagak
aginjigaazo vai be counted; pn eginjigaazod
aginzo vai be counted, belong to a group; Isg
indaginz; prt eginzod
agiw* pr those animate plural demonstrative', also
ingiw, igiw*
agogwaadan vti sew s.t. on; Isg indagogwaadaan;
pn egogwaadang
agogwaajigan ni applique piece, trim; pi
agogwaajiganan; loc agogwaajiganing; dim
agogwaajigaans
agogwaaso vai sew something on; Isg
indagogwaas; pn egogwaasod
agogwaazh /agogwaaN-/ vta sew s.o. on; Isg
indagogwaanaa; pn egogwaanaad
agokadoon vti2 stick s.t. on; Isg indagokadoon;
pn egokadood
agokazh /agokaN-/ vta stick s.o. on; Isg
indagokanaa; pn egokanaad
agoke vai stick on, adhere; Isg indagoke; pn
egoked
agoke vii stick on, adhere; pn egokeg; aug
agokemagad; pn aug egokemagak
agokiwas /agokiwasw-/ vta glue s.o., paste
something on s.o.; Isg indagokiwaswaa; pn
egokiwaswaad
agokiwasan vti glue s.t., paste something on s.t.;
Isg indagokiwasaan; prt egokiwasang
agokiwasigan ni glue, paste; pi agokiwasiganan;
loc agokiwasiganing; dim agokiwasigaans
agokiwaso vai be glued, be pasted on; Isg
indagokiwas; pn egokiwasod
agokiwate vii be glued, be pasted on; pn
egokiwateg; aug agokiwatemagad; pn aug
egokiwatemagak
agomo vai float, be suspended in water; Isg
indagom; prt egomod
agon vta hold s.o. up against; Isg indagonaa; pn
egonaad
agonan vti hold s.t. up against; Isg indagonaan;
prt egonang
agonde vii float, be suspended in water; pn
egondeg
agongos na chipmunk, Scandinavian; pi
agongosag; dim agongosens
agongosimo vai speak a Scandinavian language;
Isg indagongosim; pn egongosimod
agonjidoon vti2 soak s.t., put s.t. in to soak; Isg
indagonjidoon; pn egonjidood
agonjijigaade vii be put in to soak; pn
egonjijigaadeg; aug agonjijigaademagad; pn
aug egonjijigaademagak

agonjijigaazo—agwaa'oodoon 
6
agonjijigaazo vai be put in to soak; prt
egonjijigaazod
agonjim vta soak s.o., put s.o. in to soak; hg
indagonjimaa; prt egonjimaad
agonjoonaagan ni net float; pi agonjoonaaganan;
loc agonjoonaaganing; dim agonjoonaagaans
agoodakikwaan ni kettle hanger; pi
agoodakikwaanan; loc agoodakikwaaning;
dim agoodakikwaanens
agoodasabii vai hang up a net; Isg
indagoodasabii; prt egoodasabiid
agoodaw vta hang (s.t.) for s.o., set a snare for
s.o.; Isg indagoodawaa; pn egoodawaad
agoode vii hang; pn egoodeg; aug agoodemagad;
pn aug egoodemagak
agoodoo vai set a snare; Isg indagoodoo; prt
egoodood
agoodoon vti2 hang s.t.; Isg indagoodoon; pn
egoodood
agoodwaagan ni snare; pi agoodwaaganan; loc
agoodwaaganing; dim agoodwaagaans
agoodwaaganeyaab ni snare wire; pi
agoodwaaganeyaabiln; loc
agoodwaaganeyaabiing; dim
agoodwaagan eyaabiins
agoojiganaatig ni clothesline pole; pi
agoojiganaatigoon; loc agoojiganaatigong;
dim agoojiganaatigoons
agoojiganeyaab ni clothesline; pi
agoojiganeyaabiin; loc agoojiganeyaabiing;
dim agoojiganeyaabiins
agoojige vai hang things, hang up laundry; Isg
indagoojige; pn egoojiged
agoojin vai hang, be in the sky (e.g., a star, the
sun, or the moon); Isg indagoojin; pn
egoojing
agoojiwanaanaak ni hanging rack for food drying;
pi agoojiwanaanaakoon; loc
agoojiwanaanaakong; dim
agoojiwanaanaakoons
agoozh /agooN-/ vta hang s.o.; Isg indagoonaa;
pn egoonaad
agoozi vai be perched up on something; Isg
indagooz; prt egoozid
agwadaashi na sunfish; pi agwadaashiwag; dim
agwadaashiins
agwajiing pc outside, outdoors
agwanem vta put s.o. in one's mouth, hold s.o. in
one's mouth; Isg indagwanemaa; pn
egwanemaad
agwanendan vti put s.t. in one's mouth, hold s.t.
in one's mouth; Isg indagwanendaan; pn
egwanendang
agwanenjige vai put things in one's mouth, hold
things in one's mouth, chew tobacco; Isg
indagwanenjige; pn egwanenjiged
agwanogaan ni canopy; pi agwanogaanan; loc
agwanogaaning; dim agwanogaanens
agwapidoon vti2 tie s.t. on something; Isg
indagwapidoon; prt egwapidood
agwapijigaade vii be tied on, be hitched on; pn
egwapijigaadeg; aug agwapijigaademagad;
prt aug egwapijigaademagak
agwapijigaazo vai be tied on, be hitched on; pn
egwapijigaazod
agwapizh /agwapiN-/ vta tie s.o. on something;
Isg indagwapinaa; pn egwapinaad
agwazhe vai be covered with blankets; Isg
indagwazhe; pn egwazhed
agwazhe' vta cover s.o. with blankets; Isg
indagwazhe'aa; prt egwazhe'aad
agwazhe'on ni blanket, covering; pi
agwazhe'onan; loc agwazhe'oning; dim
agwazhe'onens
agwaabatoo vai run ashore; Isg indagwaabatoo;
prt egwaabatood
agwaabidoon vti2 pull s.t. ashore, pull s.t. from
the water; Isg indagwaabidoon; prt
egwaabidood
agwaabikide vii burn to the pan; pn
egwaabikideg; aug agwaabikidemagad; pn
aug egwaabikidemagak
agwaabikiz /agwaabikizw-/ vta burn s.o. to the
pan; Isg indagwaabikizwaa; pn
egwaabikizwaad
agwaabikizan vti burn s.t. to the pan; Isg
indagwaabikizaan; pn egwaabikizang
agwaabikizo vai burn to the pan; pn
egwaabikizod
agwaabizh /agwaabiN-/ vta pull s.o. ashore, pull
s.o. from the water; Isg indagwaabinaa; prt
egwaabinaad
agwaabiiga' /agwaabiiga'w-/ vta take s.o. off the
water using something; Isg
indagwaabiiga'waa; pn egwaabiiga'waad
agwaabiiga'amaw vta take (s.t.) off the water
using something for s.o.; Isg
indagwaabiiga'amawaa; pn
egwaabiiga'amawaad
agwaabiiga'an vti take s.t. off the water using
something; Isg indagwaabiiga'aan; pn
egwaabiiga'ang
agwaabiigin vta take s.o. off the water, take s.o. off
the fire; Isg indagwaabiiginaa; pn
egwaabiiginaad
agwaabiiginan vti take s.t. off the water, take s.t.
off the fire; Isg indagwaabiiginaa; pn
egwaabiiginaad
agwaadaabaadan tv; drag s.t. ashore; Isg
indagwaadaabaadaan; prt egwaadaabaadang
agwaadaabaazh /agwaadaabaaN-/ vta drag s.o.
ashore; Isg indagwaadaabaanaa; prt
egwaaadaabaanaad
agwaadaabii vai drag something ashore; Isg
indagwaadaabii; prt egwaadaabiid
agwaagoshi vai be moldy; pn egwaagoshid
agwaagosin vii be moldy; Prt egwaagosing
agwaagwaabikad vii be rusty; pn
egwaagwaabikak
agwaagwaabikishin vai turn rusty; pn
egwaagwaabikishing
agwaagwaabikisin vii turn rusty; pn
egwaagwaabikising
agwaagwaabikizi vai be rusty; prt
egwaagwaabikizid
agwaa'o vai land, come ashore in a boat; Isg
indagwaa'; prt egwaa'od; also agwaa'am
agwaa'oodoon vti2 take s.t. ashore by boat; hg
indagwaa'oodoon; pn egwaa'oodood

7 
agwaakwa'an—akwaa
agwaakwa'an vti nail s.t. up against the wall, post
s.t. up; Isg indagwaakwa'aan; prt
egwaakwa'ang
agwaakwa'igan m sign, notice, poster; pi
agwaakwa'iganan; lac agwaakwa'iganing; dim
agwaakwa'igaans
agwaanaaso vai unload a boat; 7s? indagwaanaas;
prt egwaanaasod
agwaashim vta take s.o. ashore, take s.o. off the
fire; Isg indagwaashimaa; prt egwaashimaad
agwaasidoon vti2 take s.t. ashore, take s.t. off the
fire; Isg indagwaasidoon; prt egwaasidood
agwaasijigaade vii be taken ashore, be taken off
the fire; prt egwaasijigaadeg; aug
agwaasijigaademagad; prt aug
egwaasijigaademagak
agwaasijigaazo vai be taken ashore, be taken off
the fire; prt egwaasijigaazod
agwaataa vai go ashore, come ashore; Isg
indagwaataa; prt egwaataad
agwaawebin vta throw s.o. out of the water; hg
indagwaawebinaa; prt egwaawebinaad
agwaawebinamaw vta throw (s.t.) out of the
water for s.o.; Isg iindagwaawebinamawaa; prt
egwaawebinamawaad
agwaawebinan vti throw s.t. out of the water; Isg
indagwaawebinaan; prt egwaawebinang
agwaayaadagaa vai swim ashore; Isg
indagwaayaadagaa; pri egwaayaadagaad
agwaayaashi vai be blown ashore, sail ashore; Isg
indagwaayaash; prr egwaayaashid
agwaayaasin vii be blown ashore; prt
egwaayaasing
a'awpr that animate singular demonstrative; also aw,
'aw, 'a
a'awedi pr that over there animate singular
demonstrative; also awedi
ajidagoode vii hang upside down; prt
ejidagoodeg; aug ajidagoodemagad; prt aug
ejidagoodemagak
ajidagoodoon un'2 hang s.t. upside down; Isg
indajidagoodoon; prt ejidagoodood
ajidagoojin vai hang upside down; prt
ejidagoojing
ajidagoozh /ajidagooN-/ vta hang s.o. upside
down; Isg indajidagoonaa; prt ejidagoonaad
ajidamoo na red squirrel; pi ajidamoog; dim
ajidamoons
ajidin via hold s.o. upside down; Isg indajidinaa;
prt ejidinaad
ajidinan vti hold s.t. upside down; Isg
indajidinaan; prt ejidinang
ajijaak na sandhill crane; pi ajijaakwag; dim
ajijaakoons
ajijibizo vai fall head first; Isg indajijibiz; prt
ejijibizod
ajijiingwese vai fall on one's face; Isg
indajijiingwese; prt ejijiingwesed
ajina pc a little while
akakanzhe m charcoal, coals, coal; lac
akakanzheng; dim akakanzhens
akakanzhebwe vai+o cook (s.t.) on the coals, grill
(s.t.); hg indakakanzhebwe,
indakakanzhebwen; prt ekakanzhebwed
akakanzhekaa vii be coals, be hot ashes; prt
ekakanzhekaag; aug akakanzhekaamagad;
prt aug ekakanzhekaamagak
akakojiish na woodchuck; pi akakojiishag; dim
akakojiishens
akamaw vta lie in wait for s.o.; Isg indakamawaa;
pn ekamawaad
akandoo vai lie in wait for game, use a blind; Isg
indakandoo; prt ekandood
akandoowin ni hunting blind; pi akandoowinan;
loc akandoowining; dim akandoowinens
akawaabam vta wait in watch for s.o., expect s.o.
to come; Isg indakawaabamaa; prt
ekawaabamaad
akawaabandan vti wait in watch for s.t., expect s.t.
to come; Isg indakawaabandaan; prr
ekawaabandang
akawaabi vai wait in watch, expect; Isg
indakawaab; prt ekawaabid
akawe pc first (in a time sequence), first of all; also
kawe
akeyaa pc in the direction of; also gakeyaa,
nakakeyaa*
aki ni earth, land, ground, country; pi akiin; loc
akiing; dim akiins
akik na kettle, pail, pot, pan; pi akikoog; loc
akikong; dim akikoons
akikoons na outboard motor; pi akikoonsag; loc
akikoonsing
akina pc all, every; also kina, gakina
akina gegoo pr everything; also kina gegoo,
gakina gegoo
akiwenzii na old man; pi akiwenziiyag
akiwenziiyiwi vai be an old man; Isg
indakiwenziiyiw; prt ekiwenziiyiwid
akii-mazina'igan ni map; pi akii-mazina'iganan;
he akii-mazina'iganing; dim akii-
mazina'igaans
akiiwan vii be the earth; prt ekiiwang
akiiwe-wiigiwaam ni earth lodge; pi akiiwe-
wiigiwaaman; loc akiiwe-wiigiwaaming; dim
akiiwe-wiigiwaamens
akiiwigamig ni sod house, root house; pI
akiiwigamigoon; he akiiwigamigong; dim
akiiwigamigoons
ako- pv3 since, a certain length, as long as, as far as
akoo' vta make s.o. a certain length, make s.o. so
long; Isg indakoo'aa; prt ekoo'aad
akootoon vti2 make s.t. a certain length, make s.t.
so long; Isg indakootoon; prt ekootood
akoozi vai be a certain length, be a certain height,
be so long, be so tall; Isg indakooz; prt
ekoozid
akwa'waa vai fish through the ice with spear; Isg
indakwa'waa; prt ekwa'waad
akwa'wewigamig ni fish house for spearing; pi
akwa'wewigamigoon; loc
akwa'wewigamigong; dim
akwa'wewigamigoons
akwanaamo vai be short of breath, take short
breaths; Isg indakwanaam; prt ekwanaamod
akwaa vii be a certain length, be a certain height,
be so long, be so tall; prt ekwaag; aug
akwaamagad; prt aug ekwaamagak

akwaabikad—anaamakamig 
8
akwaabikad vii be a certain length (as something
mineral), be so long (as something mineral); prt
ekwaabikak
akwaabikizi vat be a certain length (as something
mineral), be so long (as something mineral); prt
ekwaabikizid
akwaabiigad vii be a certain length (as something
string-like), be so long (as something string-
like); prt ekwaabiigak
akwaabiigizi vai be a certain length (as something
string-like), be so long (as something string-
like); prt ekwaabiigizid
akwaakozi vai be a certain height, be a certain
length (as something stick- or wood-like); hg
indakwaakoz; prt ekwaakozid
akwaakwad vii be a certain height, be a certain
length (as something stick- or wood-like); prt
ekwaakwak
akwaakwaa vii woods go a certain distance; prt
ekwaakwaag; aug akwaakwaamagad; prt aug
ekwaakwaamagak
akwaandawaagan ni stairway, ladder, elevator; pi
akwaandawaaganan; loc
akwaandawaaganing; Jim
akwaandawaagaans
akwaandawe vai climb up, go upstairs; Isg
indakwaandawe; prt ekwaandawed
akwaandawebatoo vai climb up fast; Isg
indakwaandawebatoo; prt
ekwaandawebatood
akwaandawebizo vai climb up fast (e.g., in an
elevator); Isg indakwaandawebiz; prt
ekwaandawebizod
akwaandawebizon ni elevator; pi
akwaandawebizonan; loc
akwaandawebizoning; dim
akwaandawebizonens
akwegad vii be a certain length (as something
sheet-like), be so long (as something sheet-
like); prt ekwegak
akwegizi vai be a certain length (as something
sheet-like), be so long (as something sheet-
like); pn ekwegizid
akwiindimaa vii be deep to a certain extent; prt
ekwiindimaag; aug akwiindimaamagad; pn
aug ekwiindimaamagak
amadaji vai wake from being cold; hg indamadaj;
prt emadajid
amadin vta wake s.o.; hg indamadinaa; prt
emadinaad
amajim vta wake s.o. by vocal noise; Isg
indamajimaa; prt emajimaad
amajine vai wake from pain; Isg indamajine; prt
emajined
amajise vai come awake; Isg indamajise; pn
emajised
amajwebin vta shake s.o. awake; Isg
indamajwebinaa; prt emajwebinaad
amaniso vai be alarmed; Isg indamanis; prt
emanisod
amanisodaw vta be alarmed by s.o.; Isg
indamanisodawaa; prt emanisodawaad
amanj pc I don't know how, I wonder how
dubitative; also amanj iidog, namanj*, namanj
iidog*
amanj apii pc I don't know when, I wonder when
dubitative
amanj igo pc however dubitative
amanj igo apii pc whenever, anytime dubitative
ambe pc come on!, let's go!, attention!
amik na beaver; pi amikwag; dim amikoons
amikwayaan na beaver hide; pi amikwayaanag;
dim amikwa/aanens
amikwiish ni beaver lodge; pi amikwiishan; loc
amikwiishing; dim amikwiishens
amo /amw-/ vta eat s.o.; Isg indamwaa; prt
emwaad
ana'o vai choke on something stuck in one's
throat; Isg indana'; pn ena'od
anama'e- pv4 Christian; also aname-
anama'e-giizhigad vii be Sunday; prt enama'e-
giizhigak; also aname-giizhigad
anama'e-mazina'igan ni prayer book; pi anama'e-
mazina'iganan; loc anama'e-mazina'iganing;
dim anama'e-mazina'igaans
anama'eminensag na rosary plural
anama'e-nagamon ni hymn; pi anama'e-
nagamonan
anama'etaw vta pray for s.o.; Isg
indanama'etawaa; pn enama'etawaad
anama'ewigamig ni church; pi
anama'ewigamigoon; loc
anama'ewigamigong; dim
anama'ewigamigoons; also anamewigamig
anama'ewikwe na nun; pi anama'ewikweg; dim
anama'ewikwens
anami'aa vai pray, be Christian; Isg indanami'aa;
prt enami'aad
anamikaw vta greet s.o.; Isg indanamikawaa; prt
enamikawaad
anamikaadiwag /anamikaadi-/ vai they greet each
other; Ipl indanamikaadimin; prt
enamikaadijig
anamikaage vai greet people; Isg indanamikaage;
pn enamikaaged
anang na star; pi anangoog; loc anangong; dim
anangoons
anaakan ni woven mat, rug; pi anaakanan; loc
anaakaning; dim anaakanens
anaakan (mat)
anaakanashk ni reed, rush; pi anaakanashkoon;
loc anaakanashkong; dim anaakanashkoons
anaamakamig pc under the ground

9 
anaamaki—animikon
anaamaki pc underground
anaamayi'ii pc under it
anaamaagon pc under the snow; also
anaamaagonag
anaamaatig /x under wood (e.g., a tree or stick)
anaamendan vti suspect s.t.; Isg
indanaamendaari; prt enaamendang
anaamenim vta suspect s.o.; Isg
indanaamenimaa; prt enaamenimaad
anaami- pn under
anaamibiig/>c underwater
anaamim vta blame s.o. (in speech), accuse s.o.;
Isg indanaamimaa; pn enaamimaad
anaamindiwag /anaamindi-/ vai they blame each
other; Ipi indanaamindimin; prt enaamindijig
anaamindizo vai blame oneself; Isg
indanaamindiz; prt enaamindizod
anaaminge vai blame people; Isg indanaaminge;
pn enaaminged
anaamisag pc under the floor, in the basement
anaamisagadaweshiinh na wren;/)/
anaamisagadaweshiinyag
anaamiskwam pc under the ice
anaamiindim pc in the depths of a body of water
anaamoonag pc under a boat
angobide vii wear out in operation; prt engobideg;
aug angobidemagad; pn aug engobidemagak
angobizo vai wear out in operation; pn engobizod
ango' vta reduce s.o. to nothing; Isg indango'aa;
pn engo'aad
angoshkan vti wear s.t. out with foot or body; Isg
indangoshkaan; pn engoshkang
angoshkaw vta wear s.o. out with foot or body
(e.g., pants); Isg indangoshkawaa; pn
engoshkawaad
angotoon vti2 reduce s.t. to nothing; Isg
indangotoon; prt engotood
ani- pv2 going away, going along, in progress, on
the way, coming up to in time; also ni-
anijiiminan /anijiimin-/ ni peas plural
anijiiminaaboo ni pea soup; loc anijiiminaaboong
anikamaanan /anikarnaan-/ ni suspenders plural
anima'adoo vai follow a trail away; Isg
indanima'adoo; prt enima'adood
anima'adoon vti2 follow s.t. away as a trail; Isg
indanima'adoon; prt enima'adood
anima'amaazo vai go away singing; Isg
indanima'amaaz; pn enima'amaazod
anima'azh /anima'aN-/ vta follow s.o.'s trail away;
Isg indanima'anaa; pn enima'anaad
anima'oodoon vn2 take s.t. away by boat; Isg
indanima'oodoon; pn enima'oodood
anima'oozh /anima'ooN-/ vta take s.o. away by
boat; Isg indanima'oonaa; pn enima'oonaad
animaabogo vai float away, drift away; Isg
indanimaabog; pn enimaabogod
animaaboode mi float away, drift away; pn
enimaaboodeg; aug animaaboodemagad; prt
aug enimaaboodemagak
animaadagaa vai swim away; Isg
indanimaadagaa; prt enimaadagaad
animaadagaako vai go away on the ice; Isg
indanimaadagaak; pn enimaadagaakod
animaadagaazii vai wade away; Isg
indanimaadagaazii; pn enimaadagaaziid
animaada'e vai skate away; Isg indanimaada'e;
prt enimaada'ed
animaa'an vii drift away on the waves; pn
enimaa'ang
animaa'ogo vai drift away on the waves; Isg
indanimaa'og; pn enimaa'ogod
animaanakwad vii clouds go away; prt
enimaanakwak
animaapi vai go away laughing; Isg indanimaap;
prt enimaapid
animaashi vai be blown away, sail away; Isg
indanimaash; pn enimaashid
animaasin vii be blown away, sail away; pn
enimaasing
animaazakonenjige vai go away with a light; Isg
indanirnaazakonenjige; prt
enimaazakonenjiged
animaazakonenjigebizo vai drive away with a
light; Isg indanimaazakonenjigebiz; pn
enimaazakonenjigebizod
animiba'idiwag /animiba'idi-/ vai they run away
(in the other direction) together; Ipl
indanimiba'idimin: pn enimiba'idijig
animiba'igo vai drive away with horses; Isg
indanimiba'ig; pn enimiba'igod
animibatoo vai run away; Isg indanimibatoo; pn
enimibatood
animibatwaadan vti run away (in the other direc-
tion) with s.t.; Isg indanimibatwaadaan; pn
enimibatwaadang
animibatwaazh /animibatwaaN-/ vta run away
(in the other direction) with s.o.; Isg
indanimibatwaanaa; pn enimibatwaanaad
animibide vii speed away, drive away, fly away; prt
enimibideg; aug animibidemagad: pn aug
enimibidemagak
animibizo vai speed away, drive away, fly away;
Isg indanimibiz; pn enimibizod
animibizoni* vta drive away with s.o. (e.g., a car);
Isg indanimibizoni'aa; pn enimibizoni'aad
animibizonitoon vti2 drive away with s.t.; Isg
indanimibizonitoon; pn enimibizonitood
animibiisaa vii rain goes away; pn enimibiisaag;
aug animibiisaamagad; pn aug
enimibiisaamagak
animidaabii vai drag away; Isg indanimidaabii; pn
enimidaabiid
animidaabii'iwe vai drive away; Isg
indanimidaabii'iwe; pn enimidaabii'iwed
animigidaazo vai go away mad; Isg
indanimigidaaz; prt enimigidaazod
animijiwan vii flow away; pn enimijiwang
animikawe vai leave tracks going away; Isg
indanimikawe; prt enimikawed
animikii na thunderbird, thunderer; pi animikiig;
dim animikiins
animikiikaa vii there is thunder; prt enimikiikaag;
aug animikiikaamagad; pn aug
enimikiikaamagak
animikogaabawi vai stand with the back out; Isg
indanimikogaabaw; pn enimikogaabawid
animikon vta turn s.o. face down, turn s.o. to face
backwards; Isg indanimikonaa; pn
enimikonaad

animikonan—anishinaabewinikaadan 
10
animikonan vti turn s.t. face down, turn s.t. to
face backwards; Isg indanimikonaan; pn
enimikonang
animikonigaade vii be turned face down, be
turned to face backwards; prt
enimikonigaadeg; aug
animikonigaademagad; pn aug
enimikonigaademagak
animikonigaazo vai be turned face down, be
turned to face backwards; pn
enimikonigaazod
animikose vai fall face down; pn enimikosed
animikose vii fall face down; pn enimikoseg; aug
animikosemagad; pn aug enimikosemagak
animikoshim via lay s.o. face down; Isg
indanimikoshimaa; pn enimikoshimaad
animikoshin vai lie face down; hg
indanimikoshin; pn enimikoshing
animikosidoon vti2 lay s.t. face down; hg
indanimikosidoon; pn enimikosidood
animikosin vii lie face down; pn enimikosing
animikwabi vai sit facing backwards; Isg
indanimikwab; pn enimikwabid
animikwabiitaw vta sit with back to s.o.; Isg
indanimikwabiitawaa; pn
enimikwabiitawaad
animinizhimo vai run away scared; Isg
indaniminizhim; prt eniminizhimod
animise vai fly away; Isg indanimise; prt enimised
animise vii fly away; prt enimiseg; aug
animisemagad; pn aug enimisemagak
animishimo vai dance away; hg indanimishim;
pn enimishimod
animishkaa vai paddle away, go away in a canoe;
Isg indanimishkaa; pn enimishkaad
animiwidoon vti2 take s.t. away, carry s.t. away;
hg indanimiwidoon; pn enimiwidood
animiwizh /animiwiN-/ vta take s.o. away, carry
s.o. away; hg indanimiwinaa; prt
enimiwinaad
animose vai walk away; hg indanimose; pn
enimosed
animosh na dog; pi animoshag; dim animoons;
also inday
animoode vai crawl away; Isg indanimoode; pn
enimooded
animoom vta carry s.o. away on one's back; Isg
indanimoomaa; pn enimoomaad
animoomigo vai ride away on horseback; hg
indanimoomig; pn enimoomigod
animoondan vti carry s.t. away on one's back; hg
indanimoondaan; pn enimoondang
animoons na puppy; pi animoonsag
animwewebatoo vai run away making noise; hg
indanimwewebatoo; pn enimwewebatood
animwewebide vii speed away making noise, drive
away making noise, fly away making noise; pn
enimwewebideg; aug animwewebidemagad;
pn aug enimwewebidemagak
animwewebizo vai speed away making noise,
drive away making noise, fly away making
noise; hg indanimwewebiz; prt
enimwewebizod
animwewetoo vai walk away making noise; hg
indanimwewetoo; prt enimwewetood
animwewidam vai2 go away speaking; hg
indanimwewidam; prt enimwewidang
ani-naagozi vai go out of sight; Isg indani-naagoz;
pn eni-naagozid
ani-naagwad vii go out of sight; pn eni-naagwak
aninaatig na maple; pi aninaatigoog; loc
aninaattgong; dim aninaatigoons; also
ininaatig
anishaapc just for nothing, without purpose, just
for fun, not really
anishinaabe na person, human (in contrast to non-
human beings), Indian (in contrast to non-
Indians), Ojibwe; pi anishinaabeg; dim
anishinaabens
anishinaabe-bimaadizi vai live the Indian way; hg
indanishinaabe-bimaadiz; pn enishinaabe-
bimaadizid
anishinaabe-gaagiigido vai speak in an Indian
language (especially in Ojibwe); Isg
indanishinaabe-gaagiigid; prt enishinaabe-
gaagiigidod
anishinaabekaa vii diere are many people, there
are many Indians; pn enishinaabekaag
anishinaabekwe na Indian woman; pi
anishinaabekweg; dim anishinaabekwens
anishinaabekwewi vai be an Indian woman; Isg
indanishinaabekwew; prt enishinaabekwewid
anishinaabe-maawanjii'idiiwigamig ni Indian
center; pi anishinaabe-
maawanjii'idiiwigamigoon; loc anishinaabe-
maawanjii'idiiwigamigong
anishinaabemo vai speak an Indian language
(especially Ojibwe); hg indanishinaabern; pn
enishinaabemod
anishinaabemotaw vta speak an Indian language
(Ojibwe) to s.o.; 7s,!; indanishinaabemotawaa;
pn enishinaabemotawaad
anishinaabemowin ni Indian language (especially
Ojibwe); pi anishinaabemowinan
anishinaabewaki ni Indian country; loc
anishinaabewakiing
anishinaabewi vai be human (in contrast to non-
human beings), be Indian (in contrast to non-
Indians), be Ojibwe; Isg indanishinaabew; pn
enishinaabewid
anishinaabewibii'amaw vta write (s.t.) in Indian
(Ojibwe) to s.o.; hg
indanishinaabewibii'amawaa; pn
enishinaabewibii'amawaad
anishinaabewibii'an vti write s.t. in Indian
(Ojibwe); hg indanishinaabewibii'aan; pn
enishinaabewibii'ang
anishinaabewibii'igan ni Indian (Ojibwe) writing,
something written in Indian (Ojibwe); pi
anishinaabewibii'iganan
anishinaabewibii'igaade vii be written in Indian
(Ojibwe); prt enishinaabewibii'igaadeg; aug
anishinaabewibii'igaademagad; pn aug
enishinaabewibii'igaademagak
anishinaabewibii'ige vai write in Indian (Ojibwe);
Isg indanishinaabewibii'ige; prt
enishinaabewibii'iged
anishinaabewinikaadan vti call s.t. in Indian
(Ojibwe); hg indanishinaabewinikaadaan; pn
enishinaafaewinikaadang

II
anishinaabewinikaade—apa'igo
anishinaabewinikaade vii be called in Indian
(Ojibwe); pn enishinaabewinikaadeg; aug
anishinaabewinikaademagad; pn aug
enishinaabewinikaademagak
anishinaabewinikaazh/anishinaabewinikaaN-/
via call s.o. in Indian (Ojibwe); hg
indanishinaabewinikaanaa; prt
enishinaabewinikaanaad
anishinaabewinikaazo vai be called in Indian
(Ojibwe); hi; indanishinaabewinikaaz; pn
enishinaabewinikaazod
anishinaabewisidoon vti2 write s.t. in Indian
(Ojibwe) (e.g., a book); Isg
indanishinaabewisidoon; prt
enishinaabewisidood
anishinaabewisin vii be written in Indian (Ojibwe)
(e.g., a book or document); pn
enishinaabewising
anishinaabe-ziinzibaakwad ni maple sugar; be
anishinaabe-ziinzibaakwadong
anit ni fish spear; pi anitiin; loc anitiing; dim
anitiins
aniw*pr those inanimate plural demonstrative, that,
those obviative demonstrative; also iniw
aniib na elm; pi aniibiig; loc aniibiing; dim aniibiins
aniibiimin ni highbush cranberry; pi aniibiiminan;
dim aniibiiminens
aniibiiminagaawanzh na highbush cranberry
bush; pi aniibiiminagaawanzhiig; loc
aniibiiminagaawanzhiing; dim
aniibiiminagaawanzhiins
aniibiish ni leaf, tea; pi aniibiishan; loc
aniibiishing; dim aniibiishens
aniibiishakik na teakettle; pi aniibiishakikoog; loc
aniibiishakikong; dim aniibiishakikoons
aniibiishaaboo ni tea; loc aniibiishaaboong; also
aniibiish
aniibiishaabooke vai make tea; Isg
indaniibiishaabooke; prt eniibiishaabooked
aniibiishaabookewinini na Chinese, Oriental; pi
aniibiishaabookewininiwag
aniibiishaabookewininiiwi vai be Chinese, be
Oriental; Isg inda niibiishaabookewininiiw; prt
eniibiishaabookewininiiwid
aniibiishibag ni leaf; pi aniibiishibagoon; be
aniibiishibagong dim aniibiishibagoons; also
aniibiish
aniibiishikaa vii there are many leaves; prt
eniibiishikaag; aug aniibiishikaamagad; pn
aug eniibiishikaamagak
aniibiishike vai make tea; Isg indaniibiishike; pn
eniibiishiked
anjiko vai be pregnant; Isg indanjik; pn enjikod
anokaadan vii work ait s.t.; Isg indanokaadaan; pn
enokaadang
anokaajigan ni manufacture, craft, something
worked on, project; pi anokaajiganan; loc
anokaajiganing; dim anokaajigaans
anokaazh /anokaaN-/ vta work at s.o.; Isg
indanokaanaa; pn enokaanaad
anokii vai work; Isg indanokii; pn enokiid
anokii* vta make s.o. work; Isg indanokii'aa; prt
enokii'aad
anokiikaazo vai pretend to work; Isg
indanokiikaaz; pn enokiikaazod
anokiitaw vta work for s.o.; Isg indanokiitawaa;
pn enokiitawaad
anokiitaage vai work for people; Isg
indanokiitaage; pn enokiitaaged
anokiitaazo vai work for oneself; Isg
indanokiitaaz; pn enokiitaazod
anokiiwigamig ni factory, workshop; pi
anokiiwigamigoon; loc anokiiwigamigong
anokiiwikwe na worker (female); pi anokiiwikweg
anokiiwin ni work, job; pi anokiiwinan
anokiiwinini na worker; pi anokiiwininiwag
anooj pc various, all kinds
anooj gegoo pr a variety of things, various things;
also anooji-gegoo
anookii vai hire, give an order, commission; Isg
indanookii; pn enookiid
anoozh /anooN-/ vta hire s.o., give an order to
s.o., commission s.o.; Isg indanoonaa; pn
enoonaad
anwaataa vai finish (in work or an activity); Isg
indanwaataa; pn enwaataad
anwaatin vii be calm weather; pn enwaating
anwebi vai rest; Isg indanweb; pn enwebid
anweshin vai rest lying down; Isg indanweshin;
pn enweshing
anwi ni bullet, shotgun shell; pi anwiin; loc
anwiing; dim anwiins
anwii-baashkizigan ni shotgun; pi anwii-
baashkiziganan; loc anwii-baashkiziganing;
dim anwii-baashkizigaans
anwiins ni twenty-two bullet; pi anwiinsan
apabiwin m chair; pi apabiwinan; loc apabiwining;
dim apabiwinens
apagajinaazhikamaw vta drive game for s.o.; Isg
indapagajinaazhikamawaa; pn
epagajinaazhikamawaad
apagajinaazhikaw vta drive s.o. as game; Isg
indapagajinaazhikawaa; pn
epagajinaazhikawaad
apagajinaazhikaage vai drive game; Isg
indapagajinaazhikaage; pn
epagajinaazhikaaged
apagidan vti throw s.t.; Isg indapagidaan; pn
epagidang; also apagidoon
apagidaw vta throw (s.t.) at s.o.; Isg
indapagidawaa; pn epagidawaad
apagidaadiwag /apagidaadi-/ vai they throw (s.t.)
at each other; Ipl indapagidaadimin; pn
epagidaadijig
apagidoon vti2 throw s.t.; Isg indapagidoon; pn
epagidood; also apagidan
apagijige vai throw things; Isg indapagijige; pn
epagijiged
apagijigewinini na pitcher (in baseball); pi
apagijigewininiwag
apagizh /apagiN-/ vta throw s.o.; Isg indapaginaa;
pn epaginaad
apagizo vai throw self down against something; Isg
indapagiz; pn epagizod
apa* vta run with s.o. to a certain place; Isg
indapa'aa; pn epa'aad
apa'idiwag /apa'idi-/ vai they run to a certain place
together; Ipl indapa'idimin; prt epa'idijig
apa'igo vai ride to a certain place with horses; hg
indapa'ig; prt epa'igod

apa'iwe—apiitaanimad
12
apa'iwe vai run away from people to a certain
place; Isg indapa'iwe; pn epa'iwed
apakwaan m roofing; pi apakwaanan; loc
apakwaaning; dim apakwaanens
apakwe vai put on a roof; hg indapakwe; pn
epakwed
apakweshkway na cattail mat, cattail; pi
apakweshkwayag
apane pc always, all the time, continually
apangishin vai fall down against; Isg
indapangishin; pn epangishing
apangisin vii fall down against; pn epangising
apanjige vai eat things with something else (e.g.,
butter with bread); Isg indapanjige; pn
epanjiged
apatoo vai run to a certain place, run in a certain
way; Isg indapatoo; prt epatood
apaabikinigan ni potholder; pi apaabikiniganan;
loc apaabikiniganing; dim apaabikinigaans
apaabowe vai+o flavor (s.t.), season (s.t.); Isg
indapaabowe, indapaabowen; pn
epaabowed
apaakozigan ni kinnikinnick (tobacco and bark
smoking mixture)
apaakozige vai make kinnikinnick; Isg
indapaakozige; prt epaakoziged
apegish pc I wish that...; also ambegish*,
ambesh*
apenimo vai+o rely on (s.t.), depend on (s.t.); Isg
indapenim, indapenimon; pn epenimod
apenimonodan vti depend on s.t.; Isg
indapenimonodaan; pn epenimonodang
apenimonodaw vta depend on s.o.; Isg
indapenimonodawaa; prt
epenimonodawaad; also apenimodaw
apibii'igan ni desk, writing surface; pi
apibii'iganan; loc apibii'iganing; dim
apibii'igaans
apibii'ige vai write on something; Isg
indapibii'ige; pn epibii'iged
apiganegwaajigan ni moccasin cuff; pi
apiganegwaajiganan; loc
apiganegwaajiganing; dim
apiganegwaajigaans; also apigwanegwaason
apigwayawegwaajigan ni collar; pi
apigwayawegwaajiganan; loc
apigwayawegwaajiganing; dim
apigwayawegwaajigaans
apikan ni strap, harness; pi apikanan; loc
apikaning; dim apikaans
apikaans ni fan belt; pi apikaansan
apikweshimo vai lie with head on something; Isg
indapikweshim; prt epikweshimod
apikweshimon in pillow; pi apikweshimonan; loc
apikweshimoning; dim apikweshimonens
apikweshimoniigin ni pillowcase; pi
apikweshimoniiginoon; loc
apikweshimoniiginong; dim
apikweshimoniiginoons
apishimo vai lie on something; Isg indapishim; pn
epishimod
apishimon ni mattress, bed (made on the floor or
ground); pi apishimonan; loc apishimoning;
dim apishimonens
apishimonike vai make a bed (as in camp); Isg
indapishimonike; pn epishimoniked
apishimoniigin ni sheet; />/apishimoniiginoon; loc
apishimoniiginong; dim apishimoniiginoons
apishin vai lie as padding; prt epishing
apishkaamon ra mat on bottom of canoe; pi
apishkaamonan; loc apishkaamoning; dim
apishkaamonens
apisidaagan na floor piece of canoe; pi
apisidaaganag; loc apisidaaganing; dim
apisidaagaans
apisidoon vti2 lay something on or under s.t. for
protection; Isg indapisidoon; pn episidood
apisijigan ni protective mat, cushion; pi
apisijiganan; loc apisijiganing; dim apisijigaans
apisin vii lie as padding; prt epising
apizideshinowin ni footstool; pi
apizideshinowinan; loc apizideshinowining;
dim apizideshinowinens
apizideyaakwa'igan ni cradle board footrest; pi
apizideyaakwa'iganan
apii pc when, then, at the time
apiichaa vii be a certain distance; pn epiichaag;
aug apiichaamagad; pn aug epiichaamagak
apiichi- pv3 a certain extent, as much as
apiichibatoo vai run at a certain speed; Isg
indapiichibatoo; pn epiichibatood
apiichibide vii drive at a certain speed, fly at a
certain speed, run at a certain speed (e.g., a
machine); pn epiichibideg; aug
apiichibidemagad; pn aug epiichibidemagak
apiichibizo vai drive at a certain speed, fly at a
certain speed, run at a certain speed (e.g., a
machine); hg indapiichibiz; pn epiichibizod
apiichigi vai grow up a certain extent, grow at a
certain speed; pn epiichigid
apiichigidaazo vai be angry to a certain extent; Isg
indapiichigidaaz; pn epiichigidaazod
apiichigin vii grow up a certain extent, grow at a
certain speed; pn epiichiging
apiichi-giizhigad vii be so late in the day; pn
epiichi-giizhigak
apiichishin vai lie to a certain depth; pn
epiichishing
apiichisin vii lie to a certain depth; pn epiichising
apiichitaa vai be engaged in an activity to a certain
extent, be so far along in an activity; Isg
indapiichitaa; prt epiichitaad
apiingwe'igan ni moccasin vamp; pi
apiingwe'iganan; loc apiingwe'iganing; dim
apiingwe'igaans
apiitagim vta set a price of a certain height on s.o.;
Isg indapiitagimaa; pn epiitagimaad
apiitagindan vti set a price of a certain height on
s.t.; Isg indapiitagindaan; pn epiitagindang
apiitaginde vii have a price of a certain height; pn
eptitagindeg; aug apiitagindemagad; pn aug
epiitagindemagak
apiitaginzo vai have a price of a certain height; pn
epiitaginzod
apiitaa vii be a certain height, be a certain
thickness; pn epiitaag; aug apiitaamagad; prt
aug epiitaamagak
apiitaanimad vii the wind has a certain speed; pn
epiitaanimak

13
apiitendan—ashkibagong inaande
apiitendan vti be proud of s.t. to a certain extent,
regard s.t. to a certain degree; Isg
indapiitendaan; pn epiitendang
apiitendaagozi vai be valued to a certain extent,
be at a certain rank; Isg indapiitendaagoz; pn
epiitendaagozid
apiitendaagwad vii be valued to a certain extent,
be at a certain rank; pn epiitendaagwak
apiitendi vaibe absent a certain length of time, be
gone a certain length of time; Isg indapiitend;
pn epiitendid
apiitenim vta be proud of s.o. to a certain extent,
feel about s.o. to a certain extent; Isg
indapiitenimaa; prt epiitenimaad
apiitenimo vai be proud of oneself; Isg
indapiitenim; prt epiitenimod
apiitinigozi vai weigh a certain amount, be so
heavy; Isg indapiitinigoz; pn epiitinigozid
apiitinigwad vii weigh a certain amount, be so
heavy; pn epiitinigwak
apiitizi vai be a certain age, have a certain
thickness, have a certain extent; Isg indapiitiz;
prt epiitizid
apiizikaa vai go a certain speed, go as fast as
possible; Isg indapiizikaa; prt epiizikaad
asab na net; pi asabiig; loc asabiing; dim asabiins
asabaab ni thread; pi asabaabiin; loc asabaabiing;
dim asabaabiins
asabaabiiwaatig ni spool (for thread); pi
asabaabiiwaatigoon; loc asabaabiiwaatigong;
dim asabaabiiwaatigoons
asabike vai make nets; Isg indasabike; pn
esabiked
asabikeshiinh na spider; pi asabikeshiinyag
Asabikone-zaaga'iganiing place Nett Lake Reser-
vation; also Asabikonaye-zaaga'iganiing
asanjigo vai+o cache (s.t.); Isg indasanjig,
indasanjigon; pn esanjigod
asanjigoowigamig ni storage lodge; pi
asanjigoowigamigoon; loc
asanjigoowigaimigong; dim
asanjigoowigaitnigoons
asanjigoowin n: cache; pi asanjigoowinan; loc
asanjigoowinirig; dim asanjigoowinens
asasawemin ni chokecherry; pi asasawemlnan
asasaweminagaawanzh na chokecherry bush; pi
asasaweminagaawanzhiig; loc
asasaweminagaawanzhiing; dim
asasaweminagaawanzhiins
asaawe na perch; pi asaaweg; dim asaawens
asekaan na tanned hide; pi asekaanag; loc
asekaaning; dim asekaanens
asekaazh /asekaaN-/ vta tan s.o. (e.g., a hide); Isg
indasekaanaa; prt esekaanaad
aseke vai tan hides; Isg indaseke; pn eseked
asekewin ni tanning
asemaa na tobacco; loc asemaang; dim asemaans
asemaawipwaagaans na cigarette; pi
asemaawipwaagaansag; also asemaa-
opwaagaans
asham vta feed (s.t.) to s.o.; Isg indashamaa; pn
eshamaad
ashandiwin ni commodity food, rations; pi
ashandiwinan
ashange vai feed people, serve food to people; Isg
indashange; prt eshanged
ashangewigamig ni welfare office, commodity
store; pi ashangewigamigoon; loc
ashangewigamigong; dim
ashangewigamigoons
ashangewikwe na social worker (female), welfare
worker (female); pi ashangewikweg
ashangewinini na social worker, welfare worker; pi
ashangewininiwag
ashaweshk ni sword; pi ashaweshkoon; loc
ashaweshkong; dim ashaweshkoons
ashaageshiinh na crayfish, crab; pi
ashaageshiinyag
ashi /aS-/ vta put s.o. in a certain place; Isg
indasaa; pn esaad
ashi-aabita nm and a half
ashi-bezhig nm and one, eleven
ashi-bezhigo- pv4 and one, eleven
ashi-bezhigo-diba'iganed vii be eleven o'clock; pn
eshi-bezhigo-diba'iganek
ashidin vta hold s.o. against; Isg indashidinaa; pn
eshidinaad
ashidinan vti hold s.t. against; Isg indashidinaan;
pn eshidinang
ashigan na largemouth bass; pi ashiganag
ashi-'mgodvuaso-pv4 and six; also ashi-
ningodwaaso-*
ashi-ingodwaaswi nm and six, sixteen; also ashi-
ningodwaaswi*
ashi-tshwaaso- pv4 and eight; also ashi-
nishwaaso*
ashi-ishwaaswi nm and eight, eighteen; oho ashi-
nishwaaswi*
ashi-naanan nm and five, fifteen
ashi-naano- pv4 and five
ashi-ningodwaaso-* pv4 and six; also ashi-
ingodwaaso-
ashi-ningodwaaswi* nm and six, sixteen; also ashi-
ingodwaaswi
ashi-nishwaaso-* pv4 and eight; also ashi-
ishwaaso-
ashi-nishwaaswi* nm and eight, eighteen; also
ashi-ishwaaswi
ashi-niso- pv4 and three
ashi-niswi nm and three, thirteen
ashi-niiwin nm and four, fourteen
ashi-niiwo- pv4 and four; also ashi-niiyo-
ashi-niiyo- pv4 and four; also ashi-niiwo-
ashi-niizh nm and two, twelve
ashi-niizho- pv4 and two
ashi-niizho-diba'iganed vii be twelve o'clock; pn
eshi-niizho-diba'iganek
ashi-niizhwaaso- pv4 and seven
ashi-niizhwaaswi nm and seven, seventeen
ashiwaa vii be dull; pn eshiwaag; aug
ashiwaamagad; pn aug eshiwaamagak
ashi-zhaangaso-/w4 and nine
ashi-zhaangaswi nm and nine, nineteen
ashki- pv4 raw
ashkibagaa vii there are green leaves; pn
eshkibagaag; aug ashkibagaamagad; pn aug
eshkibagaamagak
ashkibagong inaande vii be leaf-green; pn
ashkibagong enaandeg; aug ashkibagong

ashkibagong inaanzo—awazowin
14
inaandemagad; pn aug ashkibagong
enaandemagak
ashkibagong inaanzo vai be leaf-green; pn
ashkibagong enaanzod
ashkide vii be incompletely cooked; pn eshkideg;
aug ashkidemagad; pn aug eshkidemagak
ashkikomaan m'lead (metal); loc ashkikomaaning
ashkin vii be raw (as meat); pn eshking
ashkini vai be raw (as meat); pn eshkinid
ashkizo vai be incompletely cooked; Isg
indashkiz; pn eshkizod
asho-wiidige vai be engaged; Isg indasho-wiidige;
pn esho-wiidiged
asho-wiidigendiwag /asho-wiidigendi-/ vai they
are engaged to each other; Ipl indasho-
wiidigendimin; pn esho-wiidigendijig
asigagim via add s.o. together (e.g., money); Isg
indasigagimaa; pn esigagimaad
asigagindan vii add s.t. together; Isg
indasigagindaan; pn esigagindang
asigagindaaso vai add together, total up; Isg
indasigagindaas; pn esigagindaasod
asigibii'igan ni number; pi asigibii'iganan; loc
asigibii'iganing; dim asigibii'igaans
asigibii'ige vai write numbers; Isg indasigibii'ige;
pn esigibii'iged
asigin vta gather s.o. up, collect s.o.; Isg
indasiginaa; pn esiginaad
asiginan DO'gather s.t. up, collect s.t.; Isg
indasiginaan; pn esiginang
asiginaak na blackbird; pi asiginaakwag; dim
asiginaakoons
asiginigaade vii be gathered up; pn esiginigaadeg;
aug asiginigaademagad; pn aug
esiginigaademagak
asiginigaazo vai be gathered up; pn esiginigaazod
asigizhooniyaawe vai collect money as a donation;
Isg indasigizhooniyaawe; pn
esigizhooniyaawed
asigobaan ni processed basswood bark fiber
asigobaani-mazinichigan na doll of processed
basswood bark fiber; pi asigobaani-
mazinichiganag; dim asigobaani-
mazinichigaans
asin na stone, rock; pi asiniig; loc asiniing; dim
asiniins
asinaab na net sinker; pi asinaabiig; Ice
asinaabiing; dim asinaabiins
asinii-bwaan na Assiniboin; pi asinii-bwaanag
asiniikaa vii there are many rocks, there are many
stones; pn esiniikaag; aug asiniikaamagad; pn
aug esiniikaamagak
asinii-miikana ni concrete road; pi asinii-
miikanan; loc asinii-miikanaang; dim asinii-
miikanaans
asinii-opwaagan na stone pipe; loc asinii-
opwaaganing; dim asinii-opwaagaans
asiniiwan vii be of stone, be of rock; pn esiniiwang
ataw vta put (s.t.) in a certain place for s.o., play
cards with s.o., bet with s.o.; Isg indatawaa;
pn etawaad
ataadiwag /ataadi-/ vai they gamble with each
other, they bet with each other; Ipl
indataadimin; pn etaadijig
ataadiwin na playing card; pi ataadiwinag; loc
ataadiwining; dim ataadiwinens
ataage vai bet, gamble; Isg indataage; pn
etaaged
ataagib ni algae; loc ataagibiing
ataaso vai+o store something, store (s.t.); Isg
indataas, indataason; pn etaasod
ataasowin ni cupboard, closet; pi ataasowinan; loc
ataasowining; dim ataasowinens
ataasoowigamig ni storage lodge, shed; pi
ataasoowigamigoon; loc
ataasoowigamigong; dim
ataasoowigamigoons
ate vii be in a certain place; pn eteg; aug
atemagad; pn aug etemagak
atis /atisw-/ vta dye s.o.; tsg indatiswaa; pn
etiswaad; also adis
atisan vti dye s.t.; Isg indatisaan; pn etisang; also
adisan
atisigan ni dye; pi atisiganan; also adisigan
atisige vai dye things; Isg indatisige; pn etisiged;
also adisige
atiso vai be ripe; pn etisod; also adiso
atite vii be ripe; pn etiteg; aug atitemagad; prt
aug etitemagak; also adite
atoobaan ni trough, tank; pi atoobaanan; loc
atoobaaning
atoon vti2 put s.t. in a certain place; Isg indatoon;
pn etood
atoono vai make a canoe; Isg indatoon; pn
etoonod
aw pr that animate singular demonstrative; also a'aw,
'aw, 'a
awakaan na domestic animal, slave; pi awakaanag
awakaanigamig ni barn; pi awakaanigamigoon;
loc awakaanigamigong; dim
awakaanigamigoons
awan vii be foggy, there is a fog; pn ewang
awanibiisaa vii be sprinkling rain, be misty; pn
ewanibiisaag; aug awanibiisaamagad; pn aug
ewanibiisaamagak
awanjish pc persistently, stubbornly, even though
awas pc go away!
awasagaam pc over across the water
awasajiw pc beyond the mountain, over across the
mountain
awasayi'ii pc beyond it, over across it
awasaakwaa pc beyond the woods, over across the
woods
awas-biboonong pc winter before last
awas-dagwaagong pc fall before last
awashime pc much more
awashtoyaa na blacksmith; pi awashtoyaag; also
awishtoyaa
awasi- pn beyond, over across
awasishkode pc beyond the fire, over across the
fire
awas-niibinong />t summer before last
awasonaago pc day before yesterday
awas-waabang/K day after tomorrow
awas-ziigwanongpc spring before last
awazo vai warm oneself by the fire; Isg indawaz;
pn ewazod
awazowin ni heater; pi awazowinan; loc
awazowining; dim awazowinens

IS
awaazisii—aabajitoon
awaazisii tia bullhead; pi awaazisiig; dim
awaazisiins; also owaazisii, wawaazisii
awedi pr that over there animate singular
demonstrative; also a'awedi
awegonen pr what inanimate interrogative; pi
awegonenan: also wegonen
awegwen pr I don't know who animate dubitative, I
wonder who animate dubitative; pi awegwenag
awegwen igo pr whoever animate dubitative
awenen pr who animate interrogative; pi
awegnenag
awenesh pr who, who then animate interrogative
awesiinh na wild animal; pi awesiinyag; dim
awesiins
awi- pv2 go over to; after a personal prefix: a'o-; also
'o-
awibaa vii be calm, be windless; prt ewibaag; aug
awibaamagad; prt aug ewibaamagak
awi' vta lend (s.t.) to s.o.; Isg indawi'aa; prt
ewi'aad
awi'iwe vai lend (s.t.) to people, rent (s.t.) to
people; Isg indawi'iwe; prt ewi'iwed
awiya pr somebody animate indefinite;, anybody
animate indefinite; also awiiya
aya'aapr a being, someone, I don't remember who
ayaa vai be (in a certain place), with a pv4 be in a
certain state, with a pv4 move a certain way; Isg
indayaa; prt eyaad
ayaa vii be (in a certain place), with a pv4 be in a
certain state, with a pv4 move a certain way; prt
eyaag; aug ayaamagad; prt aug eyaamagak
ayaabe na buck; pi ayaabeg; dim ayaabens
ayaakw= < akw=
ayaan /ayaam-/ vti3 have s.t., own s.t.; Isg
indayaan; prt eyaang
ayaangodinong pc sometimes, occasionally; also
aangodinong
ayaangwaamim vta warn s.o., caution s.o.; Isg
indayaangwaamimaa; pn
eyaangwaamimaad
ayaangwaamizi vai be careful, be cautious; Isg
indayaangwaamiz; pn eyaangwaamizid
ayaanig= < inig=
ayaanigokw= < inigokw=
ayaapiich= < apiich-
ayaapiit= < apiit=
ayaapiiz= < apiiz-
ayaaw vta have s.o., own s.o.; Isg indayaawaa; prt
eyaawaad
ayeko' vta make s.o. tired; Isg indayeko'aa; prt
eyeko'aad
ayekozi vai be tired; Isg indayekoz; prt eyekozid
ayekwamanji'o vai feel tired; Isg
indayekwamanji'; prt eyekwamanji'od
ayi'ii pr thing, something, I don't remember what
ayindan= < dan=
ayindap= < dap=
ayindas= < das=
ayindash= < dash=
ayindazh= < dazh=
ayindaa= < daa=
ayindood= < dood=
azaadi na poplar; pi azaadiwag; loc azaadiing; dim
azaadiins
azhashki ni mud; loc azhashkiing
azhashkiikaa vii there is much mud; prt
ezhashkiikaag; aug azhashkiikaamagad; prt
aug ezhashkiikaamagak
azhashkiiwan vii be muddy; pn ezhashkiiwang
azhashkiiwizide vai have muddy feet; Isg
indazhashkiiwizide; prt ezhashkiiwizided
azhe- pv4 go back
azhebidoon vli2 pull s.t. back; Isg
indazhebidoon; prt ezhebidood
azhebizh /azhebiN-/ vta pull s.o. back; Isg
indazhebinaa; prt ezhebinaad
azhebizo vai back up a vehicle; Isg indazhebiz; prt
ezhebizod
azheboyaanaak ni oar; pi azheboyaanaakoon; loc
azheboyaanaakong; dim azheboyaanaakoons
azheboye vai row (a boat); Isg indazheboye; pn
ezheboyed
azhegaabawi vai stand back; Isg indazhegaabaw;
prt ezhegaabawid
azhegiiwe vai go back, return; Isg indazhegiiwe;
prt ezhegiiwed
azhe'o vai paddle backwards; Isg indazhe'; prt
ezhe'od
azhen vta return s.o., take s.o. back, hand s.o.
back; Isg indazhenaa; pn ezhenaad
azhenamaw vta return (s.t.) to s.o., take (s.t.)
back to s.o.; Isg indazhenamawaa; pn
ezhenamawaad
azhenamaage vai return (s.t.) to people; Isg
indazhenamaage; prt ezhenamaaged
azhenan mi return s.t., take s.t. back, hand s.t.
back; Isg indazhenaan; prt ezhenang
azheshkaa vai go backwards; Isg indazheshkaa;
pn ezheshkaad
azhetaa vai go backwards, back up; Isg
indazhetaa; pn ezhetaad
azhigan ni sock; pi azhiganan; loc azhiganing; dim
azhigaans
azhigwa pc now, at this time, already, then; also
zhigwa, zhigo
aabadad vii be useful, be used; prt ayaabadak
aabadizi vai be useful, be used; Isg indaabadiz; prt
ayaabadizid
aaba* /aaba'w-/ vta undo s.o., untie s.o.; Isg
indaaba'waa; prt ayaaba'waad
aaba'amaw vta undo (s.t.) for s.o., untie (s.t.) for
s.o.; Isg indaaba'amawaa; pn
ayaaba'amawaad
aaba'an vti undo s.t., untie s.t.; Isg indaaba'aan;
prt ayaaba'ang
aaba'igaade vii be undone, be untied; pn
ayaaba'igaadeg; aug aaba'igaademagad; prt
aug ayaaba'igaademagak
aaba'igaazo vai be undone, be untied; pn
ayaaba'igaazod
aaba'oodoo vai untie wild rice; Isg
indaaba'oodoo; prt ayaaba'oodood
aaba'oodoon vti2 untie s.t.; Isg indaaba'oodoon;
prt ayaaba'oodood
aabajichigan ni tool; pi aabajichiganan; loc
aabajichiganing; dim aabajichigaans
aabaji' vta use s.o.; Isg indaabaji'aa; prt
ayaabaji'aad
aabajitoon vti2 use s.t.; Isg indaabajitoon; prt
ayaabajitood

aabanaabam—aagawe
16
aabanaabam via turn and look back at s.o.; Isg
indaabanaabamaa; prt ayaabanaabamaad
aabanaabandan vti turn and look back at s.t.; Isg
indaabanaabandaan; prt ayaabanaabandang
aabanaabi vai turn and look back; Isg
indaabanaab; pn ayaabanaabid
aabawaa mi be warm weather, be rnild weather; pn
ayaabawaag; aug aabawaamagad; pn aug
ayaabawaamagak
aabaabika* /aabaabika'w-/ vta unlock s.o.; Isg
indaabaabika'waa; prt ayaabaabika'waad
aabaabika'amaw via unlock (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
indaabaabika'amawaa; pn
ayaabaabika'amawaad
aabaabika'an vti unlock s.t.; Isg
indaabaabika'aan; prt ayaabaabika'ang
aabaabika'igan ni key; pi aabaabika'iganan; loc
aabaabika'iganing; dim aabaabika'igaans
aabaabika'igaade vii be unlocked; prt
ayaabaabika'igaadeg; aug
aabaabika'igaademagad; prt aug
ayaabaabika'igaademagak
aabaabiigin ma unwind s.o. (as something string-
like), unravel s.o. (as something string-like);
Isg indaabaabiiginaa; pn ayaabaabiiginaad
aabaabiiginan vti unwind s.t. (as something string-
like), unravel s.t. (as something string-like); Isg
indaabaabiiginaan; prt ayaabaabiiginang
aabaakawad vii revive, clear off after a storm; prt
ayaabaakawak
aabaakawi' via revive s.o.; Isg indaabaakawi'aa;
pn ayaabaakawi'aad
aabaakawizi vai revive, come to; Isg
indaabaakawiz; pn ayaabaakawizid
aabibidoon va2 rip s.t. open; Isg indaabibidoon;
prt ayaabibidood
aabibizh /aabibiN-/ vta rip s.o. open; Isg
indaabibinaa; prt ayaabibinaad
aabidanokii vai work without stopping; Isg
indaabidanokii; pn ayaabidanokiid
aabidaanagidoon vai talk without stopping; Isg
indaabidaanagidoon; prt
ayaabidaanagidoong
aabiding pc once, at one time
aabiji- pv4 continually
aabijiibaa vai revive, come alive; Isg indaabijiibaa;
prt ayaabijiibaad
aabiskon vta undo s.o. by hand; Isg
indaabiskonaa; pn ayaabiskonaad
aabiskonan vti undo s.t. by hand; Isg
indaabiskonaan; prt ayaabiskonang
aabiskose vai come undone, unravel; pn
ayaabiskosed
aabiskose vii come undone, unravel; prt
ayaabiskoseg; aug aabiskosemagad; pn aug
ayaabiskosemagak
aabiskwegin vta unfold s.o. (as something sheet-
like); Isg indaabiskweginaa; prt
ayaabiskweginaad
aabiskweginan vti unfold s.t. (as something sheet-
like); Isg indaabiskweginaan; pn
ayaabiskweginang
aabita pc half
aabita- pv4 half
aabita-niibino-giizis na July
aabitawayi'ii pc halfway along it
aabitawaabik na half-dollar
aabitawaabikizi vai be half (as something mineral,
e.g., the moon); pn ayaabitawaabikizid
aabita-zhooniyaans na nickel (coin); pi aabita-
zhooniyaansag
aabitaa-dibikad vii be midnight; prt ayaabitaa-
dibikak
aabitoobadoon vti2 fill s.t. half full (of liquid); Isg
indaabitoobadoon; prt ayaabitoobadood
aabitoobazh /aabitoobaN-/ vta fill s.o. half full (of
liquid); Isg indaabitoobanaa; prt
ayaabitoobanaad
aabitoobii vai behalf full (of liquid) ;pn
ayaabitoobiid
aabitoobii tmbe half full (of liquid) j pn
ayaabitoobiig; aug aabitoobiimagad; prt aug
ayaabitoobiimagak
aabitoose vii be Wednesday; prt ayaabitooseg;
aug aabitoosemagad; pn aug
ayaabitoosemagak
aabitooshkin pc half a bag
aabitooshkinadoon vti2 fill s.t. half full; Isg
indaabitooshkinadoon; prt
ayaabitooshkinadood
aabitooshkina' vta fill s.o. half full (of solids); Isg
indaabitooshkina'aa; pn
ayaabitooshkina'aad
aabitooshkine vai be half full (of solids) ;prr
ayaabitooshkined
aabitooshkine vii be half full (of solids); pn
ayaabitooshkineg; aug aabitooshkinemagad;
pn aug ayaabitooshkinemagak
aaboodin vta turn s.o. inside out; Isg
indaaboodinaa; prt ayaaboodinaad
aaboodinan vti turn s.t. inside out; Isg
indaaboodinaan; prt ayaaboodinang
aabooztkan vti wear s.t. inside out; Isg
indaaboozikaan; pn ayaaboozikang
aaboozikaw vta wear s.o. inside out; Isg
indaaboozikawaa; pn ayaaboozikawaad
aaboozikaa vai turn inside out; pn ayaaboozikaad
aaboozikaa vii turn inside out; prt ayaaboozikaag;
aug aaboozikaamagad; prt aug
ayaaboozikaamagak
aadawa'am vta go with s.o. in a boat; Isg
indaadawa'amaa; prt ayaadawa'amaad
aadizookaw vta tell a legend to s.o., tell a myth to
s.o.; Isg indaadizookawaa; pn
ayaadizookawaad
aadizookaan na traditional story, legend, myth,
character of a legend or myth; pi
aadizookaanag; dim aadizookaanens
aadizooke vai tell a traditional story, tell a legend,
tell a myth; Isg indaadizooke; pn
ayaadizooked
aadizookewinini na storyteller; pi
aadizookewininiwag
aadodan vti tell a story of s.t.; Isg indaadodaan;
prt ayaadodang
aagade vai burp; Isg indaagade; pn ayaagaded
aagask na prairie chicken; pi aagaskwag; dim
aagaskoons
aagawe vai go out of sight (as around a corner);
Isg indaagawe; pn egaagawed

17
aagim—aanike-ogimaa
aagim na snowshoe; pi aagimag; he aagiming;
dim aagimen'i
aagimaak na black ash (tree); pi aagimaakwag; he
aagimaakong; dim aagimaakoons
aagimose vai snowshoe; Isg indaagimose; prt
ayaagimosed
aagonwetam vai2 deny, contradict; Isg
indaagonwetmm; pn ayaagonwetang
aagonwetan vti deny s.t., contradict s.t., not
believe s.t. said; Isg indaagonwetaan; pn
ayaagonwetang
aagonwetaw vta deny what s.o. says, contradict
s.o., not believe what s.o. says; Isg
indaagonwetawaa; pn ayaagonwetawaad
aagonweyenim vta disbelieve s.o.; Isg
indaagonweyenimaa; pn
ayaagonweyenimaad
aajigade na coot, mud hen; pi aajigadeg; dim
aajigadens
aajikode vii be notched; pn ayaajikodeg; aug
aajikodemagad; pn aug ayaajikodemagak
aajim vta tell a story of s.o.; Isg indaajimaa; pn
ayaajimaad
aajiningwa'on m crutch; pi aajiningwa'onan; loc
aajiningwa'oriing; dim aajiningwa'onens
aajisag pc in the next room
aakoshkade vai have a stomachache; Isg
indaakoshkade; pn ayaakoshkaded
aakoshkadekaw- vta give s.o. a stomachache; in
inverse forms: Isg indaakoshkadekaagon; prt
ayaakoshkadekaagod
aakozi vai+o be sick, be sick (in s.t.), be ill; Isg
indaakoz, indaakozin; pn ayaakozid
aakoziwin ni sickness, disease; pi aakoziwinan
aakoziwinikaa vii there is much sickness; pn
ayaakoziwinikaag; aug aakoziwinikaamagad;
pn aug ayaakoziwinikaamagak
aakoziikaazo vai pretend to be sick; Isg
indaakoziikaaz; pn ayaakoziikaazod
aakoziishkaw- vta make s.o. sick (especially of a
substance consumed); in inverse forms: Isg
indaakoziishkaagon; pn ayaakoziishkaagod
aakoziiwendaagozi vai be considered sickly; pn
ayaakoziiwendaagozid
aakoziiwidaabaan na ambulance; pi
aakoziiwidaabaanag; loc
aakoziiwidaabaaning; dim
aakoziiwidaabaanens
aakoziiwtgamig ni hospital; pi
aakoziiwigamigoon; loc aakoziiwigamigong;
dim aakoziiwigamigoons
aakoziiwinaagozi vai look sick; Isg
indaakoziiwinaagoz; pn ayaakoziiwinaagozid
aakwaadizi vai be fierce; Isg indaakwaadiz; pn
ayaakwaadizid
aakwendam vai2 have intense feelings or desires;
Isg indaakwendam; pn ayaakwendang
aamiwag /aami-/ vai they spawn; pn ayaamijig
aamoo na bee, wasp; pi aarnoog; dim aamoons
aamoo-wadiswan ni beehive, wasp nest; pi
aamoo-wadiswanan; loc aamoo-wadiswaning
aamoo-ziinzibaakwad ni honey
aanakwad ni cloud; pi aanakwadoon; loc
aanakwadong; dim aanakwadoons
aanapii pc when? interrogative; also aanapiish,
aaniin apii, aaniin iw apii
aanapiish pc when? interrogative; also aanapii,
aaniin apii, aaniin iw apii
aanawendan vti dislike s.t., reject s.t., find s.t.
unsatisfactory; Isg indaanawendaan; prt
ayaanawendang
aanawendaagozi vai be disliked, be rejected, be
found unsatisfactory; Isg indaanawendaagoz;
pn ayaanawendaagozid
aanawendaagwad vii be disliked, be rejected, be
found unsatisfactory; pn ayaanawendaagwak
aanawenim vta dislike s.o., reject s.o., find s.o.
unsatisfactory; Isg indaanawenimaa; pn
ayaanawenimaad
aanawenjige vai dislike things, reject things, find
things unsatisfactory; Isg indaanawenjige; pn
ayaanawenjiged
aanawewizi vai be inadequate, be ineffective, do
in vain; Isg indaanawewiz; pn ayaanawewizid
aanawi pc anyhow, although, despite, but
aandabi vai change seat; Isg indaandab; prt
ayaandabid
aandagim vta count s.o. over; Isg indaandagimaa;
pn ayaandagimaad
aandagindan vti c count s.t. over; Isg
indaandagindaan; pn ayaandaginang
aandaginzo vai count over; Isg indaandaginz; pn
ayaandaginzod
aandagoode vai change one's dress; Isg
indaandagoode; pn ayaandagoodeg
aandakii vai live somewhere else, change
countries; Isg indaandakii; pn ayaandakiid
aandaabikinigan ni gearshift; pi
aandaabikiniganan; lac aandaabikiniganing;
dim aandaabikinigaans
aandaabikinige vai shift gears; Isg
indaandaabikinige; prt ayaandaabikiniged
aandaakonige vai change plans, change laws; Isg
indaandaakonige; pn ayaandaakoniged
aandeg na crow; pi aandegwag; dim aandegoons
aandi pc where? interrogative; also aandish, aaniindi
aangodinong pc sometimes, occasionally; also
aaningodinong
aanikanootan vti translate s.t., interpret s.t.; Isg
indaanikanootaan; pn ayaanikanootang
aanikanootaw vta translate s.o., interpret s.o.; Isg
indaanikanootawaa; prt ayaanikanootawaad
aanikanootaage vai translate for people, interpret
for people; Isg indaanikanootaage; prt
ayaanikanootaaged
aanikanootaagewinini na speaker (for others),
interpreter, translator; pi
aanikanootaagewininiwag
aanikanootaagozi vai be interpreted; Isg
indaanikanootaagoz; pn
ayaanikanootaagozid
aanikegamaa vii be a chain of lakes; prt
ayaanikegamaag; aug aanikegamaamagad;
pn aug ayaanikegamaamagak
aanike-ogimaa na someone next in succession to
the leader (e.g., a vice president); pi aanike-
ogimaag; dim aanike-ogimaans

aanikeshkaw—aate'an
18
aanikeshkaw vta stand in place of s.o., follow in
s.o.'s steps, be next to s.o.; Isg
indaanikeshkawaa; prt ayaanikeshkawaad
aanikeshkodaadiwag /aanikeshkodaadi-/ vai they
are next to each other; Ipl
indaanikeshkodaadimin; prt
ayaanikeshkodaadijig
aanikoobijigan na ancestor, great-grandparent,
great-grandchild; pi aanikoobijiganag; loc
aanikoobijiganing; dim aanikoobijigaans
aanikooshim vta lay s.o. joining something else;
Isg indaanikooshimaa; prt ayaanikooshimaad
aanikooshin vai lie joining something else; prt
ayaanikooshing
aanikoosidoon vti2 lay s.t. joining something else;
Isg indaanikoosidoon; prt ayaanikoosidood
aanikoosin vii lie joining something else; prt
ayaanikoosing
aanimad vii wind blows wildly, be a disturbance,
be danger; pn ayaanimak
aanimendam vai2 suffer mentally, suffer
emotionally; Isg indaanimendam; prt
ayaanimendang
aanimi' vta abuse s.o., make s.o. suffer, cause s.o.
trouble; Isg indaanimi'aa; prt ayaanimi'aad
aanimim vta reprimand s.o.; Isg inaanimimaa; prt
ayaanimimaad
aanimitoon vti2 abuse s.t.; Isg indaanimitoon; prt
ayaanimitood
aanimizi vai be seriously ill, be very sick, suffer, be
in distress; Isg indaanimiz; prt ayaanimizid
aanind pc some
aanish pc well, well then
aanishim vta discourage s.o.; Isg indaanishimaa;
prt ayaanishimaad
aanizhiitam vai2 change one's mind, quit
working, decide against, give up; Isg
indaanizhiitam; pn ayaanizhiitang
aaniin pc how?, why?, in what way? interrogative
aaniin pc hello!, greetings!
aaniin apii pc when? interrogative', also aanapii,
aanapiish, aaniin iw apii, aaniinwapii
aaniin dash pc why? interrogative
aaniindi pc where? interrogative; oho aandi
aaniin iwapii pc when? interrogative; also aanapii,
aanapiish, aaniin apii
aaniin minikpc how many?, how much?
interrogative
aaniin danaa pt well how?, well why?, why not?
aaniish pc how?, why?, in what way? interrogative,
well now, you see
aaniish apii pc when? interrogative; also anapii,
aanin apii, aanapiish, aaniin iw apii
aaniish naapc well now, you see
aanji- pv4 change
aanji-bimaadizi vai change one's life; Isg indaanji-
bimaadiz; prt ayaanji-bimaadizid
aanjibii'an vti write s.t. over; Isg indaanjibii'aan;
pn ayaanjibii'ang
aanji-gozi vai move to a new residence; Isg
indaanji-goz; prt ayaanji-gozid
aanji' vta change s.o., make s.o. over; Isg
indaanji'aa; prt ayaanji'aad
aanjitoon vti2 change s.t., make s.t. over; Isg
indaanjitoon; prt ayaanjitood
aano- pvl in vain, without result
aanzikan vti change s.t. with foot or body (e.g.,
clothes); Isg indaanzikaan; prt ayaanzikang
aanzikaw vta change s.o. with foot or body (e.g.,
clothes); Isg indaanzikawaa; prt
ayaanzikawaad
aanzikonaye vai change one's clothes; Isg
indaanzikonaye; pn ayaanzikonayed
aanzikonaye' vta change s.o.'s clothes; Isg
indaanzikonaye'aa; prt ayaanzikonaye'aad
aanzinaago' vta change s.o.'s appearance,
transform s.o.; Isg indaanzinaago'aa; pn
ayaanzinaago'aad
aanzinaago'idizo vai change one's own appear-
ance, transform oneself; Isg
indaanzinaago'idiz; prt ayaanzinaago'idizod
aanzinaagotoon vti2 change s.t.'s appearance,
transform s.t.; Isg indaanzinaagotoon; pn
ayaanzinaagotood
aanzinaagozi vai look changed; Isg
indaanzinaagoz; prt ayaanzinaagozid
aanzinaagwad vii look changed; prt
ayaanzinaagwak
aanziyaan ni man's apron (traditional dress),
breech clout, diaper; pi aanziyaanan; he
aanziyaaning; dim aanziyaanens
aapidaanagidoon vai talk without stopping; Isg
indaapidaanagidoon; pn
ayaapidaanagidoong
aapidegpc without a doubt, certainly
aapidendi vai go and not return, be gone forever;
Isg indaapidend; pn ayaapidendid
aapiji pc very, quite
aapijibatoo vai run away for good; Isg
indaapijibatoo; prt ayaapijibatood
aapijinazh /aapijinaN-/ vta finally and completely
kills.o.; Isg indaapijinanaa; prt
ayaapijinanaad
aapijinizhimo vai flee for good; Isg
indaapijinizhim; prt ayaapijinizhimod
aapijishin vai have a bad fall, die from a fall; Isg
indaapijishin; pn ayaapijishing
aapiji-wiidige vai be legally married; Isg indaapiji-
wiidige; prt ayaapiji-wiidiged
aapiji-wiidige-mazina'igan ni marriage license; pi
aapiji-wiidige-mazina'iganan
aas ni legging; pi aasan
aasamisag ni wall; pi aasamisagoon; loc
aasamisagong
aasaakamig ni moss; pi aasaakamigoon
aasodoodooshimebizon ni brassiere; pi
aasodoodooshimebizonan; loc
aasodoodooshimebizoning; dim
aasodoodooshimebizonens
aatayaa pc man's expression of mild displeasure or
disdain; also taayaa
aate vii be extinguished; pn ayaateg; aug
aatemagad; prt aug ayaatemagak
aatebidoon vri2 turn s.t. out (e.g., stove or lamp);
Isg indaatebidoon; prt ayaatebidood
aatebizh /aatebiN-/ vta put out a fire on s.o. with
hands; Isg indaatebinaa; prt ayaatebinaad
aatebii vai sober up; Isg indaatebii; prt ayaatebiid
aate'an TO put s.t. out (e.g., fire or light),
extinguish s.t.; Isg indaate'aan; pn ayaate'ang

19
aate'igan—aazhawibatoo
aate'igan ni fire extinguisher; pi aate'iganan; loc
aate'iganing; dim aate'igaans
aate'ishkodawewidaabaan na fire truck; toe
aate'ishkodawewidaabaaning; dim
aate'ishkodawewidaabaanens
aate'ishkodawewinini na fireman; pi
aate'ishkodawewininiwag; dim
aate'ishkodawewininiins
aatenaagozi vai appear to be extinguished (e.g.,
the moon or sun in an eclipse); prt
ayaatenaagozid
aatewebinan vti put s.t. out quickly (e.g., fire or
light); Isg indaatewebinaan; prt
ayaatewebinang
aateyaabikishin vai be darkened (e.g. the moon or
sun in an eclipse); prt ayaateyaabikishing
aatwaakogaabawi vai stand leaning against
something; Isg indaatwaakogaabaw; pn
ayaatwaakogaabawid
aatwaakoshim via lean s.o. against (as something
stick- or wood-like); Isg indaatwaakoshimaa;
prt ayaatwaakoshimaad
aatwaakoshin vai lean against (as something stick-
or wood-like); Isg indaatwaakoshin; pn
ayaatwaakoshing
aatwaakosidoon vti2 lean s.t. against (as
something stick- or wood-like); Isg
indaatwaakosidoon; prt ayaatwaakosidood
aatwaakosin vii lean against (as something stick-
or wood-like); prt ayaatwaakosing
aatwaakowebin via throw s.o. up against (as
something stick- or wood-like); Isg
indaatwaakowebinaa; prt
ayaatwaakowebinaad
aatwaakowebinan vti throw s.t. up against (as
something stick- or wood-like); Isg
indaatwaakowebinaan; prt
ayaatwaakowebinang
aawadaw vta haul (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
indaawadawaa; prt ayaawadawaad
aawadaaso vai haul something; Isg indaawadaas;
prt ayaawadaasod
aawadaasoowidaabaan na truck; pi
aawadaasoowidaabaanag; loc
aawadaasoowidaabaaning; dim
aawadaasoowidaabaanens
aawadoon vti2 haul s.t.; Isg indaawadoon; prt
ayaawadood
aawajimine vai haul wild rice; Isg indaawajimine;
prt ayaawajimined
aawajinigaadan vti haul s.t. on one's shoulder; Isg
indaawajinigaadaan; prt ayaawajinigaadang
aawajinigaazh /aawajinigaaN-/ vta haul s.o. on
one's shoulder; Isg indaawajinigaanaa; prt
ayaawajinigaanaad
aawajinige vai haul things on one's shoulder; Isg
indaawajinige; prt ayaawajiniged
aawan vii be a certain thing; prt ayaawang
aawazh /aawaN-/ vta haul s.o.; Isg indaawanaa;
prt ayaawanaad
aawazhiwe vai haul people; Isg indaawazhiwe; prt
ayaawazhiwed
aawazhiwewidaabaan na van; pi
aawazhiwewidaabaanag; loc
aawazhiwewidaabaaning; dim
aawazhiwewidaabaanens
aawekaazh /aawekaaN-/ vta recognize s.o.; Isg
indaawekaanaa; pn ayaawekaanaad
aawenan vti recognize s.t. by sight, identify s.t. by
sight; Isg indaawenaan; pn ayaawenang
aawenaw vta recognize s.o. by sight, identify s.o.
by sight; Isg indaawenawaa; pn
ayaawenawaad
aawendan vti recognize s.t., identify s.t.; Isg
indaawendaan; prt ayaawendang
aawenim vta recognize s.o., identify s.o.; Isg
indaawenimaa; pn ayaawenimaad
aawetan vti recognize s.t. by sound, identify s.t. by
sound; Isg indaawetaan; prt ayaawetang
aawetaw vta recognize s.o. by sound, identify s.o.
by sound; Isg indaawetawaa; prt
ayaawetawaad
aawi vai be a certain thing or being; Isg indaaw;
prt ayaawid
aayaapii pc every once in a while
aazhawagaazii vai wade across; Isg
indaazhawagaazii; pn ayaazhawagaaziid
aazhawagaaziibatoo vai run across wading; Isg
indaazhawagaaziibatoo; prt
ayaazhawagaaziibatood
aazhawa'am vai2 go across by boat; Isg
indaazhawa'am; pn ayaazhawa'ang; also
aazhawa'o
aazhawa'o vai go across by boat; Isg
indaazhawa'; prt ayaazhawa'od; also
aazhawa'am
aazhawa'oodoon vti2 take s.t. across by boat,
ferry s.t. across; Isg indaazhawa'oodoon; pn
ayaazhawa'oodood
aazhawa'oozh /aazhawa'ooN-/ vta take s.o.
across by boat, ferry s.o. across; Isg
indaazhawa'oonaa; prt ayaazhawa'oonaad
aazhawayi'ii pc on the other side of it
aazhawaadagaa vai swim across; Isg
indaazhawaadagaa; pn ayaazhawaadagaad
aazhawaakoshim vta lay s.o. across (as something
stick- or wood-like); Isg
indaazhawaakoshimaa; pn
ayaazhawaakoshimaad
aazhawaakoshin vai lie across (as something stick-
or wood-like); Isg indaazhawaakoshin; pn
ayaazhawaakoshing
aazhawaakosidoon vti2 lay s.t. across (as
something stick- or wood-like); Isg
indaazhawaakosidoon; pn
ayaazhawaakosidood
aazhawaakosin vii lie across (as something stick-
or wood-like); pn ayaazhawaakosing
aazhawaandawaagan ni foot bridge; pi
aazhawaandawaaganan; loc
aazhawaandawaaganing; dim
aazhawaandawaagaans
aazhawaandawe vai climb across; Isg
indaazhawaandawe; pn ayaazhawaandawed
aazhawibatoo vai run across; Lsg
indaazhawifaatoo; pn ayaazhawibatood; also
aazhoobatoo

aazhawigwaashkwani—babaamaadizi
20
aazhawigwaashkwani vai jump across; Isg
indaazhawigwaashkwan; prt
ayaazhawigwaashkwanid
aazhibik ni rock cliff; pi aazhibikoon; loc
aazhibikong; dim aazhibikoons
aazhidem ma talk back to s.o., answer back to s.o.;
Isg indaazhidemaa; prt ayaazhidemaad
aazhideyaatig na cross; pi aazhideyaatigoog; loc
aazhideyaatigong; dim aazhideyaatigoons
aazhigidwebin vta throw s.o. over backwards; Isg
indaazhigidwebinaa; prt ayaazhigidwebinaad
aazhigidwebinan vti throw s.t. over backwards; Isg
indaazhigidwebinaan; prt
ayaazhigidwebinang
aazhigijise vai turn over backwards, turn face up;
hg indaazhigijise; prt ayaazhigijised
aazhigijise vii turn over backwards, turn face up;
prt ayaazhigijiseg; aug aazhigijisemagad; prt
aug ayaazhigijisemagak
aazhigijishim vta lay s.o. over backwards, lay s.o.
faceup; Js£indaazhigijishimaa;pr?
ayaazhigijishimaad
aazhigijishin vai fall over backwards, lie face up;
Isg indaazhigijishin; prt ayaazhigijishing
aazhigijisidoon vti2 lay s.t. over backwards, lay s.t.
face up; Isg indaazhigijisidoon; prt
ayaazhigijisidood
aazhigijisin vii fal! over backwards, lie face up; prt
ayaazhigijising
aazhikwe vai scream; Isg indaazhikwe; prt
ayaazhikwed
aazhogan ni bridge; pi aazhoganan; loc
aazhoganing; dim aazhogaans
aazhoge vai go across water; Isg indaazhoge; prt
ayaazhoged
aazhogeba'idiwag /aazhogeba'idi-/ vai they run
across together; Ipl indaazhogeba'idimin; prt
ayaazhogeba'idijig
aazhogebizo vai drive across; Isg indaazhogebiz;
prt ayaazhogebizod
aazhogedaabipiwe vai drive across; Isg
indaazhogedaabii'iwe; prt
ayaazhogedaabii'iwed
aazhogewidoon vti2 carry s.t. across, take s.t.
across; Isg indaazhogewidoon; prt
ayaazhogewidood
aazhogewizh /aazhogewiN-/ vta carry s.o. across,
take s.o. across; Isg indaazhogewinaa; prt
ayaazhogewinaad
aazhooba'idiwag /aazhooba'idi-/ vai they run
across together; Ipl indaazhooba'idimin; prt
ayaazhooba'idijig
aazhoobatoo vai run across; Isg indaazhoobatoo;
prt ayaazhoobatood; also aazhawibatoo
aazhoodamon /aazhoodamo-/ vii go across (as a
road or trail); prt ayaazhoodamog
aazhoodaabii'iwe vai drive across; Isg
indaazhoodaabii'iwe; prt
ayaazhoodaabii'iwed
aazhoogaadebi vai sit with legs crossed; Isg
indaazhoogaadeb; prt ayaazhoogaadebid
aazhookoodin vta infect s.o. with something; Isg
indaazhookoodinaa; prt ayaazhookoodinaad
aazhooningwa'an vti wear s.t. across the shoulder;
Isg indaazhooningwa'aan; prt
ayaazhooningwa'ang
aazhooningwa'igan na bandolier bag; pi
aazhooningwa'iganag; dim
aazhooningwa'igaans; also aazhooningwa'on;
the usual Mitte Lacs term is gashkibidaagan
aazhooshkaa vai go across; Isg indaazhooshkaa;
prt ayaazhooshkaad
B
ba- pv2 toward the speaker, this way, here, hither
changed form of: bi-
babagiwayaan ni shirt; pi babagiwayaanan; loc
babagiwayaaning; dim babagiwayaanens; also
bagiwayaan
babagiwayaanegamig ni tent; pi
babagiwayaanegamigoon; loc
babagiwayaanegamigong; dim
babagiwayaanegamigoons; also
bagiwayaanegamig
babagiwayaanegamigwegin ni canvas; pi
babagiwayaanegamigweginoon
babagiwayaanekizin ni tennis shoe, canvas shoe;
pi babagiwayaanekizinan; loc
babagiwayaanekizining; dim
babagiwayaanekizinens; also
bagiwayaanekizin
babagiwayaaniigin ni cloth, cotton cloth; pi
babagiwayaaniiginoon; loc
babagiwayaaniiginong; dim
babagiwayaaniiginoons; also bagiwayaaniigin
babaa- pv2 going about
babaa-ayaa vai be around, wander about; Isg
imbabaa-ayaa; prt bebaa-ayaad
babaabag= < bibag=
babaadagw= < badagw=
babaamadaawe vai go about trading, be a
peddler; Isg imbabaamadaawe; prt
bebaamadaawed
babaamadaawewinini na peddler; pi
babaamadaawewininiwag; also
babaamadaawaagewinini
babaamademo vai go about crying; Isg
imbabaamadem; prt bebaamademod
babaamaadagaa vai swim about; Isg
imbabaamaadagaa; prt bebaamaadagaad
babaamaadagaako vai go about on the ice; Isg
imbabaamaadagaak; prt bebaamaadagaakod
babaamaadagaazii vai wade about; Isg
imbabaamaadagaazii; prt
bebaamaadagaaziid
babaamaada'e vai skate about; Isg
imbabaamaada'e; prt bebaamaada'ed
babaamaadizi vai live about, travel about; Isg
imbabaamaadiz; prt bebaamaadizid

21
babaamaadizii-makak—badaka'an
babaamaadizii-niiakak tii suitcase; pi
babaamaadizii-makakoon; loc
babaamaadizii-makakong; dim
babaamaadizii-makakoons
babaamaajimo vai spread the news about; Isg
imbabaamaajinn; prt bebaamaajimod
babaamaajimoo-irnazina'igan ni newspaper; pi
babaamaajimoo-mazina'iganan; loc
babaamaajimoo-mazina'iganing; dim
babaamaajimoo-mazina'igaans
babaamaanakwad vii clouds move about; prt
bebaamaanakwak
babaamaashi vai be blown about, sail about; 1st;
imbabaamaash; prt bebaamaashid
babaamaasin vii be blown about, sail about; prt
bebaamaasing
babaamendam uai2 pay attention, worry; Isg
imbabaamendam; prt bebaamendang
babaamendan vti pay attention to s.t., worry
about s.t., bother s.t.; Isg imbabaamendaan;
prt bebaamendang
babaamenim vta pay attention to s.o., worry
about s.o., bother s.o.; Isg imbabaamenimaa;
prt bebaamenimaad
babaamiba'idiwag /babaamiba'idi-/ vai they run
about together; I pi imbabaamiba'idimin; prt
bebaamiba'idijig
babaamibatoo vai run about; Isg
imbabaamibatoo; prt bebaamibatood
babaamibide vii speed about, drive about, fly
about; prt bebaamibideg; aug
babaamibidemagad; prt aug
bebaamibidernagak
babaamibizo vai speed about, drive about, fly
about; Isg imbabaamibiz; prt bebaamibizod
babaamidaabii'iwe vai drive about; Isg
imbabaamidaabii'iwe; prt
bebaamidaabii'iwed
babaamigozi vai move one's residence about; Isg
imbabaamigoz; prt bebaamigozid
babaaminizha' /babaaminizha'w-/ via chase s.o.
about; Isg imbabaaminizha'waa; prt
bebaaminizha'waad
babaaminizha'an vti chase s.t. about; Isg
imbabaaminizha'aan; prt bebaaminizha'ang
babaaminizha'ige vai chase things about; Isg
imbabaaminizha'ige; prt bebaaminizha'iged
babaamise vai fly about; hg imbabaamise; prt
bebaamised
babaamise vii fly about; prt bebaamiseg; aug
babaamisemagad; prt aug bebaamisemagak
babaamishimo vai dance about; Isg
imbabaamishim; prt bebaamishimod
babaamishkaa vai paddle about, go about in a
boat; Isg imbabaamishkaa; prt
bebaamishkaad
babaamiwidoon vii2 take s.t. about, carry s.t.
about; Isg imbabaamiwidoon; prt
bebaamiwidood
babaamiwizh /babaamiwiN-/ vta take s.o. about,
carry s.o. about, guide s.o. about; Isg
imbabaamiwinaa; prt bebaamiwinaad
babaamizi vai do business, go about on one's
business; Isg imbabaamiz; prt bebaamizid
babaamose vai walk about; Isg imbabaamose; prt
bebaamosed
babaamoode vai crawl about; Isg
imbabaamoode; prt bebaamooded
babaamoomigo vai ride about on horseback; Isg
imbabaamoomig; prt bebaamoomigod
babaazagw= < bazagw=
babig na flea; pi babigwag; dim babigoons
babimose vai walk about, take a stroll; Isg
imbabimose; pn bebimosed
babiich= < bich=
babiichii vai put on one's shoes, put on one's
moccasins; Isg imbabiichii; prt bebiichiid
babiigomakakii na toad; pi babiigomakaktig; dim
babiigomakakiins
babiikw= < bikw=
babiinzikawaagan ni coat, jacket; pi
babiinzikawaaganan; loc
babiinzikawaaganing; dim
babiinzikawaagaans
babiishag3 < bishag=
babiiwaawan /babiiwaa-/ vii they are tiny; prt
bebiiwaagin
babiiwiminagadoon /babiiwiminagad-/ vii they
are tiny (as something ball-like); prt
bebiiwiminagakin
babiiwiminagiziwag /babiiwiminagizi-/ vai they
are tiny (as something ball-like); pn
bebiiwiminagizijig
babiiwizhiinyiwag /babiiwizhiinyi-/ vai they are
tiny plural-., Ipl imbabiiwizhiinyimin; pn
bebiiwizhiinyijig
babiizigaakiz /babiizigaakizw-/ vta curl s.o.'s hair
by heat; Isg imbabiizigaakizwaa; prt
bebiizigaakizwaad
babiizigindibe vai have curly hair; Isg
imbabiizigindibe; pn bebiizigindibed
babiizoge= < bizoge=
badagoshkan vti cover s.t. with body, lie
protectively on s.t.; Isg imbadagoshkaan; pn
bedagoshkang
badagoshkaw vta cover s.o. with body, lie protec-
tively on s.o.; Isg imbadagoshkawaa; prt
bedagoshkawaad
badagwana' /badagwana'w-/ vta cover s.o.; Isg
imbadagwana'waa; prt bedagwana'waad
badagwana'an vti cover s.t.; Isg
imbadagwana'aan; prt bedagwana'ang
badagwana'igaade vii be covered; pn
bedagwana'igaadeg; aug
badagwana'igaademagad; prt aug
bedagwana'igaademagak
badagwana'igaazo vai be covered; pn
bedagwana'igaazod
badagwana'ige vai cover things; Isg
imbadagwana'ige; prt bedagwana'iged
badagwiingweshin vai lie with one's face covered;
Isg imbadagwiingweshin; prt
bedagwiingweshing
badaka' /badaka'w-/ vta stick something in s.o.,
prick s.o., use a fork on s.o.; hg
imbadaka'waa; pn bedaka'waad
badaka'an vti stick something in s.t., prick s.t.,
spear s.t., use a fork on s.t.; Isg imbadaka'aan;
prt bedaka'ang

badaka'igan—bagesaaniminagaawanzh
22
badaka'igan ni fork; pi badaka'iganan; loc
badaka'iganing; dim badaka'igaans
badaka'ige vai stick something in things, prick
things, spear; hg imbadaka'ige; pn
bedaka'iged
badakijin vai get pricked; Isg imbadakijin; pn
bedakijing
badakibine'o vai stick a feather in one's hair or
hat; Isg imbadakibine'; pn bedakibine'od
badakide vn stand up from a surface, be planted
in; pn bedakideg; aug badakidemagad; pn
aug bedakidemagak
badakidoon vli2 stick s.t. in, plant s.t.; hg
imbadakidoon; pn bedakidood
badakise vai stick in a surface; pn bedakised
badakise vii stick in a surface; pn bedakiseg; aug
badakisemagad; pn aug bedakisemagak
badakishim vta stick s.o. in, set s.o. in the ground;
Isg imbadakishimaa; pn bedakishimaad
badakisidoon vti2 stick s.t. in, set s.t. in the
ground; Isg imbadakisidoon; pn
bedakisidood
badakisijige vai stick things in, set things in the
ground; Isg imbadakisijige; pn bedakisijiged
badakizh /badakiN-/ vta stick s.o. in, plant s.o. in;
Isg imbadakinaa; pn bedakinaad
badakizo vai stand up from a surface, be planted
in; Isg imbadakiz; pn bedakizod
bagakaabam via see s.o. clearly; Isg
imbagakaabamaa; pn begakaabamaad
bagakaabandan vti see s.t. clearly; Isg
imbagakaabandaan; pn begakaabandang
bagakaabi vai see clearly; Isg imbagakaab; pn
begakaabid
bagamaadagaa vai arrive swimming; Isg
imbagamaadagaa; pn begamaadagaad
bagamaagan ni war club; pi bagamaaganan; loc
bagamaaganing; dim bagamaagaans
bagamaagan (war club)
bagamaajimo vai arrive with news; Isg
imbagamaajim; pn begamaajimod
bagamaanimad vii wind comes in hard; pn
begamaanimak
bagamaapi vai arrive laughing; hg imbagamaap;
pn begamaapid
bagamaashi vai be blown in, sail in; Isg
imbagamaash; pn begamaashid
bagamaasin vii be blown in, sail in; pn
begamaasing
bagami- pv4 arriving
bagami-ayaa vai arrive; Isg imbagami-ayaa; pn
begami-ayaad
bagami-ayaa vii arrive, come to be, come to pass;
pn begami-ayaag; aug bagami-ayaamagad;
pn aug begami-ayaamagak
bagamiba'idiwag /bagamiba'idi-/ vai they arrive
on the run together; Ipl imbagamiba'idimin;
pn begamiba'idijig
bagamiba'iwe vai arrive fleeing from people; Isg
imbagamiba'iwe; pn begamiba'iwed
bagamibatoo vai arrive on the run; Isg
imbagamibatoo; pn begamibatood
bagamibide vii arrive speeding, arrive driving,
arrive flying; pn begamibideg; aug
bagamibidemagad; pn aug
begamibidemagak
bagamibizo vai arrive speeding, arrive driving,
arrive flying; Isg imbagamibiz; pn
begamibizod
bagamibiisaa vii rain is on the way; pn
begamibiisaag; aug bagamibiisaamagad; pn
aug begamibiisaamagak
bagamidaabii'iwe vai arrive driving; Isg
imbagamidaabii'iwe; pn begamidaabii'iwed
bagamigidaazo vai arrive mad; Isg
imbagamigidaaz; pn begamigidaazod
bagamise vai arrive flying; Isg imbagamise; pn
begamised
bagamise vii arrive flying; pn begamiseg; aug
bagamisemagad; pn aug begamisemagak
bagamishkaa vai arrive paddling, arrive by boat;
Isg imbagamishkaa; pn begamishkaad
bagamiwidoon vti2 arrive carrying s.t.; Isg
imbagamiwidoon; pn begamcwidood
bagamiwizh /bagamiwiN-/ vta arrive carrying s.o.;
Isg imbagamiwinaa; pn begamiwinaad
bagamose vai arrive walking; Isg imbagamose;
pn begamosed
bagamoode vai arrive crawling; Isg
imbagamoode; pn begamooded
bagamoomigo vai arrive on horseback; Isg
imbagamoomig; pn begamoomigod
bagandizi vai be lazy, be shiftless, be incompetent;
Isg imbagandiz; pn begandizid
bagaan na nut, hazelnut, peanut; pi bagaanag; loc
bagaaning; dim bagaanens
bagaani-bimide ni peanut butter; also bagaanensi-
bimide
bagaaniminzh na hazelnut bush; pi
bagaaniminzhiig; loc bagaaniminzhiing; dim
bagaaniminzhiins
bagesaan na plum; pi bagesaanag; loc
bagesaaning; dim bagesaanens
bagesaanaatig na plum tree; pi
bagesaanaatigoog; loc bagesaanaatigong; dim
bagesaanaatigoons
bagesaaniminagaawanzh na plum bush; pi
bagesaaniminagaawanzhiig; loc

23
bagese—bagwaakide
bagesaaniminagaawanzhiing; dim
bagesaaniminagaawanzhiins
bagese vai play the dish game; Isg imbagese; pn
begesed
bagida'waa vai fish with a net, set a net; Isg
imbagida'waa; pn begida'waad
bagidam vta let s.o. drop from one's mouth; Isg
imbagidamaa; pn begidamaad
bagidanaamo vai breathe, exhale; Isg
imbagidanaam; pn begidanaamod
bagidandan vti let s.t. drop from one's mouth; Isg
imbagidandaan; pn begidandang
bagidaabii vai frsh with set lines; Isg imbagidaabii;
pn begidaabiid
bagidendan vti release s.t. from one's mind; Isg
imbagidendaan; pn begidendang
bagidenirn vta release s.o. from one's mind, bury
s.o., complete mourning for s.o.; Isg
imbagidenimaa; pn begidenimaad
bagidenjigaazo vai be buried; pn
begidenjigaazod
bagidenjige vai release things from one's mind,
hold a funeral; Isg imbagidenjige; pn
begidenjiged
bagidin vta set s.o. down, offer s.o., release s.o., let
s.o. go, allow s.o.; Isg imbagidinaa; pn
begidinaad
bagidinamaw vta set (s.t.) down for s.o., offer
(s.t.) to s.o., release (s.t.) to s.o., allow (s.t.) to
s.o.; Isg imbagidinamawaa; pn
begidinamawaad
bagidinan vti set s.t. down, offer s.t., release s.t.,
let s.t. go, allow s.t.; Isg imbagidinaan; pn
begidinang
bagidinigaade vii be set down, be offered, be
released, be let go, be allowed; pn
begidinigaadeg; aug bagidinigaademagad; pn
aug begidinigaademagak
bagidinigaazo vai be set down, be offered, be
released, be let go, be allowed; pn
begidinigaazod
bagidinige vai set things down, offer things, re-
lease things, let things go, allow things, plant
things in; Isg imbagidinige; pn begidiniged
bagidinise vai put wood on the fire; Isg
imbagidinise; pit begidinised
bagidoom vta set s.o. down off one's back; Isg
imbagidoomaa pn begidoomaad
bagidoondan vti set s.t. down off one's back; Isg
imbagidoondaan; pn begidoondang
bagijigan ni offering; pi bagijiganan; dim
bagijigaans
bagijige vai make an offering; Isg imbagijige; pn
begijiged
bagijiwane vai set down one's pack; Isg
imbagijiwane; pn begijiwaned
bagijwebin vta release s.o. quickly, throw s.o.
down quickly; Isg imbagijwebinaa; prt
begijwebinaad
bagijwebinan vti release s.t. quickly, throw s.t.
down quickly; Isg imbagijwebinaan; prt
begijwebinang
bagiwayaan ni shirt, piece of cloth; pi
bagiwayaanan; he bagiwayaaning; dim
bagiwayaanens; also babagiwayaan
bagiwayaanegamig ni tent; pi
bagiwayaanegamigoon; loc
bagiwayaanegamigong; dim
bagiwayaanegamigoons; also
babagiwayaanegamig
bagiwayaaneshkimod ni cloth bag; pi
bagiwayaaneshkimodan; loc
bagiwayaaneshkimodaang; dim
bagiwayaaneshkimodens
bagiwayaanish ni cloth, rag; pi bagiwayaanishan;
loc bagiwayaanishing; dim bagiwayaanishens;
also babagiwayaanish
bagizo vai bathe, go swimming; Isg imbagiz; pn
begizod
bagizowin ni bathtub; pi bagizowinan; loc
bagizowining; dim bagizowinens
bagojiin vta gut s.o.; Isg imbagoji'maa; pn
begojiinaad
bagone' fbagone'w-/ vta drill s.o., make a hole in
s.o. using something; Isg imbagone'waa; prt
begone'waad
bagone'an vti drill s.t., make a hole in s.t. using
something; Isg imbagone'aan; pn begone'ang
bagone'igan ni drill; pi bagone'iganan; loc
bagone'iganing; dim bagone'igaans
bagoneyaa vii have a hole; pn begoneyaag; aug
bagoneyaamagad; prt aug begoneyaamagak
bagonezi vai have a hole; pn begonezid
bagosendam vai2 wish, hope; Isg
imbagosendam; pn begosendang
bagosendan vti wish for s.t., hope for s.t.; Isg
imbagosendaan; prt begosendang
bagosenim vta wish of s.o., hope for s.o., have
hope for s.o.; Isg imbagosenimaa; pn
begosenimaad
bagoshkaa vai get a hole; pit begoshkaad
bagoshkaa vii get a hole; pn begoshkaag; aug
bagoshkaamagad; pn aug begoshkaamagak
bagwa' /bagwa'w-/ vta patch s.o.; Isg
imbagwa'waa; pn begwa'waad
bagwa'amaw vta patch (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
imbagwa'amawaa; pn begwa'amawaad
bagwa'an vti patch s.t.; Isg imbagwa'aan; prt
begwa'ang
bagwa'igan ni patch; pi bagwa'iganan; loc
bagwa'iganing; dim bagwa'igaans
bagwa'igaade vii be patched; pn begwa'igaadeg;
aug bagwa'igaademagad; prt aug
begwa'igaademagak
bagwa'igaazo vai be patched, wear patches; prt
begwa'igaazod
bagwa'ige vai patch things; Isg imbagwa'ige; pn
begwaMged
bagwaj pc in the wilderness
bagwaji- pv4 wild
bagwajipin iia wild potato; pi bagwajipiniig; loc
bagwajipiniing; dim bagwajipiniins; also
bagwaji-opin
bagwana pc at random, anyhow
bagwanawizi vai be ignorant, be dumb; Isg
imbagwanawiz; pn begwanawizid
bagwaakide vii have a hole burned in; prt
begwaakideg; aug bagwaakidemagad; pn aug
begwaakidemagak

bagwaakiz—bakitejii'iganaak
24
bagwaakiz /bagwaakizw-/ vta burn a hole in s.o.;
Isg imbagwaakizwaa; prt begwaakizwaad
bagwaakizan vti burn a hole in s.t.; Isg
imbagwaakizaan; prt begwaakizang
bagwaakizo vai have a hole burned in; prt
begwaakizod
bajiishka'ogaan ni tipi, lodge with pointed top; pi
bajiishka'ogaanan; loc bajiishka'ogaaning;
dim bajiishka'ogaanens
bajiishka'ogaan (tipi, lodge with pointed top)
bajiishkaa vii be pointed; prl bejiishkaag; aug
bajiishkaamagad; prt aug bejiishkaamagak
bajiishkiga* /bajiishkiga'w-/ vta chop s.o. pointed;
Isg imbajiishkiga'waa; prt bejiishkiga'waad
bajiishkiga'an ^w'chops.t. pointed; Isg
imbajiishkiga'aan; prt bejiishkiga'ang
bajiishkizi vai be pointed; pn bejiishkizid
bakade vai be hungry; Isg imbakade; prr bekaded
bakadekaazo vai pretend to be hungry; Isg
imbakadekaaz; pn bekadekaazod
bakam vta bite s.o. through (e.g., something
string-like); Isg imbakamaa; pn bekamaad
bakandan vti bite s.t. through (e.g., something
string-like); Isg imbakandaan; pn bekandang
bakazhaawe vai clean a fish; Isg imbakazhaawe;
pn bekazhaawed
bakaakadozo vai be thin (of a person), be skinny;
Isg imbakaakadoz; prt bekaakadozod
bakaan pc different
bakaanad vii be different; pn bekaanak
bakaanige vai be secluded at first menses; Isg
imbakaanige; prt bekaaniged
bakaanizi vai be different; Is ft imbakaaniz; prt
bekaanizid
bake vai go off to the side; Isg imbake; prt beked
bakebatoo vai run off to the side; Isg
imbakebatoo; prt bekebatood
bakebide vii speed off to the side, drive off to the
side; prt bekebideg; aug bakebidemagad; pn
aug bekebidemagak
bakebizo vai speed off to the side, drive off to the
side; Isg imbakebiz; prt bekebizod
bakegamaa vii lake goes off from another; pn
bekegamaag; aug bakegamaamagad: pn aug
bekegamaamagak
bakekazh /bakekaN-/ vta bypass s.o.; Isg
imbakekanaa; prt bekekanaad
bakekazhiwe vai bypass people; Isg
imbakekazhiwe; prt bekekazhiwed
bakemon /bakemo-/ vii go off to the side (as a
road or trail); prt bekemog
baketigweyaa vii divide (as a river), branch (as a
river); prt beketigweyaag; aug
baketigweyaamagad; pn aug
beketigweyaamagak
bakibidoon vti2 snap s.t. off (e.g., something
string-like), break s.t. off (e.g., something
string-like); Isg imbakibidoon; pn bekibidood
bakibizh /bakibiN-/ vta snap s.o. off (e.g.,
something string-like), break s.o. off (e.g.,
something string-like); Isg imbakibinaa; pn
bekibinaad
baktboode vii break apart from rubbing (e.g.,
something string-like); pn bekiboodeg; aug
bakiboodemagad; pn aug bekiboodemagak
bakiboozo vai break apart from rubbing (e.g.,
something string-like); Isg imbakibooz; prt
bekiboozod
bakinaw vta win over s.o., beat s.o. in a contest;
Isg imbakinawaa; pn bekinawaad
bakinaage vai win over people, beat people in a
contest; Isg imbakinaage; prr bekinaaged
bakise vai part, break apart (e.g., something
string-like); pn bekised
bakise vii part, break apart (e.g., something string-
like); pn bekiseg; aug bakisemagad; pn aug
bekisemagak
bakishkan vti snap s.t. off with foot or body (e.g.,
something string-like); Isg imbakishkaan; pn
bekishkang
bakishkaw vta snap s.o. off with foot or body (e.g.,
something string-like); Isg imbakishkawaa; prt
bekishkawaad
bakite' /bakite'w-/ vta hit s.o., strike s.o.; Isg
imbakite'waa; pn bekite'waad
bakite'an en hit s.t., strike s.t.; Isg imbakite'aan;
prt bekite'ang
bakite'ibii'igan m typewriter; pi bakite'ibii'iganan;
loc bakite'ibii'iganing; dim bakite'ibii'igaans
bakite'igan ni hammer; pi bakite'iganan; loc
bakite'iganing; dim bakite'igaans; also
bakite'igaans
bakite'iganaak ni hammer handle; pi
bakite*iganaakoon; Joe bakite'iganaakong;
dim bakite'iganaakoons
bakite'igaade vii be hit, be struck; pn
bekite'igaadeg; aug bakite'igaademagad; prt
aug bekite'igaademagak
bakite'igaans ni hand hammer; pi bakite'igaansan
bakite'igaazo vai be hit, be struck; pn
bekite'igaazod
bakite'ige vai hit things, strike things; Isg
imbakite'ige; prt bekite'iged
bakite'odiwag /bakite'odi-/ vai they hit each
other, they strike each other; Ipl
imbakite'odimin; pn bekite'odijig
bakitejii'iganaak ni baseball bat; pi
bakitejii'iganaakoon; loc
bakitejii'iganaakong; dim
bakitejii'iganaakoons

25
bakitejii'ige—banaajp
bakitejii'ige vai play baseball; isg imbakitejii'ige;
pn bekitejii'iged
bakitejii'igewinini na baseball player; pi
bakitejii'igewiriiniwag
bakiteshin vai fall down hard; Isg imbakiteshin;
pn bekiteshing
bakiteshka'ige vai thresh field crops; Isg
imbakiteshka'ige; pn bekiteshka'iged
bakizh /bakizhw-/ vta snip s.o. off (e.g., something
string-like); Isg imbakizhwaa; pn bekizhwaad
bakizhan vti snip s.t. off (e.g., something string-
like); Isg imbakizhaan; pn bekizhang
bakobii vai go down into the water; Isg imbakobii;
pn bekobiid
bakobiibatoo vai nan into the water; Isg
imbakobiibatoo; pn bekobiibatood
bakobiidaabaadan vti drag s.t. into the water; Isg
imbakobiidaabaadaan; pn
bekobiidaabaadang
bakobiidaabaazh /bakobiidaabaaN-/ vta drag s.o.
into the water; Isg imbakobiidaabaanaa; pn
bekobiidaabaainaad
bakobiigwaashkwani vai jump into the water; Isg
imbakobiigwaashkwan; pn
bekobiigwaashkwanid
bakobiise vai fall into the water; Isg imbakobiise;
pn bekobiised
bakobiise vii fall into the water; pn bekobiiseg;
aiig bakobiisemagad; pn aug bekobiisemagak
bakobiiwebin vta throw s.o. into the water; Isg
imbakobiiwebinaa; pn bekobiiwebinaad
bakobiiwebinan vti throw s.t. into the water; Isg
imbakobiiwebinaan; pn bekobiiwebinang
bakobiiyaashi vai be blown into the water; Isg
imbakobiiyaash; pn bekobiiyaashid
bakobiiyaasin vn be blown into the water; pn
bekobiiyaasing
bakon vta skin s.o.; Isg itnbakonaa; pn bekonaad
bakonige vai skin tilings; Isg imbakonige; pn
bekoniged
bakwajibidoon vti2pul\ s.t. up, pluck s.t.; Isg
imbakwajibidoon; pn bekwajibidood
bakwebidoon vd2 tear a piece off of s.t.; Isg
imbakwebidooin; pn bekwebidood
bakwebizh /bakwebiN-/ vta tear a piece off of s.o.;
Isg imbakwebinaa; pn bekwebinaad
bakwega' /bakwega'w-/ vta chop a piece off s.o.
(as something of wood); Isg imbakwega'waa;
pn bekwega'waad
bakwega'an vti chop a piece off s.t. (as something
of wood); Isg imbakwega'aan; pn
bekwega'ang
bakwe' vta take a piece off s.o. using something;
Isg imbakwe'aa.; pn bekwe'aad
bakwe'an vti take a piece off s.t. using something;
Isg imbakwe'aan; pn bekwe'ang
bakwem vta bite a piece off s.o.; Isg
imbakwemaa; pn bekwemaad
bakwen vta take a piece off s.o. by hand; Isg
imbakwenaa; pn bekwenaad
bakwenan vti take a piece off s.t. by hand; Isg
imbakwenaan; prt bekwenang
bakwendan vti bite a piece off s.t.; Isg
imbakwendaan; pn bekwendang
bakwene vti smoke, be smoky; pn bekweneg; aug
bakwenemagad; pn aug bekwenemagak
bakwenibii vai choke while drinking; Isg
imbakwenibii; pn bekwenibiid
bakwenige vai cut cards; Isg imbakwenige; pn
bekweniged
bakwenishkaago vai choke on food; Isg
imbakwenishkaag; pn bekwenishkaagod
bakweshkaa vii come off in pieces; pn
bekweshkaag; aug bakweshkaamagad; pn
aug bekweshkaamagak
bakwezh /bakwezhw-/ vta cut a piece off s.o.; Isg
imbakwezhwaa; prt bekwezhwaad
bakwezhan vti cut a piece off s.t.; Isg
imbakwezhaan; pn bekwezhang
bakwezhigan na bread, fiour; pi bakwezhiganag;
loc bakwezhiganing; dim bakwezhigaans
bakwezhiganaaboo ni gravy
bakwezhiganike vai make bread; Isg
imbakwezhiganike; pn bekwezhiganiked
bakwezhiganikewigamig ni bakery; pi
bakwezhiganikewigamigoon; loc
bakwezhiganikewigamigong
bakwezhiganikewikwe na baker (female); pi
bakwezhiganikewikweg
bakwezhiganikewinini na baker; pi
bakwezhiganikewininiwag
bakwezhigani-makak ni flour box, bread box; pi
bakwezhigani-makakoon; loc bakwezhigani-
makakong; dim bakwezhigani-makakoons
bakwezhigaans na cookie, cracker, roll; pi
bakwezhigaansag; loc bakwezhigaansing
bamendan vti care for s.t.; Isg imbamendaan; pn
bemendang
bamenim vta care for s.o.; Isg imbamenimaa; pn
bemenimaad
bami' vta support s.o., adopt s.o.; Isg imbami'aa;
pn bemi'aad
bami'aagan na supported one, adopted one; pi
bami'aaganag; dim bami'aagaans
bami'aagaans na pet; pi bami'aagaansag
bamoozhe vai take care of a child, baby-sit; Isg
imbamoozhe; pn bemoozhed
bana' /bana'w-/ vta miss s.o. using something; Isg
imbana'waa; pn bena'waad
bana'an vti miss s.t. using something; Isg
imbana'aan; pn bena'ang
banajaanh na baby bird, nestling; f l banajaanyag
banaadad vii be spoiled, be damaged; pn
benaadak
banaadendam vai2 despair; Isg imbanaadendam;
pn benaadendang
banaadendan vti despair of s.t., lose hope in s.t.;
Isg imbanaadendaan; prt benaadendang
banaadenim vta despair of s.o., lose hope in s.o.;
Isg imbanaadenimaa; pn benaadenimaad
banaadizi vai be spoiled, be damaged; Isg
imbanaadiz; prt benaadizid
banaajibidoon vti2 damage s.t. with hands; Isg
imbanaajibidoon; pn benaajibidood
banaajibrzh /banaajibiN-/ vta damage s.o. with
hands; Isg imbanaajibinaa; pn benaajibinaad
banaaji* vta spoil s.o., damage s.o.; Isg
imbanaaji'aa; prt benaaji'aad

banaajishin—basindibe*
26
banaajishin vai spoil; Isg imbanaajishin; pn
benaajishing
banaajisin vii spoil; pn benaajising
banaajitoon vti2 spoil s.t., damage s.t.; Isg
imbanaajitoon; pn benaajitood
bande vii be singed; prt bendeg; aug
bandemagad; pn aug bendemagak
bangan vii be peaceful, be quiet; pn bengang
bangate vii be a quiet house; pn bengateg; aug
bangatemagad; pn aug bengatemagak
bangigaa vii drip down; pn bengigaag; aug
bangigaamagad; pn aug bengigaamagak
bangishim vta drop s.o.; Isg imbangishimaa; pn
bengishimaad
bangishimon /bangishimo-/ vii set as the sun;
conjunct bangishimog in the west; pn
bengishimog
bangishin vai fall; Isg imbangishin; pn bengishing
bangisidoon vti2 drop s.t.; Isg imbangisidoon; pn
bengisidood
bangisin vii fall; pn bengising
bangii pc a little, a little bit, few
bangiishenh pc a very little bit, just a little
bangiishenhwagad vii be a very little bit, be very
few; pn bengiishenhwagak
bangiishenhwagizi vai be a very little bit, be very
few; prt bengiishenhwagizid
bangiiwagad vii be a little bit, be few; pn
bengiiwagak
bangiiwagizi vai be a little bit, be few; pn
bengiiwagizid
banin vta let s.o. drop; Isg imbaninaa; pn
beninaad
baninan vti let s.t. drop; Isg imbaninaan; pn
beninang
banitan vti mishear s.t.; Isg imbanitaan; prt
benitang
banitaw vta mishear s.o.; Isg imbanitawaa; pn
benitawaad
banizi vai miss out; Isg imbaniz; prt benizid
banoomigo vai fall off a horse; Isg imbanoomig;
pn benoomigod
banzan vti singe s.t.; Isg imbanzaan; pn benzang
banzo vai be singed; Isg imbanz; pn benzod
banzo /banzw-/ vta singe s.o.; Isg imbanzwaa; pn
benzwaad
bapagone= < bagone=
bapagw= < bagw=
bapajiishk= < bajiishk=
bapak= < bak=
bapakine no grasshopper; pi bapakineg; dim
bapakinens
bapakite= < bakite=
bapakwe= < bakwe-
bapakwaanaajiinh iia bat; pi bapakwaanaajiinyag;
also apakwaanaajiinh
bapan= < ban=
bapang= < bang=
bapasa < bas=
bapasangw= < basangw=
bapashanzhe= < bashanzhe=
bapashkw= < bashkw=
bapasidiye' /bapasidiye'w-/ vta spank s.o.; Isg
imbapasidiye'waa; prt bepasidiye'waad
bapasikawe vai play shinny; Isg imbapasikawe;
prt bepasikawed
bapasininjii'odizo vai clap one's hands; Isg
imbapasininjii'odiz; pn bepasininjii'odizod
bapaw= < baw=
bapawaangeni vai shake one's wings; Isg
imbapawaangen; prt bepawaangenid
bapazhib= < bazhib=
bapaadak= < badak=
bapaakwa'am vai2 come out of the woods; Isg
imbapaakwa'am; pn bepaakwa'ang
bapiimw= < bimw=
bapiin= < ban=
basadinaa vii be a valley; pn besadinaag; aug
basadinaamagad; pn aug besadinaamagak
basangwaabapijigan ni blindfold; pi
basangwaabapijiganan; loc
basangwaabapijiganing; dim
basangwaabapijigaans
basangwaabapizh /basangwaabapiN-/ vta
blindfold s.o.; 7s£ imbasangwaabapinaa; pn
besangwaabapinaad
basangwaabapizo vai be blindfolded; Isg
imbasangwaabapiz; prt besangwaabapizod
basangwaabi vai shut one's eyes; Isg
imbasangwaab: pn besangwaabid
bashanzhe' /bashanzhe'w-/ vta whip s.o.; Isg
imbashanzhe'waa; pn beshanzhe'waad
bashanzhe'igan ni whip; pi bashanzhe'iganan; loc
bashanzhe'iganing; dim bashanzhe'igaans
bashanzhe'ige wazwhip; 75^imbashanzhe'ige;/>r£
beshanzhe'iged
bashkobizh /bashkobiN-/ vta pluck s.o. (e.g., a
bird); Isg imbashkobinaa; prt beshkobinaad
bashkwanige vai be toothless; Isg
imbashkwanige; pn beshkwaniged
bashkwashkibidoon vti2 pluck s.t. (as a plant),
weed s.t.; Isg imbashkwashkibidoon; pn
beshkwashkibidood
bashkwashkibijige vai weed things; Isg
imbashkwashkibijige; pn beshkwashkibijiged
bashkwegin ni leather, hide; pi bashkweginoon;
loc bashkweginong; dim bashkweginoons
bashkweginagooday ni buckskin dress; pi
bashkweginagoodayan
bashkweginowayaan ni leather; pi
bashkweginowayaanan
bashkweginwakizin ni hide moccasin; pi
bashkweginwakizinan; loc
bashkweginwakizining; dim
bashkweginwakizinens; also
bashkwegino-makizin
basidiye' /basidiye'w-/ vta slap s.o. on the rear; Isg
imbasidiye'waa; pn besidiye'waad
basidiyeshkaw vta kick s.o. in the rear; Isg
imbasidiyeshkawaa; pn besidiyeshkawaad
basikawaadan vti kick s.t.; Isg imbasikawaadaan:
pn besikawaadang
basikawaazh /basikawaaN-/ vta kick s.o.; Isg
imbasikawaanaa; pn besikawaanaad
basikwebizon ni headband; pi basikwebizonan;
loc basikwebizoning; dim basikwebizonens
basindibe' /basindibe'w-/ vta slap s.o. on the head;
Isg imbasindibe'waa; prt besindibe'waad

27
basiingwe'—baagwaa
basiingwe' /basiingwe'w-/ via slap s.o. on the face;
Isg imbasiingwe'waa; pn besiingwe'waad
baswewe vai echo, resound; Isg imbaswewe; pn
beswewed
baswewe vii echo, resound; prt besweweg; aug
baswewemagad; pn aug beswewemagak
bawa'am vai2 harvest wild rice, knock wild rice;
Isg imbawa'am; pn bewa'ang
bawa'iganaak na rice knocker (stick for wild rice
harvesting); pi bawa'iganaakoog; loc
bawa'iganaakong; dim bawa'iganaakoons
bawa'iganaakoog (rice knockers)
bawa'iminagaawanzh na pincherry bush; pi
bawa'iminagaawanzhiig; loc
bawa'iminagaawanzhiing; dim
bawa'iminagaawanzhiins
bawa'iminaan ra pincherry; pi bawa'iminaanan
bawaadan vti dream of s.t.; Isg imbawaadaan; pn
bewaadang
bawaagone' /bawaagone'w-/ vta brush snow off
s.o. using something; Isg imbawaagone'waa;
prt bewaagone'waad
bawaagone'an vti brush snow off s.t. using
something; Isg iimbawaagone'aan; pn
bewaagone'ang
bawaagonen vta brush snow off s.o. by hand; Isg
imbawaagonenaa; pn bewaagonenaad
bawaagonenan vti brush snow off s.t. by hand; Isg
imbawaagoneriaan; pn bewaagonenang
bawaajige vai have dreams; Isg imbawaajige; pn
bewaajiged
bawaazh /bawaaN-/ vta dream of s.o.; Isg
imbawaanaa; pn bewaanaad
bawega' /bawega'w-/ vta brush s.o. using
something (as something sheet-like); Isg
imbawega'waa; pn bewega'waad
bawega'an vti brush s.t. using something (as
something sheet-like); Isg imbawega'aan; pn
bewega'ang
bawegin vta shake s.o. out (as something sheet-
like); Isg imbaweginaa; pn beweginaad
baweginan vti shake s.t. out (as something sheet-
like); Isg imbaweginaan; pn beweginang
bawin vta shake s.o..; Isg imbawinaa; pn
bewinaad
bawinan vti shake s.t.; Isg imbawinaan; pn
bewinang
bazagokadoon vti2 glue s.t.; Isg
imbazagokadoon; pn bezagokadood
bazagokazh /bazagokaN-/ vta glue s.o.; Isg
imbazagokanaa; pn bezagokanaad
bazagoke vai stick, adhere; prt bezagoked
bazagoke vii stick, adhere; pn bezagokeg; aug
bazagokemagad; pn aug bezagokemagak
bazagozi vai be sticky; Isg imbazagoz; pn
bezagozid
bazagwaa vii be sticky; pn bezagwaag; aug
bazagwaamagad; pn aug bezagwaamagak
bazhiba' /bazhiba'w-/ vta stab s.o.; Isg
imbazhiba'waa; pn bezhiba'waad
bazhiba'an vti stab s.t.; Isg imbazhiba'aan; pn
bezhiba'ang
bazhiba'ige vai spear things; Isg imbazhiba'ige;
pn bezhiba'iged
bazhidebii vii overflow (as a liquid); pn
bezhidebiig; aug bazhidebiimagad; pn aug
bezhidebiimagak
bazigonjise vai stand up suddenly; Isg
imbazigonjise; pn bezigonjised
bazigwii vai stand up; Isg imbazigwii; pn
bezigwiid
bazikwa'o vai take off into the air; Isg
imbazikwa'; pn bezikwa'od
baa- pv2 about a place (locally distributed)
baabii* vta keep waiting for s.o.; Isg imbaabii'aa;
pn bayaabii'aad
baabii'o vai keep waiting; Isg imbaabii'; pn
bayaabii'od
baabiitoon vti2 keep waiting for s.t.; Isg
imbaabiitoon; pn bayaabiitood
baaboonaw= < bwaanaw=
baaga'adowaan ni lacrosse stick; pi
baaga'adowaanan
baaga'adowe vai play lacrosse; Isg
imbaaga'adowe; pn bayaaga'adowed
baaga'akokwaan ni drumstick for hand drum; pi
baaga'akokwaanan; dim baaga'akokwaanens
baaga'akokwe vai pound on drum; Isg
imbaaga'akokwe; pn bayaaga'akokwed
baagijaane vai have a swollen nose; Isg
imbaagijaane; pn bayaagijaaned
baagijigaade vii be struck by lightning; pn
bayaagijigaadeg; aug baagijigaademagad; pn
aug bayaagijigaademagak
baagijigaazo vai be struck by lightning; pit
bayaagijigaazod
baagininjii vai have a swollen hand; Isg
imbaagininjii; pn bayaagininjiid
baaginiishkwe vai have a swollen gland (lymph
node); Isg imbaaginiishkwe; pn
bayaaginiishkwed
baagishi vai be swollen; Isg imbaagish; pn
bayaagishid
baagishkiinzhigwe vai have swollen eyes; Isg
imbaagishkiinzhigwe; pn
bayaagishkiinzhigwed
baagisin vii be swollen; prt bayaagising
baagizide vai have a swollen foot; Isg
imbaagizide; pn bayaagizided
baagiingwe vai have a swollen face; Isg
imbaagiingwe; pn bayaagiingwed
baagwaa vii be shallow; pn bayaagwaag; aug
baagwaamagad; prt aug bayaagwaamagak

baaka'aakwenh—baapinodaw
28
baaka'aakwenh na chicken; pi baaka'aakwenyag;
dim baaka'aakwens
baaka'aakwenhwaaboo ni chicken soup; loc
baaka'aakwenhwaaboong
baaka'aakwenhwigamig ni chicken coop; pi
baaka'aakwenhwigamigoon; loc
baaka'aakwenhwigamigong; dim
baaka'aakwenhwigamigoons
baakaakonamaw vta open (s.t.) for s.o. (as
something stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door); Isg
imbaakaakonamawaa; prt
bayaakaakonamawaad
baakaakonan vti open s.t. (as something stick- or
wood-like, e.g., a door); Isg imbaakaakonaan;
prt bayaakaakonang
baakaakonigaade vti be opened (as something
stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door); prt
bayaakaakonigaadeg; aug
baakaakonigaademagad; prt aug
bayaakaakonigaademagak
baakaakose vii fly open (as something stick- or
wood-like, e.g., a door); prt bayaakaakoseg;
aug baakaakosemagad; prt aug
bayaakaakosemagak
baakaakosin vii be open (as something stick- or
wood-like, e.g., a door); prt bayaakaakosing
baakaakowebinan vti fling s.t. open (as something
stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door); Isg
imbaakaakowebinaan; prt
bayaakaakowebinang
baakaakozhigan ni can opener; pi
baakaakozhiganan; he baakaakozhiganing;
dim baakaakozhigaans
baakibii'an vii ice clears off the lake; prt
bayaakibii'ang
baakin vta uncover s.o., open s.o. up; Isg
imbaakinaa; prt bayaakinaad
baakinamaw vta uncover (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
imbaakinamawaa; prt bayaakinamawaad
baakinan vti uncover s.t., open s.t. up; Isg
imbaakinaan; prt bayaakinang
baakinige vai uncover things, open things up; Isg
imbaakinige; prt bayaakiniged
baakise vai come uncovered, come open, fly open;
prt bayaakised
baakise vii come uncovered, come open, fly open;
pn bayaakiseg; aug baakisemagad; prt aug
bayaakisemagak
baakishin vai lie uncovered, be open; prt
bayaakishing
baakisin vii lie uncovered, be open; pn
bayaakising
baakoshim vta leave s.o. uncovered; Isg
imbaakoshimaa; prt bayaakoshimaad
baakosidoon vti2 leave s.t. uncovered; Isg
imbaakosidoon; prt bayaakosidood
baamaa pc later; also baanimaa
baamaapii pc later, after a while; also baanimaa
apii, baanimaapii
baanimaa pi later, after a while; also baamaa
baanimaa apii pc later, after a while; also
baanimaapii, baamaapii
baanizhan vti cut s.t. into strips; Isg
imbaanizhaan; prt bayaanizhang
baanizhaawe vai cut meat into strips for preserva-
tion; Isg imbaanizhaawe; pn
bayaanizhaawed
baapagishkaa vai tremble, shake; Isg
imbaapagishkaa; /JIT bayaapagishkaad
baapagishkaa vii tremble, shake; pn
bayaapagishkaag; aug baapagishkaamagad;
prt aug bayaapagishkaamagak
baapaagaakwa* /baapaagaakwa'w-/ vta knock on
s.o. (as something stick- or wood-like); Isg
imbaapaagaakwa'waa; pn
bayaapaagaakwa'waad
baapaagaakwa'an vti knock on s.t. (as something
stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door); Isg
imbaapaagaakwa'aan; prt
bayaapaagaakwa'ang
baapaagaakwa'ige vai knock on things (as some-
thing stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door); Isg
imbaapaagaakwa'ige; pn
bayaapaagaakwa'iged
baapaagimaak na white ash (tree); pi
baapaagimaakwag; loc baapaagimaakong;
dim baapaagimaakoons
baapaagokozh /baapaagokoN-/ vta give s.o. a
haircut; Isg imbaapaagokonaa; pn
bayaapaagokonaad
baapaagokozhiwewigamig ni barber shop, hair-
dressing salon; pi
baapaagokozhiwewigamigoon; loc
baapaagokozhiwewigamtgong
baapaagokozhiwewikwe na hairdresser (female);
pi baapaagokozhiwewikweg
baapaagokozhiwewinini na barber, hairdresser
(male); pi baapaagokozhiwewininiwag
baapaagokozo vai get a haircut; Isg
imbaapaagokoz; pn bayaapaagokozod
baapaas= < baas=
baapaase na woodpecker; pi baapaaseg; dim
baapaasens
baapaashk= < baashk=
baapaashkizige-gtizhigad vii be the Fourth of
July; prt bayaapaashkizige-giizhigak
baapaashkizige-giizis na July
baapaaw= < baw=
baapaawin vta hold and shake s.o. out; Isg
imbaapaawinaa; pn bayaapaawinaad
baapaawinan vti hold and shake s.t. out; Isg
imbaapaawinaan; pn bayaapaawinang
baapaazhid= < baazhid=
baapi vai laugh; Isg imbaap; prt bayaapid
baapi' vta laugh at s.o.; Isg imbaapi'aa; pn
bayaapi'aad
baapinakamigad vii there are festivities; pn
bayaapinakamigak
baapinakamigizi vai be excited; Isg
imbaapinakamigiz; pn bayaapinakamigizid
baapiniziwaagan pc beware! (a warning based on a
premonition)
baapinodaw vta mock s.o. disrespectfully, show
disrespect for s.o.; Isg imbaapinodawaa; pn
bayaapinodawaad

29
baapitoon—baataam
baapitoon vti2 laugh at s.t.; Isg imbaapitoon; prt
bayaapitood
baas /baasw-/ vta dry s.o.; Isg imbaaswaa; prt
bayaaswaad
baasa' /baasa'w-/ vta crack s.o. using something,
shatter s.o. using something; Isg imbaasa'waa;
prt bayaasa'waad
baasa'an vti crack s.t. using something, shatter s.t.
using something; Isg imbaasa'aan; prt
bayaasa'ang
baasa'ige vai crack things using something, shatter
things using something; Isg imbaasa'ige; prt
bayaasa'iged
baasan vti dry s.t.; Isg imbaasaan; prt bayaasang
baasaabikiz /baasaabikizw-/ vta blast s.o.; Isg
imbaasaabikizwaa; prt bayaasaabikizwaad
baasaabikizan vti blast s.t.; Isg
imbaasaabikizaan; prt bayaasaabikizang
baasaabikizigan ni dynamite; pi
baasaabikiziganan; loc baasaabikiziganing;
dim baasaabikizigaans
baasaabikizige vai blast things; Isg
imbaasaabikizige; pn bayaasaabikiziged
baashka' /baashka'w-/ vta burst s.o. using some-
thing; Isg imbaashka'waa; prt
bayaash ka* waad
baashka'an vti burst s.t. using something; Isg
imbaashka'aan; prt bayaashka'ang
baashkakwa'am vai2 make a thunderclap (of the
thunderers); prt bayaashkakwa'ang
baashkaabigwanii vti blossom, bloom; prt
bayaashkaabigwaniig; aug
baashkaabigwaniimagad; prt aug
bayaashkaabigwaniimagak
baashkaapi vai burst out laughing; Isg
imbaashkaap; pn bayaashkaapid
baashkaawe'am vai2 hatch; pn
bayaashkaawe'ang; also baashkaawe'o
baashkaawe'o vai hatch; prt bayaashkaawe'od;
also baashkaawe'am
baashkide vii explode, blow up; prt bayaashkideg;
aug baashkidemagad; prt aug
bayaashkidernagak
baashkijii' /baashkijii'w-/ vta burst s.o. open using
something; Isg imbaashkijii'waa; pn
bayaashkijii'aad
baashkijii'an vti burst s.t. open using something;
Jsg imbaashkijii'aan; prt bayaashkijii'ang
baashkijiisijige vai have a blowout; prt
bayaashkijiisijiged
baashkiminasigan ni jam, preserves; pi
baashkiminasiganan; loc
baashkiminasiganing; dim
baashkiminasigaans
baashkinede vii steam; prt bayaashkinedeg; aug
baashkinedemagad; prt aug
bayaashkinedemagak
baashkinezo vai steam; prt bayaashkinezod
baashkishim vta burst s.o. on impact; Isg
imbaashkishimaa; prt bayaashkishimaad
baashkisidoon vti2 burst s.t. on impact; Isg
imbaashkisidoon; prt bayaashkisidood
baashkiz /baashkizw-/ vta shoot s.o.; Isg
imbaashkizwaa; prt bayaashkizwaad
baashkizan vti shoot s.t.; Isg imbaashkizaan; prt
bayaashkizang
baashkizigan ni gun; pi baashkiziganan; loc
baashkiziganing; dim baashkizigaans
baashkizige vai shoot things, ejaculate; Isg
imbaashkizige; prt bayaashkiziged
baashkizo vai explode, blow up; prt bayaashkizod
baashkizodizo vai shoot oneself; Isg
imbaashkizodiz; prt bayaashkizodizod
baaside vii shatter from heat, crack from heat; prt
bayaasideg; aug baasidemagad; prt aug
bayaasidemagak
baasiga* /baasiga'w-/ vta chop s.o. into small
pieces (as something of wood); Isg
imbaasiga'waa; pn bayaasiga'waad
baasiga'an vti chop s.t. into small pieces (as some-
thing of wood); Isg imbaasiga'aan; prt
bayaasiga'ang
baasigaade vii be dried; prt bayaasigaadeg; aug
baasigaademagad; prt aug
bayaasigaademagak
baasigaazo vai be dried; prt bayaasigaazod
baasikan vti shatter s.t. with foot or body; Isg
imbaasikaan; prt bayaasikang
baasikaw vta shatter s.o. with foot or body; Isg
imbaasikawaa; prt bayaasikawaad
baasikaa vii shatter (e.g., glass or china), crack
(e.g., glass or china); prt bayaasikaag; aug
baasikaamagad; prt aug bayaasikaamagak
baasindibeshin vai fall and crack one's head; Isg
imbaasindibeshin; prt bayaasindibeshing
baasinigo vai be bloated; Isg imbaasinig; prt
bayaasinigod
baasishim vta shatter s.o., crack s.o.; Isg
imbaasishimaa; prt bayaasishimaad
baasishin vai shatter on impact, crack on impact;
prt bayaasishing
baasisidoon vti2 shatter s.t., crack s.t.; Isg
imbaasisidoon; prt bayaasisidood
baasisin vii shatter on impact, crack on impact; prt
bayaasising
baasiz /baasizw-/ vta shatter s.o. by heat, crack
s.o. by heat; Isg imbaasizwaa; pn
bayaasizwaad
baasizan vti shatter s.t. by heat, crack s.t. by heat;
Isg imbaasizaan; prt bayaasizang
baasizo vai shatter from heat, crack from heat; prt
bayaasizod
baaso vai be dry; prt bayaasod
baatayiinad vii be much, be many; prt
bayaatayiinak
baataytinatoon vti2 have much of s.t., have many
of s.t.; Isg imbaatayiinatoon; prt
bayaatayiinatood
baatayiino vai be much, be many; prt
bayaatayiinod; also baatayiini
baatayiino' vta have much of s.o., have many of
s.o.; Isg imbaatayiino'aa; prt
bayaatayiino'aad
baataam vta tell on s.o., testify against s.o.; Isg
imbaataamaa; pn bayaataamaad

baataase—bibagiigad
30
baataase vai get stuck; Isg imbaataase; prt
bayaataased
baataase vii get stuck; pn bayaataaseg; aiig
baataasemagad; prt aug bayaatesemagak
baataashin vai be stuck; Isg imbaataashin; pn
bayaataashing
baataasin vii be stuck; pn bayaataasing
baate vii be dry; prt bayaateg; aug baateinagad;
pn aug bayaatemagak
baate- pv4 dried
baazagobizh /baazagobiN-/ vta scratch s.o.; Isg
imbaazagobinaa; pn bayaazagobinaad
baazhida' /baazhida'w-/ vta step over s.o.; Isg
imbaazhida'waa; prt bayaazhida'waad
baazhida'an vti step over s.t.; Isg imbaazhida'aan;
pn bayaazhida'ang
baazhidaandawe vai climb over; Isg
imbaazhidaandawe; pn bayaazhidaandawed
baazhijigwaashkwani vai jump over; Isg
imbaazhijigwaashkwani; pn
bayaazhijigwaashkwanid
baazhijiwebin vta throw s.o. over; Isg
imbaazhijiwebinaa; pn bayaazhijiwebinaad
baazhijiwebinan vti throw s.t. over; Isg
imbaazhijiwebinaan; pn bayaazhijiwebinang
bebakaan= < bakaan=
bebakaan pc all different
bebangii pc a little bit each
bebangiiwag= < bangiiwag=
bebaamaadizid na-pt traveller, tourist; pi
bebaamaadizijig
bebezhig nm one-by-one
bebezhigooganzhii na horse; pi
bebezhigooganzhiig; dim
bebezhigooganzhiins; also mishtadim*,
mashtadim*
bebinezid bakwezhigan na flour
bebiikominagak ni-pt pill; pi bebiikominagakin
bedose vai walk slowly; Isg imbedose; pn
bayedosed
bedowe vai have a soft voice; Isg imbedowe; prt
bayedowed
bejibatoo vai run slowly; Isg imbejibatoo; prt
bayejibatood
bejibide vii move slowly, drive slowly; prt
bayejibideg; aug bejibidemagad; prt aug
bayejibidemagak
bejibizo vai move slowly, drive slowly; Isg
imbejibiz; pn bayejibizod
bekaa pi wait!, slow down!, hold on!
bekaadizi vai be quiet, be easygoing; Isg
imbekaadiz; prt bayekaadizid
bekish pc at the same time
bekwaawigang na-pt camel; pi bekwaawigangig
bemaadizid na-pt person; pi bemaadizijig
bemisemagak ni-pt airplane; pi bemisemagakin
bengozi vai be dry; pn bayengozid
bengwa' /bengwa'w-/ vta dry s.o. using some-
thing; Isg imbengwa'waa; prt bayengwa'waad
bengwa'an vti dry s.t. using something; Isg
imbengwa'aan; prt bayengwa'ang
bengwan vii be dry; prt bayengwang
bepesh= < besh=
beshaa vii have a line, have a stripe; pn
bayeshaag; aug beshaamagad; prt aug
bayeshaamagak
beshibii' /beshibii'w-/ vta mark s.o. with a stripe;
Isg imbeshibii'waa; pn bayeshibii'waad
beshibii'an vti mark s.t. with a stripe; Isg
imbeshibii'aan; prt bayeshibii'ang
beshibii'ige vai mark things with a stripe; Isg
imbeshibii'ige; prt bayeshibii'iged
beshizh /beshizhw-/ vta make a cut on s.o.; Isg
imbeshizhwaa; pn bayeshizhwaad
beshizhan vti make a cut on s.t.; Isg
imbeshizhaan; prt bayeshizhang
beshizi vai have a line, have a stripe; Isg imbeshiz;
prt bayeshizid
besho pc near, close
beshonaagozi vai appear to be close; pn
bayeshonaagozid
beshonaagwad vii appear to be close; prt
bayeshonaagwak
beshowad vii be near, be close; pn bayeshowak
beshwaji' vta be close friends with s.o.; Isg
imbeshwaji'aa; prt bayeshwaji'aad
beshwendan vti think s.t. to be close; Isg
imbeshwendaan; pn bayeshwendang
beshwendaagozi vai be thought near; pn
bayeshwendaagozid
beshwendaagwad vii be thought near; prt
bayeshwendaagwak
bezhig nm one
bezhigo vai be alone, be the only one; Isg
imbezhig; pn bayezhigod
bezhigo- pv4 one
bezhigoobii'igan na ace (card); pi
bezhigoobii'iganag
bezhigwan vii be one, be the only one, be the
same; pn bayezhigwang
bezhigwanong pc one place, in one place
bezhigwaabik pc one dollar
bezhizhooniyaans na dime; pi
bezhizhooniyaansag
bezikaa vai move slowly; Isg imbezikaa: prt
bayezikaad
bezikaabatoo vai run slowly; Isg
imbezikaabatoo; prt bayezikaabatood
bi- pv2 toward the speaker, this way, here, hither
bibagaa vii be thin; pn bebagaag; aug
bibagaamagad; prt aug bebagaamagak
bibagaabikaad vii be thin (as something mineral);
pn bebagaabikak
bibagaabikizi vai be thin (as something mineral);
prt bebagaabikizid
bibagaakwadin vii be frozen thin; pn
bebagaakwading
bibagaakwaji vai be frozen thin; pn
bebagaakwajid
bibagikodan vti slice s.t. thin; Isg
imbibagikodaan; pn bebagikodang
bibagikozh /bibagikoN-/ vta slice s.o. thin; Isg
imbibagikonaa; prt bebagikonaad
bibagishin vai lie in a thin layer; pn bebagishing
bibagisin vii lie in a thin layer; prt bebagising
bibagizi vai be thin; pn bebagizid
bibagiigad viibe thin (as something sheet-like);prt
bebagiigak

31
bibagiigizi—bimaaboono
bibagiigizi vai be thin (as something sheet-like); pn
bebagiigizid
bibigwan m flute; pi bibigwanan
bibigwan (flute)
bibigwe vai play the flute; hg imbibigwe; pn
bebigwed
bibine-bakwezhigan na flour
bibine-ziinzibaakwad ni granulated sugar
biboon vii be winter; pn beboong
biboonagad vii be a winter, a year passes; prt
beboonagak
biboonishi vai spend the winter somewhere; Isg
imbiboonish; pn beboonishid
biboonodaabaari na sleigh; pi
biboonodaabaanag; loc biboonodaabaaning;
dim biboonodaabaanens
biboonodaabaariens na sled; pi
biboonodaabaanensag
biboonong pc last winter
bichi- pv4 by mistake, accidentally
bichinan vti shoot s.t. accidentally; Isg
imbichinaan; prt bechinang
bichinaw vta shoot s.o. accidentally; Isg
imbichinawaa; prt bechinawaad
bichinaadizo vai shoot oneself accidentally; Isg
imbichinaadiz; prt bechinaadizod
bichinaage vai shoot things accidentally; Isg
imbichinaage; prt bechinaaged
bigishkanad vii be rotten, fall to pieces; pn
begishkanak
bigishkanani vai be rotten, fall to pieces; pn
begishkananid
bigishkibidoon vti2 tear s.t. to pieces; Isg
imbigishkibidoon; pn begishkibidood
bigishkibizh /bigishkibiN-/ vta tear s.o. to pieces;
hg imbigishkibinaa; pn begishkibinaad
bigishkise vai go to pieces; pn begishkiseg
bigishkise vii go Co pieces; pn begishkiseg; aug
bigishkisemagad; prt aug begishkisemagak
bigishkizh /bigishkizhw-/ via cut s.o. to pieces; Isg
imbigishkizhwaa; prt begishkizhwaad
bigishkizhan vti cut s.t. to pieces; Isg
imbigishkizhaan; pn begishkizhang
bigishki-zhooniyaans na loose change; pi bigishki-
zhooniyaans
bigiw ni pitch, tar; dim bigiins
bigiwizigan ni maple taffy
bigiwizige vai make taffy; Isg imbigiwizige; pn
begiwiziged
bigiikaadan vti apply pitch to s.t. (e.g., a canoe),
putty s.t., tar s.t.; Isg imbigiikaadaan; prt
begiikaadang
bigiike vai apply pitch, putty, tar; Isg imbigiike;
pn begiiked
bigii-miikana ni asphalt road; pi bigii-miikanan;
Joe bigii-miikanaang
bigiins na chewing gum; pi bigiinsag
bi-izhaa vai come; Isg imbi-izhaa; pn ba-izhaad
bijiinag pc after a while, recently, just now
bijiinaago pc yesterday
bikonagizhii vai have a potbelly; Isg
imbikonagizhii; pn bekonagizhiid
bikoojaan re ball of twine or yarn; pi bikoojaanan;
loc bikoojaaning; dim bikoojaanens
bikwadinaa vii be a knoll, be a small hill; pn
bekwadinaag; aug bikwadinaamagad; pn aug
bekwadinaamagak
bikwak ni arrow; pi bikwakoon; loc bikwakong;
dim bikwakoons
bikwaakoganaan m ankle joint; pi
bikwaakoganaanan; loc bikwaakoganaaning;
dim bikwaakoganaanens
bikwaakwad ni ball; pi bikwaakwadoon; loc
bikwaakwadong; dim bikwaakwadoons
bikwaakwado-bagamaagan ni ball-headed club;
pi bikwaakwado-bagamaaganan; dim
bikwaakwado-bagamaagaans
bimademo vai cry walking along; Isg
imbimadem; pn bemademod
bima'adoo vai follow a trail along; Isg
imbima'adoo; pn bema'adood
bima'adoon vti2 follow s.t. along as a trail; Isg
imbima'adoon; pn bema'adood
bima'amaazo vai go along singing; Isg
imbima'amaaz; pn bema'amaazod
bima'an vti skim s.t.; hg imbima'aan; prt
bema'ang
bima'azh /bima'aN-/ vta follow s.o.'s trail along;
hg imbima'anaa; pn bema'anaad
bima'ige vai skim things; Isg imbima'ige; pn
bema'iged
bima'oodoo vai pole a boat along; Isg
imbima'oodoo; prt bema'oodood
bima'oodoon vti2 take s.t. along in a boat, pole
s.t. along in a boat; hg imbima'oodoon; pit
bema'oodood
bima'ookii vai pole a boat along; Isg
imbima'ookii; prt bema'ookiid
bima'oozh /bima'ooN-/ vta take s.o. along in a
boat, pole s.o. along in a boat; Isg
imbima'oonaa; pn bema'oonaad
bimakwazhiwe vai paddle along, swim along (as a
fish); Isg imbimakwazhiwe; prt
bemakwazhiwed
bimamon /bimamo-/ vii lead along (as a road or
trail); prt bemamog; aug bimamoomagad; pn
aug bemamoomagak
bimaabiigamon /bimaabiigamo-/ vii lead along
(as something string-like); prt bemaabiigamog
bimaabiigin vta string s.o. along; hg
imbimaabiiginaa; prt bemaabiiginaad
bimaabiiginan vti string s.t. along; Isg
imbimaabiiginaan; pn bemaabiiginang
bimaaboode vii drift along on current; pn
bemaaboodeg; aug bimaaboodemagad; prt
aug bemaaboodemagak
bimaaboono vai drift along on current; pn
bemaaboonod

bimaadagaa—bimodan
32
bimaadagaa vai swim along; Isg imbimaadagaa;
prt bemaadagaad
bimaadagaako vai walk along on the ice; Isg
imbimaadagaak; prt bemaadagaakod
bimaadagaazii vai wade along; Isg
imbimaadagaazii; prt bemaadagaaziid
bimaada'e vai skate along; Isg imbimaada'e; prt
bemaada'ed
bimaadizi vai live, be alive; Isg imbimaadiz; prt
bemaadizid
bimaaji* via save the life of s.o.; Isg imbirnaaji'aa;
prt bemaaji'aad
bimaakoshim vta put s.o. along (as something
stick- or wood-like); Isg imbimaakoshimaa;
prt bemaakoshimaad
bimaakoshin vai lie along (as something stick- or
wood-like); Isg imbimaakoshin; prt
bemaakoshing
bimaakosidoon vti2 put s.t. along (as something
stick- or wood-like); Isg imbimaakosidoon; prt
bemaakosidood
bimaakosin vii lie along (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt bemaakosing
bimaanakwad vii clouds go along; prt
bemaanakwak
bimaandawe vai climb along; Isg
imbimaandawe; prt bemaandawed
bimaashi vai be blown alongj sail along; Isg
imbimaash; prt bemaashid
bimaasin vii be blown along, sail along; prt
bemaasing
bimaawadaaso vai travel along in a group (as a
school of fish); prt bemaawadaasod
bimaazakonenjige vai go along with a light; Isg
imbimaazakonenjige; prt
bemaazakonenjiged
bimaazhagaame vai go along the edge, go along
the shore; Isg imbimaazhagaame; prt
bemaazhagaamed
bimi- pv2 along, going along, going by, going past,
on the way
bimi-ayaa vai go along, travel along; Isg imbimi-
ayaa; prt bemi-ayaad
bimiba'idiwag /bimiba'idi-/ vai they run along
together; Ipl imbimiba'idimin; prt
bemiba'idijig
bimiba'igo vai ride along drawn by horses; Isg
imbimiba'ig; pn bemiba'igod
bimiba'iwe vai run along in flight from someone;
Isg imbimiba'iwe; prt bemiba'iwed
bimibatoo vai run along; Isg imbimibatoo; prt
bemibatood
bimibide vii speed along, drive along, fly along; prt
bemibideg; aug bimibidemagad; prt aug
bemibidemagak
bimibizo vai speed along, drive along, fly along;
Isg imbimibiz; prt bemibizod
bimibizoni' vta drive s.o. along, take s.o. along for
a ride; Isg imbimibizoni'aa; prt
bemibizoni*aad
bimibizonitoon vti2 drive s.t. along; Isg
imbimibizonitoon; prt bemibizonitood
bimibiisaa vii rain goes along; prt bemibiisaag;
aug bimibiisaamagad; prt aug
bemibiisaamagak
bimidasaa na thwart; pi bimidasaag; also
bimidasaagan, -an
bimidaabaadan vii drag s.t. along; Isg
imbimidaabaadaan; prt bemidaabaadang
bimidaabaazh /bimidaabaaN-/ vta drag s.o.
along; Isg imbimidaabaanaa; prt
bemidaabaanaad
bimidaabiiba'igo vai drive along quickly in a
wagon or sleigh; Isg imbimidaabiiba'ig; prt
bemidaabiiba'igod
bimidaabii'iwe vai drive along; Isg
imbimidaabii'iwe; prt bemidaabii'iwed
bimide ni grease, oil; loc bimideng
bimijiwan vii flow along; pn bemijiwang
bimikawaan ni footprint, track; pi bimikawaanan
bimikawe vai leave tracks going along; Isg
imbimikawe; prt bemikawed
biminaazhikaage vai send people along, chase
people along; Isg imbiminaazhikaage; prt
beminaazhikaaged
biminizha' /biminizha'w-/ vta chase s.o. along; Isg
imbiminizha'waa; prt beminizha'waad
biminizha'an vti chase s.t. along; Isg
imbiminizha'aan; prt beminizha'ang
biminizha'ige vai chase things along; Isg
imbiminizha'ige; prt beminizha'iged
biminizhikaw vta send s.o. along, chase s.o. along;
Isg imbiminizhikawaa; prt beminizhikawaad
biminizhimo vai run along in flight; Isg
imbiminizhim; prt beminizhimod
bimipon /bitnipo-/ vii snow goes along; prt
bemipog
bimise vai fly along; Isg imbimise; prt bemised
bimise vii fly along; pn bemiseg; aug
bimisemagad; prt aug bemisemagak
bimishimo vai dance along; Isg imbimishim; prt
bemishimod
bimishkaa vai paddle along, go along by boat; Isg
imbimishkaa; prt bemishkaad
bimitigweyaa vii flow along (as a river); prt
bemitigweyaag; aug bimitigweyaamagad; prt
aug bemitigweyaamagak
bimiwanaan ni pack, backpack; pi bimiwanaanan;
loc bimiwanaaning; dim bimiwanaanens
bimiwane vai carry a pack along; Isg
imbimiwane; prt bemiwaned
bimiwidoon vti2 carry s.t. along, take s.t. along;
Isg imbimiwidoon; pn bemiwidood
bimiwijige vai carry things along, be pregnant; Isg
imbimiwijige; pn bemiwijiged
bimiwizh /bimiwiN-/ vta carry s.o. along, take s.o.
along; Isg imbimiwinaa; prt bemiwinaad
bimiwizhiwe vai take people along, drive people
along (as in a bus); Isg imbimiwizhiwe; prt
bemiwizhiwed
bimiwizhiwewidaabaan na taxi; pi
bimiwizhiwewidaabaanag; loc
bimiwizhiwewidaabaaning; dim
bimiwizhiwewidaabaanens
bimiwizhiwewinini na taxi driver, chauffeur; pi
bimiwizhiwewininiwag
bimo /bimw-/ vta shoot s.o. with an arrow or other
missile; Isg imbimwaa; prt bemwaad
bimodan vti shoot s.t. with an arrow or other
missile; Isg imbimodaan; pn bemodang

33
bimojigan—biskane
bimojigan ni slingshot; pi bimojiganan; dim
bimojigaans
bimojige vai shoot things with an arrow or other
missile; Isg imbimojige; pn bemojiged
bimose vai walk along; Isg imbimose; pn
bemosed
bimoode vai crawl along; Isg imbimoode; pn
bemooded
bimoom vta carry s.o. along on one's back; Isg
imbimoomaa; pn bemoomaad
bimoomaawaso vai carry a baby along on one's
back; Isg imbiimoomaawas; pn
bemoomaawasod
bimoomigo vai ride along on horseback; Isg
imbimoomig; pn bemoomigod
bimoomigoo-apaibiwin ni saddle; pi
bimoomigooapabiwinan; loc bimoomigoo-
apabiwining; dim bimoomigoo-apabiwinens
bimoondan vti carry s.t. along on one's back; Isg
imbimoondaan; pn bemoondang
bimoonjigan m dance bustle, pack frame; pi
bimoonjiganan; loc bimoonjiganing; dim
bimoonjigaans
bimwewebide vii be heard speeding along, be
heard driving along; pn bemwewebideg; aug
bimwewebldemagad; pn aug
bemwewebidemagak
bimwewebizo vai be heard speeding along, be
heard driving along; Isg imbimwewebiz; pn
bemwewebizod
bimweweshin vai be heard walking along, be
heard going along and falling; Isg
imbimweweshin; pn bemweweshing
bina' /bina'w-/ vta take s.o. down; Isg imbina'waa;
pn bena'waad
bina'an vti take s.t. down; Isg imbina'aan; pn
bena'ang
bi-naagozi vai appear, come into view; Isg imbi-
naagoz; pn ba-naagozid
bi-naagwad vii appear, come into view; pn ba-
naagwak
binaakwaan ni comb; pi binaakwaanan; loc
binaakwaaning: dim binaakwaanens
binaakwe* /binaakwe'w-/ vta comb s.o.; Isg
imbinaakwe'waa; pn benaakwe'waad
binaakwe'igan ni rake; pi binaakwe'iganan; loc
binaakwe'iganing; dim binaakwe'igaans
binaakwe'ige vai rake things; Isg imbinaakwe'ige;
pn benaakwe'iged
binaakwe'o vai comb one's hair; Isg
imbinaakwe'; pn benaakwe'od
binaakwii vai fall (as a leaf); Isg imbinaakwii; pn
benaakwiid
binaakwii-giizis na October; also binaakwe-giizis
bine na partridge; pi binewag; dim binens
bineshiinh na bird; pi bineshiinyag; dim bineshiins
bineshiinhwayaan na bird skin; pi
bineshiinhwayaanag; lac
bineshiinhwayaaning; dim
bineshiinhwayaanens
binesi na bird (of large species, e.g., hawk or
eagle), thunderbird; pi binesiwag
bingoshens na gnat; pi bingoshensag
bingwi ni sand, ashes; loc bingwiing; dim bingwiins
bingwiikaa vii be much sand; pn bengwiikaag;
aug bingwiikaamagad; pn aug
bengwiikaamagak
bingwii-miikana ni gravel road; pi bingwii-
miikanan; loc bingwii-miikanaang; dim
bingwii-miikanaans
biniweba' /biniweba'w-/ vta knock s.o. down
using something; Isg imbiniweba'waa; pn
beniweba'waad
biniweba'an vti knock s.t. down using something;
Isg imbiniweba'aan; pn beniweba'ang
binzini vai have something in one's eye; Isg
imbinzin; pn benzinid
bipakoombens ni cucumber; pi bipakoombensan
bishagaakwa'ige vai peel timber using something;
Isg imbishagaakwa'ige; pn
beshagaakwa'iged
bishagaaso vai peel from sunburn; Isg
imbishagaas; pn beshagaasod
bishagibidoon vti2 peel s.t. with hands; Isg
imbishagibidoon; prt beshagibidood
bishagibijige vai peel things with hands; Isg
imbishagibijige; pn beshagibijiged
bishagibizh /bishagibiN-/ vta peel s.o. with hands;
hg imbishagibinaa; pn beshagibinaad
bishagigidigweshin vai skin one's knee; Isg
imbishagigidigweshin; prt
beshagigidigweshing
bishagikodan vti peel s.t. with a knife; hg
imbishagikodaan; pn beshagikodang
bishagikozh /bishagikoN-/ vta peel s.o. with a
knife; Isg imbishagikonaa; pn
beshagikozhwaad
bishagishkaa vai peel off; pn beshagishkaad
bishagishkaa vii peel off; pn beshagishkaag; aug
bishagishkaamagad; pn aug
beshagishkaamagak
bishagiishkate vii be dark indoors; pn
beshagiishkateg; aug bishagiishkatemagad;
pn aug beshagiishkatemagak
bishagiishkaa vii be dark; pn beshagiishkaag; aug
bishagiishkaamagad; pn aug
beshagiishkaamagak
bishagiishkaande vii be dark colored; pn
beshagiishkaandeg; aug
bishagiishkaandemagad; pn aug
beshagiishkaandemagak
bishagiishkaanzo vai be dark colored; pn
beshagiishkaanzod
bisha'igobii vai peel wigob (inner bark of
basswood); hg imbisha'igobii; pn
besha'igobiid
bishkonan vti shoot at s.t. and miss; Isg
imbishkonaan; pn beshkonang
bishkonaw vta shoot at s.o. and miss; hg
imbishkonawaa; pn beshkonawaad
bishkonaage vai shoot and miss; Isg
imbishkonaage; pn beshkonaaged
bishkongwashi vai doze; hg imbishkongwash; pn
beshkongwashid
bisigadanaaboo ni dumpling soup; loc
bisigadanaaboong
biskane vii catch fire, ignite; pn beskaneg; aug
biskanemagad; pn aug beskanemagak

biskanebidoon—biida'oodoon
34
biskanebidoon vri2 switch s.t. on; Isg
imbiskanebidoon; prt beskanebidood
biskanesidoon vti2 light s.t. by striking; Isg
imbiskanesidoon; pn beskanesidood
biskaa vii be bent over, be folded; pn beskaag; aug
biskaamagad; pn aug beskaamagak
biskaabii vai make a round trip in one day; Isg
imbiskaabii; prt beskaabiid
biskaakonebijigan m switch; pi
biskaakonebijiganan; loc
biskaakonebijiganing; dim
biskaakonebijigaans
biskibidoon va2 bend s.t. over with hands, fold s.t.
with hands; Isg imbiskibidoon; prt
beskibidood
biskibizh /biskibiN-/ vta bend s.o. over with hands,
fold s.o. with hands; Isg imbiskibinaa; pn
beskibinaad
biskin vta bend s.o. over, fold s.o.; Isg imbiskinaa;
pn beskinaad
biskinan vti bend s.t. over, fold s.t.; Isg
imbiskinaan; pn beskinang
biskinigaade vii be bent over, be folded; prt
beskinigaadeg; aug biskinigaademagad; prt
aug beskinigaademagak
biskitenaagan ni sap bucket of folded birch bark;
pi biskitenaaganan; loc biskitenaaganing; dim
biskitenaagaans
biskiigin vta fold s.o. (as something sheet-like); Isg
imbiskiiginaa; prt beskiiginaad
biskiiginan vti fold s.t. (as something sheet-like);
Isg imbiskiiginaan; pn beskiiginang
bitaganaam vta accidentally hit s.o.; Isg
imbitaganaamaa; prt betaganaamaad
bitaganaandan vti accidentally hit s.t.; Isg
imbitaganaandaan; prt betaganaandang
bitaakondibeshin vai bump one's head; Isg
imbitaakondibeshin; pn betaakondibeshing
bitaakoshin vai bump something, hit against
something accidentally (as something stick- or
wood-like); Isg imbitaakoshin; pn
betaakoshing
bitaakoshkan wibump into s.t.; Isg
imbitaakoshkaan; pn betaakoshkang
bitaakoshkaw vta bump into s.o.; Isg
imbitaakoshkawaa; prt betaakoshkawaad
bitaakoshkodaadiwag /bitaakoshkodaadi-/ vai
they have a collision; Ipl
imbitaakoshkodaadimin; pn
betaakoshkodaadijig
bitaakosin vii bump something, hit against
something accidentally (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn betaakosing
bitizh /bitizhw-/ vta cut s.o. accidentally; Isg
imbitizhwaa; pn betizhwaad
bitizhan vti cut s.t. accidentally; Isg imbitizhaan;
pn betizhang
bizaan pc quiet, still
bizaan-ayaa vai be quiet; Isg imbizaan-ayaa; pn
bezaan-ayaad; also bizaani-ayaa
bizaanaakwadabi vai sit still; Isg
imbizaanaakwadab; pn bezaanaakwadabid
bizaanigaabawi vai stand quietly; Isg
imbizaanigaabaw; pn bezaanigaabawid
bizaanishin vai lie still; Isg imbizaanishin; prt
bezaanishing
bizhiki na cow, bison, buffalo; pi bizhikiwag; dim
bizhikiins
bizhikiwayaan na cowhide; pi bizhikiwayaanag;
dim bizhikiwayaanens
bizhiki-wiiyaas m beef; also bizhikiwi-wiiyaas
bizhikiins na calf; pi bizhikiinsag
bizhikiinsiwayaan na calfhide; pi
bizhikiinsiwayaanag
bizhishigozi vai be empty; pn bezhishigozid
bizhishigwaa vii be empty; pn bezhishigwaag; aug
bizhishigwaamagad; pn aug
bezhishigwaamagak
bizhiw na lynx; pi bizhiwag; dim bizhiwens
bizhiwayaan na lynx hide; pi bizhiwayaanag; loc
bizhiwayaaning; dim bizhiwayaanens
bizindam vai2 listen; Isg imbizindam; pn
bezindang
bizindamowin ni radio; pi bizindamowinan
bizindamoo-makak ni radio; pi bizindamoo-
makakoon; loc bizindamoo-makakong; dim
bizindamoo-makakoons
bizindan vti listen to s.t.; Isg imbizindaan; pn
bezindang
bizindaw vta listen to s.o.; Isg imbizindawaa; pn
bezindawaad
bizogeshin vai stumble; Isg imbizogeshin; pn
bezogeshing
bizokan vti stumble on s.t.; Isg imbizokaan; pn
bezokang
bizokaw vta stumble on s.o.; Isg imbizokawaa; pn
bezokawaad
bizozideshin vai stub one's toe, trip; Isg
imbizozideshin; pn bezozideshing
biibaagi vai call out, shout; Isg imbiibaag; pn
baabaagid
biibaagim vta call out to s.o., shout at s.o.; Isg
imbiibaagimaa; prt baabaagimaad
biibaagindan vti call out to s.t., shout at s.t.; Isg
imbiibaagindaan; pn baabaagindang
biibii na baby; pi biibiiyag; dim biibiiyens
biichibabagiwayaane vai put on one's shirt; Isg
imbiichibabagiwayaane; pn
baachibabagiwayaaned
biichibabiinzikawaagane vai put on one's coat;
Isg imbiichibabiinzikawaagane; prt
baachibabiinzikawaaganed
biichigiboodiyegwaazone vai put on one's pants;
Isg imbiichigiboodiyegwaazone; pn
baachigiboodiyegwaazoned
biichiminjikaawane vai put on one's mittens; Isg
imbiichiminjikaawane; pn
baachiminjikaawaned
biichiwakwaane vai put on one's hat; Isg
imbiichiwakwaane; pn baachiwakwaaned
biida'adoo vai follow a trail here; Isg
imbiida'adoo; pn baada'adood
biida'adoon vti2 follow s.t. as a trail here; Isg
imbiida'adoon; pn baada'adood
biida'azh /biida'aN-/ vta follow s.o.'s trail here; Isg
imbiida'anaa; pn baada'anaad
biida'oodoon vti2 bring here in a boat; Isg
imbiida'oodoon; pn baada'oodood

35
biida'oozh—biigwawe
biida'oozh /biida'ooN-/ vta bring s.o. here in a
boat; Isg imbiida'oonaa; pn baada'oonaad
biidakwazhiwe vai paddle here, swim here (as a
fish); 1st; imbiidakwazhiwe: prt
baadakwazhiwed
biidaw vta bring (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg imbiidawaa; prt
baadawaad; also biidamaw
biidaaban vii dawn comes, be daybreak; prt
baadaabang
biidaadagaa vai swim here; Isg imbiidaadagaa; prt
baadaadagaad
biidaadagaazii vai wade here; Isg
imbiidaadagaazii; prt baadaadagaaziid
biidaada'e vai skate here; Isg imbiidaada'e; pn
baadaada'ed
biidaajimo vai come telling news; Isg
imbiidaajim; pn baadaajimod
biidaanakwad vii clouds approach; pn
baadaanakwak
biidaandawe vai climb here; Isg imbiidaandawe;
prt baadaandawed
biidaanimizi vai come in fear; Isg imbiidaanimiz;
pn baadaanimizid
biidaapi vai come laughing; Isg imbiidaap; pn
baadaapid
biidaasamabi vai sit facing this way; Isg
imbiidaasamab; pn baadaasamabid
biidaasamishkaa vai paddle here, come in a boat;
Isg imbiidaasarnishkaa; pn
baadaasamishkaad
biidaasamose vai walk here; Isg imbiidaasamose;
pn baadaasamosed
biidaashi vai be blown here, sail here; Isg
imbiidaash; prt baadaashid
biidaashkaa vii waves come in to shore; pn
baadaashkaag; aug biidaashkaamagad; prt
aug baadaashkaamagak
biidaasin vii be blown here, sail here; pn
baadaasing
biidaazakonebizo vai drive here with a light; Isg
imbiidaazakonebiz; prt baadaazakonebizod
biidaazakwanenjige vai come with a light; Isg
imbiidaazakwanenjige; prt
baadaazakwanenjiged
biidin vta hand s.o. over (here); Isg imbiidinaa; pn
baadinaad
biidinamaw vta hand (s.t.) over (here) to s.o.; Isg
imbiidinamawaia; pn baadinamawaad
biidinan vti hand s.t. over (here); Isg imbiidinaan;
prt baadinang
biidoode vai crawl here; Isg imbiidoode; pn
baadooded
biidoomigo vai ride here on horseback; Isg
imbiidoomig; pn baadoornigod
biidoon vti2 bring s.t.; l.sg imbiidoon; prt baadood
biidwewebatoo vai be heard running here; Isg
imbiidwewebatoo; pn baadwewebatood
biidwewebide vii be heard speeding here, be heard
driving here; pn baadwewebideg; aug
biidwewebidemagad; pn aug
baadwewebidemagak
biidwewebizo vai be heard speeding here, be
heard driving here; Isg imbiidwewebiz; pn
baadwewebizod
biidwewekamigibatoo vai be heard running here
on the ground; Isg imbiidwewekamigibatoo;
pn baadwewekamigibatood
biidweweshin vai be heard walking here; Isg
imbiidweweshin; prt baadweweshing
biidweweyaadagaa vai be heard swimming here;
Isg imbiidweweyaadagaa; pn
baadweweyaadagaad
biidwewidam vai2 come making noise (e.g.,
thunder), come speaking; Isg imbiidwewidam;
pn baadwewidang
biig na spade suite card; pi biigwag
biigobidoon vti2 tear s.t., rip s.t.; Isg
imbiigobidoon; pn baagobidood
biigobijigaade vii be torn, be ripped; pn
baagobijigaadeg; aug biigobijigaademagad;
prt aug baagobijigaademagak
biigobijigaazo vai be torn, be ripped; prt
baagobijigaazod
biigobijige vai tear things, rip things; Isg
imbiigobijige; prt baagobijiged
biigobizh /biigobiN-/ vta tear s.o., rip s.o.; Isg
imbiigobinaa; prt baagobinaad
biigodaabaane vai have a broken-down car; hg
imbiigodaabaane; pn baagodaabaaned
biigode vii break by heat; pn baagodeg; aug
biigodemagad; prt aug baagodemagak
biigojiishkaa vai burst open; pn baagojiishkaad
biigojiishkaa vii burst open; pn baagojiishkaag;
aug biigojiishkaamagad; pn aug
baagojiishkaamagak
biigon vta break s.o. by hand, dismantle s.o.; Isg
imbiigonaa; pn baagonaad
biigonan vti break s.t. by hand, dismantle s.t; Isg
imbiigonaan; pn baagonang
biigoshim vta break s.o. by dropping, smash s.o.;
Isg imbiigoshimaa; pn baagoshimaad
biigoshin vai break on impact; Isg imbiigoshin; pn
baagoshing
biigoshkaa vai break, be broken, be broke (out of
money); pn baagoshkaad
biigoshkaa vii break, be broken; pn baagoshkaag;
aug biigoshkaamagad; pn aug
baagoshkaamagak
biigosidoon vti2 break s.t. by dropping, smash s.t.;
Isg imbiigosidoon; pn baagosidood
biigosin vii break on impact; pn baagosing
biigozo vai break by heat; pn baagozod
biigwa' /biigwa'w-/ vta break s.o. using something;
Isg imbiigwa'waa; pn baagwa'waad
biigwa'an vti break s.t. using something; Isg
imbiigwa'aan; prt baagwa'ang
biigwakamigibidoon vti2 break s.t. up (as
ground), plow s.t.; Isg
imbiigwakamigibidoon; prt
baagwakamigibidood
biigwakamigibijigan na plow; pi
biigwakamigibijiganag; loc
biigwakamigibijiganing; dim
biigwakamigibijigaans
biigwakamigibijige vai plow; Isg
imbiigwakamigibijige; prt
baagwakamigibijiged
biigwawe vai be bushy; Isg imbiigwawe; pn
baagwawed

biigwaashi—biindig
36
biigwaashi vai be blown apart; pn baagwaashid
biigwaasin vii be blown apart; pn baagwaasing
bii" vta wait for s.o.; hg imbii'aa; pn baa'aad
bii'o vai wait; hg imbii'; pn baa'od
biijiba'idiwag /biijiba'idi-/ vai they run here
together; Ipl imbiijiba'idimin; pn
baajiba'idijig
biijibatoo vai run here; hg imbiijibatoo; pn
baajibatood
biijibide vii speed here, drive here, fly here; pn
baajibideg; aug biijibidemagad; pn aug
baajibidemagak
biijibizo vai speed here, drive here, fly here; hg
imbiijibiz; prt baajibizod
biijibii'amaw- vta write (s.t.) here to s.o. in inverse
forms: Isg imbiijibii'amaag; prt
baajibii'amaagod
biijibii'ige vai write here, send a letter here; prt
baajibii'iged
biijibiisaa vii rain comes; pn baajibiisaag; aug
biijibiisaamagad; pn aug baajibiisaamagak
biijidaabaadan vti drag s.t. here; Isg
imbiijidaabaadaan; prt baajidaabaadang
biijidaabaazh /biijidaabaaN-/ vta drag s.o. here;
Isg imbiijidaabaanaa; pn baajidaabaanaad
biijidaabii vai drag here; Isg imbiijidaabii; prt
baajidaabiid
biijidaabii'iwe vai drive here; hg
imbiijidaabii'iwe; pn baajidaabii'iwed
biijigaade vii be brought; pn baajigaadeg; aug
biijigaademagad; pn aug baajigaademagak
biijigaazo vai be brought; prt baajigaazod
biijigidaazo vai come in anger; hg imbiijigidaaz;
pn baajigidaazod
biijigozi vai move one's residence here; hg
imbiijigoz; pn baajigozid
biijikawe vai come leaving tracks; hg imbiijikawe;
pn baajikawed
biijimaagozi vai give off a smell; Isg
imbiijimaagoz; pn baajimaagozid
biijimaagwad vii give off a smell; pn
baajimaagwak
biijimaam vta smell s.o.; hg imbiijirnaamaa; pn
baajimaamaad
biijimaandan vti smell s.t.; hg imbiijimaandaan;
pn baajimaandang
biijimaaso vai give off a smell in cooking or burn-
ing; pn baajimaasod
biijimaate vii give off a smell in cooking or burn-
ing; pn baajimaateg; aug biijimaatemagad;
pn aug baajimaatemagak
biijise vai fly here; hg irnbiijise; pn baajised
biijise vii fly here; pn baajiseg; aug biijisemagad;
pn aug baajisemagak
biijwebin vta throw s.o. here; hg imbiijwebinaa;
pn baajwebinaad
biijwebinamaw vta throw (s.t.) here to s.o,; hg
imbiijwebinamawaa; pn baajwebinamawaad
biijwebinan vd throw s.t. here; hg
imbiijwebinaan; pn baajwebinang
biimashkwemaginigan ni bark torch; pi
biimashkwemaginiganan; loc
biimashkwemaginiganing; dim
biimashkwemaginigaans
biimaakwad ni vine; pi biimaakwadoon; loc
biimaakwadong; dim biimaakwadoons
biimidoon vai have a twisted mouth (as from a
stroke); Isg imbiimidoon; prt baamidoong
biiminakwaan ni rope; pi biiminakwaanan; loc
biiminakwaaning; dim biiminakwaanens
biiminakwaanens ni string; pi
biiminakwaanensan: loc biiminakwaanensing
biiminakwe vai make rope, make string; hg
imbiiminakwe; pn baaminakwed
biiminigan ni brace and bit; pi biiminiganan
biimiskodisii na snail; pi biimiskodisiig
biimiskon vta turn s.o., twist s.o.; hg
imbiimiskonaa; pn baamiskonaad
biimiskonan vti turn s.t., twist s.t.; hg
imbiimiskonaan; pn baamiskonang
biimiskonigan in screw; pi biimiskoniganan; dim
biimiskonigaans
biimiskonikeshin vai fall and twist one's arm; hg
imbiimiskonikeshin; pn baamiskonikeshing
biimiskwa'an vti screw s.t.; hg imbiimiskwa'aan;
pn baamiskwa'ang
biimiskwa'igan ni screwdriver, wrench; pi
biimiskwa'iganan; loc biimiskwa'iganing; dim
biimiskwa'igaans
biimiskwa'igaans ni screw; pi
biimiskwa'igaansan; loc biimiskwa'igaansing
biinad vii be clean; pn baanak
biina' /biina'w-/ vta put s.o. in; Isg imbiina'waa;
pn baana'waad
biina'an vtipat s.t. in; /s^imbiina'aan;prt
baana'ang
biina'igaade vii be put in; pn baana'igaadeg; aug
biina'igaademagad; pn aug
baana'igaademagak
biina'igaazo vai be put in; prt baana'igaazod
biinaagamin /biinaagami-/ vii be clean (as a
liquid); pn baanaagamig
biinda'am vai2 be caught in a net; hg
imbiinda'am; pn baanda'ang
biindashkwaadan vti stuff s.t.; hg
imbiindashkwaadaan; prt
baandashkwaadang
biindashkwaazh /biindashkwaaN-/ vta stuff s.o.;
Isg imbiindashkwaanaa; pn
baandashkwaanaad
biindaabikibijigan ni gearshift; pi
biindaabikibijiganan
biindaabikibijige vai shift gears; Isg
imbiindaabikibijige; pn baandaabikibijiged
biindaablkibizh /biindaabikibiN-/ vta shift s.o.
(e.g., a car); /st'imbiindaabikibinaa; /OT
baandaabikibinaad
biindaakoojige vai make an offering of tobacco;
hg imbiindaakoojige; pn baandaakoojiged
biindaakoozh /biindaakooN-/ vta make an offer-
ing of tobacco to s.o.; Isg imbiindaakoonaa;
prt baandaakoonaad
biindaakwaan na snuff; loc biindaakwaaning
biindaakwe vai chew snuff or tobacco; hg
imbiindaakwe; pn baandaakwed
biinde vii be in; pn baandeg; aug biindemagad;
pn aug baandemagak
biindig pc inside

37
biindigadoon—biisiboojigan
biindigadoon vti2 bring s.t. inside, take s.t. inside;
Isg imbiindigadoon; prt baandigadood
biindigaw vta enter into where s.o. is, come into
where s.o. is; hg imbiindigawaa; pn
baandigawaad
biindigazh /biindigaN-/ vta bring s.o. inside, take
s.o. inside; Isg imbiindiganaa: pn
baandiganaad
biindige vai enter, go inside, come inside; hg
imbiindige; prt baandiged
biindigeba'idiwag /biindigeba'idi-/ vai they run
inside together; I pi imbiindigeba'idimin; pn
baandigeba'idijig
biindigeba'iwe vai run inside from people; hg
imbiindigeba'iwe; prt baandigeba'iwed
biindigebatoo vai run inside; 1st;
imbiindigebatoo; prt baandigebatood
biindigebatwaadan vti run inside with s.t.; hg
imbiindigebatwaadaan; pn
baandigebatwaadang
biindigebatwaazh /biindigebatwaaN-/ vta run
inside with s.o.; J's^imbiindigebatwaanaa;prt
baandigebatwaanaad
biindigebide vii speed inside, drive inside, fly in-
side; prt baandigebideg; aug
biindigebidemagad; prt aug
baandigebidemagak
biindigebizo vai speed inside, drive inside, fly in-
side; hg imbiindigebiz; pn baandigebizod
biindigenaazha' /biindigenaazha'w-/ via tell s.o.
to go inside; hg imbiindigenaazha'waa; pn
baandigenaazha'waad
biindigenaazhikaw vta chase s.o. inside; hg
imbiindigenaazhikawaa; prt
baandigenaazhikawaad
biindigenise vai bring firewood inside; hg
imbiindigenise; pn baandigenised
biindigenizhikaw vta chase s.o. inside; hg
imbiindigenizhikawaa; pn
baandigenizhikawaad
biindigeshimo vai dance inside (as in a Grand
Entry); hg imbiiindigeshim; pn
baandigeshimod
biindigewebin vta throw s.o. inside; hg
imbiindigewebinaa; prt baandigewebinaad
biindigewebinan vti throw s.t. inside; hg
imbiindigewebinaan; pn baandigewebinang
biindigewebinige vai throw things inside; hg
imbiindigewebinige; pn baandigewebiniged
biindigeyaashi vai be blown inside; pn
baandigeyaashid
biindigeyaasin vii be blown inside; prt
baandigeyaasing
biindoode vii crawl in; pn baandooded
biingeji vai feel cold; hg imbiingeji; pn baangejid
biingeyendam vai2 have something on one's
mind, worry; hg imbiingeyendam; prt
baangeyendang
biinichigaade vii be cleaned; pn baanichigaadeg;
aug biinichigaademagad; prt aug
baanichigaademagak
biinichigaazo vat be cleaned; pn baanichigaazod
biinichige vai clean things; hg imbiinichige; prt
baanichiged
biinichigewikwe na cleaner (female), janitor (fe-
male); pi biinichigewikweg
biinichigewinini na cleaner, janitor; pi
biinichigewininiwag
biini' via clean s.o.; hg imbiini'aa; pn baani'aad
biinininjii vai have a clean hand; hg imbiinininjii;
pn baanininjiid
biinish pc until, up to
biinitaw vta clean (s.t.) for s.o.; hg imbiinitawaa;
pn baanitawaad
biinitoon vti2 clean s.t.; hg imbiinitoon; pn
baanitood
biinizi vai be clean; hg imbiiniz; prt baanizid
biinizikaa pc spontaneously, for no purpose at all
biinjayi'ii pc inside it
biinjibide vii speed in, drive in, fly in, fall in; pn
baanjibideg; aug biinjibidemagad; pn aug
baanjibidemagak
biinjibizo vai speed in, drive in, fly in, fall in; hg
imbiinjibiz; pn baanjibizod
biinjiboonaagan na fish trap; pi
biinjiboonaaganag; loc biinjiboonaaganing;
dim biinjiboonaagaans
biinjidawaa vii be an outlet; pn baanjidawaag
biinjidoon pc inside the mouth
biinjijaanzh pc inside the nose
biinjijiwan vii flow in; pn baanjijiwang
biinjikomaan ni knife sheath; pi biinjikomaanan;
loc biinjikomaaning: dim biinjikomaanens
biinjina pc inside the body
biinjise vai fly in, fall in; hg imbiinjise; pn
baanjised
biinjise vii fly in, fall in; prt baanjiseg; aug
biinjisemagad; pn aug baanjisemagak
biinjitawag pc inside an ear
biinjwebin vta throw s.o. in; hg imbiinjwebinaa;
pn baanjwebinaad
biinjwebinan vti throw s.t. in; hg
imbiinjwebinaan; pn baanjwebinang
biinjwebinige vai throw things in, vote; hg
imbiinjwebinige; pn baanjwebiniged
biinjwebinigetamaw vta vote for s.o.; hg
imbiinjwebinigetamawaa; pn
baanjwebinigetamawaad
biinjwebinigewi-giizhigad vii be election day; pn
baanjwebinigewi-giizhigak
biinzibii ^az'burp grease; Isg imbiinzibii; pn
baanzibiid
biinzo vai be in; hg imbiinz; pn baanzod
biipiinjigana'onag na dew-claw game plural
biisa" /biisa'w-/ vta chop s.o. fine; hg imbiisa'waa;
pn baasa'waad
biisa'an vti chop s.t. fine; hg imbiisa'aan; prt
baasa'ang
biisaa vii be fine, be in particles; prt baasaag; aug
biisaarnagad; pn aug baasaamagak
biisibidoon vti2 crumble s.t., pull s.t. into
particles; hg imbiisibidoon; pn baasibidood
biisibizh /biisibiN-/ vta crumble s.o., pull s.o. into
particles; hg imbiisibinaa; pn baasibinaad
biisiboodoon vti2 grind s.t. up; hg
imbiisiboodoon; pn baasiboodood
biisiboojigan na cornmeal; loc biisiboojiganing
biisiboojigan ni grinder, mill; pi biisiboojiganan;
loc biisiboojiganing; dim biisiboojigaans

biisiboozh—bookobidoon
38
biisiboozh /biisibooN-/ vta grind s.o. up; Isg
imbiisiboonaa: prt baasiboonaad
biisiga'isaan in kindling wood; pi biisiga'isaanan;
he biisiga'isaaning; dim biisiga'isaanens
biisiga'ise vai make kindling; 7sjf imbiisiga'ise;£rf
baasiga'ised
biisitaagan in bubble; pi biisitaaganan; he
biisitaaganing; dim biisitaagaans
biisizi vai be fine, be in particles; pn baasizid
biitagoode vai put on one's dress; Isg
imbiitagoode; prt baatagoodeg
biitawagoodaan ni slip; pi biitawagoodaanan; loc
biitawagoodaaning; dim biitawagoodaanens
biitazhigane vai put on one's socks; Isg
imbiitazhigane; prt baatazhiganed
biite m foam
biitewan vii be foamy; prt baatewang
biitewaaboo ni beer; loc biitewaaboong
biitoo- pv4 as a layer
biitoo-babagiwayaan ni undershirt; pi biitoo-
babagiwayaanan; loc biitoo-
babagiwayaaning; dim biitoo-
babagiwayaanens
biitoo-giboodiyegwaazon na underpants; pi
biitoo-giboodiyegwaazonag; loc biitoo-
giboodiyegwaazoning; dim biitoo-
giboodiyegwaazonens
biitookizinaan m overshoe; pi biitookizinaanan;
he biitookizinaaning; dim biitookizinaanens;
also biitookizin
biitookizine vai wear overshoes; Isg
imbiitookizine; prt baatookizined
biitookonaye vai wear layers (as underwear); Isg
imbiitookonaye; prt baatookonayed
biitoon vti2 wait for s.t.; Isg imbiitoon; prt
baatood
biitooshin vai lie in a layer; pn baatooshing
biitooshkigan ni men's underwear; pi
biitooshkiganan; loc biitooshkiganing; dim
biitooshkigaans
biitoosijigan na pie; pi biitoosijiganag; loc
biitoosijiganing; dim biitoosijigaans
biitoosijigani-bakwezhigan na pie; pi
biitoosijigani-bakwezhiganag; loc
biitoosijigani-bakwezhiganing; dim
biitoosijigani-bakwezhigaans
biitoosin vii lie in a layer; pn baatoosing
biiwan vii be a blizzard; prt baawang
biiwaabik ni (piece of) metal, iron; pi
biiwaabikoon; loc biiwaabikong; dim
biiwaabikoons
biiwaabiko-adaawewigamig ni hardware store; pi
biiwaabiko-adaawewigamigoon; loc
biiwaabiko-adaawewigamigong; also
biiwaabikwadaawewigamig
biiwaabiko-jiimaan ni aluminum canoe; pi
biiwaabiko-jiimaanan; loc biiwaabiko-
jiimaaning; dim biiwaabiko-jiimaanens
biiwaabikokaan ni mine; pi biiwaabikokaanan; loc
biiwaabikokaaning; dim biiwaabikokaanens
biiwaabikokewinini na miner; pi
biiwaabikokewininiwag
biiwaabikoons ni can, wire; pi biiwaabikoonsan;
loc biiwaabikoonsing
biiwaanag na flint; pi biiwaanagoog; loc
biiwaanagong; dim biiwaanagoons
biiwega'igan ni chip; pi biiwega'iganan; loc
biiwega'iganing; dim biiwega'igaans
biiwide na stranger, visitor; pi biiwideg
biiwise vai scatter, disperse; pn baawised
biiwise vii scatter, disperse; prt baawiseg; aug
biiwisemagad; pn aug baawisemagak
biiwiwebin vta scatter s.o.; 7^imbiiwiwebinaa;
pn baawiwebinaad
biiwiwebinan vti scatter s.t.; Isg
imbiiwiwebinaan; prt baawiwebinang
biizh /biiN-/ vta bring s.o.; Isg imbiinaa; prt
baanaad
biizikan vti wear s.t., have s.t. on (e.g., clothes),
put s.t. on (e.g., clothes); Isg imbiizikaan; prt
baazikang
biizikaw vta wear s.o., have s.o. on (e.g., clothes),
put s.o. on (e.g., clothes); Isg imbiizikawaa;
prt baazikawaad
biizikiigan ra'item of clothing; />/biizikiiganan; loc
biizikiiganing; dim biizikiigaans
biizikonaye vai dress, be dressed, put on one's
clothes; Isg imbiizikonaye; pn baazikonayed
biizikonaye' vta dress s.o.; Isg imbiizikonaye'aa;
pn baazikonaye'aad
booch pc it is necessary, it is certain
boodawaade vii there is a fire made in a fireplace;
pn bwaadawaadeg; aug boodawaademagad;
pn aug bwaadawaademagak
boodawaan in fireplace; pi boodawaanan; he
boodawaaning; dim boodawaanens
boodawe vai build a fire; Isg imboodawe; pn
bwaadawed
boodawewinini na maintenance engineer, school
custodian; pi boodawewininiwag; dim
boodawewininiins
boodaadan vtiblow on s.t.; Isg imboodaadaan;
prt bwaadaadang
boodaajige vai blow on things; Isg imboodaajige;
prt bwaadaajiged
boodaajii' /boodaajii'w-/ vta inflate s.o.; Isg
imboodaajii'waa; pn bwaadaajii'waad
boodaajii'an uzi inflate s.t.; Isg imboodaajii'aan;
prl bwaadaajii'ang
boodaajii'igan ni tire pump, air pump; pi
boodaajii'iganan; loc boodaajii'iganing; dim
boodaajii'igaans
boodaajii'ige vai inflate things; Isg
imboodaajii'ige; pn bwaadaajii'iged
boodaakwe vai+o put (s.t.) in the kettle; Isg
imboodaakwe, imboodaakwen: pn
bwaadaakwed
boodaazh /boodaaN-/ vta blow on s.o.; Isg
imboodaanaa; prt bwaadaanaad
boodewaadamii na Potawatomi; pi
boodewaadamiig; dim boodewaadamiins
boodoonh na tadpole; pi boodoonyag
boogidi vai fart; Isg imboogid; pn bwaagidid
bookadinigan na doughnut; pi bookadiniganag;
he bookadiniganing; dim bookadinigaans;
also bwaakadinigaazod
bookobidoon vti2 pull s.t. in two, break s.t. in two
with hands; Isg imbookobidoon; prt
bwaakobidood

39
bookobizh—bwaanzhiiwi'o
bookobizh /bookobiN-/ vta pull s.o. in two, break
s.o. in two with hands; Isg imbookobinaa; prt
bwaakobinaad
bookoganaam vta break s.o. in two by hitting; Isg
imbookoganaamaa; pn bwaakoganaamaad
bookoganaandan mi break s.t. in two by hitting;
Isg imbookoganaandaan; pn
bwaakoganaandang
bookogaade vai break one's leg, have a broken
leg; Isg imbookogaade; pn bwaakogaaded
bookogaadeshin vai fall and break one's leg; Isg
imbookogaadeshin; pn bwaakogaadeshing
bookogwebizh /bookogwebiN-/ vta wring s.o.'s
neck; hg imbookogwebinaa; prt
bwaakogwebinaad
bookojaane vai have a broken nose; hg
imbookojaane; prt bwaakojaaned
bookonike vai break one's arm, have a broken
arm; Isg imbookonike; prt bwaakoniked
bookonikeshin vai fall and break one's arm; Isg
imbookonikeshin; prt bwaakonikeshing
bookoshkan vti break s.t. in two by foot or body;
hg imbookoshkaian: pn bwaakoshkang
bookoshkaw vta break s.o. in two by foot or body;
hg imbookoshka waa: pn bwaakoshkawaad
bookoshkaa vai break in two, be broken in two;
Isg imbookoshkaa; pn bwaakoshkaad
bookoshkaa vii break in two, be broken in two; prt
bwaakoshkaag; aug bookoshkaamagad; pn
aug bwaakoshkaamagak
bookwaabik ni piece of metal; pi bookwaabikoon;
loc bookwaabikong; dim bookwaabikoons
bookwaawiganeshin vai fall and break one's back;
Isg imbookwaawiganeshin; prt
bwaakwaawiganeshing
boonakadoon vti2 anchor s.t.; Isg
imboonakadoon; prt bwaanakadood
boonakajigan m anchor; pi boonakajiganan; loc
boonakajiganing; dim boonakajigaans
boonam vai2 lay an egg; pn bwaanang
boonaanimad vii wind lets up, wind dies down; prt
bwaanaanimak
boonendam vai2 give up, not think about, ignore;
hg imboonendam; prt bwaanendang
boonendan vti forget s.t., ignore s.t.; Isg
imboonendaan; prt bwaanendang
boonenim vta forget s.o., ignore s.o.; Isg
imboonenimaa; pn bwaanenimaad
boonichigaade wVbe left alone; prt
bwaanichigaadeg; aug boonichigaademagad;
prt aug bwaanichigaademagak
boonichigaazo vai be left alone; pn
bwaanichigaazod
boom* vta leave s.o. alone, quit s.o.; hg
imbooni'aa; pn bwaani'aad
boonim vta stop talking to s.o., avoid talking to
s.o.; Isg imboonimaa; prt bwaanimaad
boonitoon vti2 leave s.t. alone, quit s.t.; Isg
imboonitoon; pn bwaanitood
boonii vai alight, land (from flight); Isg imboonii;
pn bwaaniid
boopoogid= < boogid=
booshke pc it's up to you, it's your decision; also
booshke giniin
bootaagan na mortar for wild rice; pi
bootaaganag; he bootaaganing; dim
bootaagaans
bootaaganaak ni pestle; pi bootaaganaakoon; loc
bootaaganaakong; dim bootaaganaakoons
bootaagaadan vti stamp s.t. in a mortar; Isg
imbootaagaadaan; pn bwaataagaadang
bootaage vai stamp things in a mortar (e.g., wild
rice); Isg imbootaage; pn bwaataaged
boozhoo/'c hello!, greetings!
boozi vai get in a vehicle or boat, board, embark,
get aboard; hg imbooz; pn bwaazid
boozigwaashkwani vai jump in a vehicle or boat,
jump aboard; Isg imboozigwaashkwan; pn
b waaz i gwaas h kwan id
boozi' vta give a ride to s.o.; Isg imboozi'aa; pn
bwaazi'aad
boozikinaagan ni bowl; pi boozikinaaganan; loc
boozikinaaganing; dim boozikinaagaans
boozinaazha' /boozinaazha'w-/ vta tell s.o. to get
in (a vehicle or boat), tell s.o. to go aboard; Isg
imboozinaazha'waa; prt bwaazinaazha'waad
boozinodaw vta catch a ride with s.o.; Isg
imboozinodawaa; pn bwaazinodawaad
boozitaw vta load (s.t.) with cargo for s.o.; Isg
imboozitawaa; prt bwaazitawaad
boozitaaso vai load cargo; Isg imboozitaas; pn
bwaazitaasod
boozitoon vti2 load s.t. as cargo; Isg
imboozitoon; prt bwaazitood
bwaa- pvl not able to, not before
bwaakadinigaazod na-pt doughnut; pi
bwaakadinigaazojig; also bookadinigan
bwaan na Dakota (Sioux); pi bwaanag; dim
bwaanens
bwaanawichige vaibe unable (to do something);
hg imbwaanawichige; pn bwayaanawichiged
bwaanawi* vta be unable to do something to s.o.,
be unable to manage s.o.; hg imbwaanawi'aa;
pn bwayaanawi'aad
bwaanawi'o vai be unable to do something, be
stuck; Isg imbwaanawi'; pn bwayaanawi'od
bwaanawitoon vti2 be unable to do s.t., be unable
to manage s.t.; hg imbwaanawitoon; prt
bwayaanawitood
bwaanikwe na Dakota woman; pi bwaanikweg;
dim bwaanikwens
bwaanimo vai speak Dakota; hg imbwaanim; prt
bwayaanimod
bwaanimotaw vta speak Dakota to s.o.; hg
imbwaanimotawaa; prt bwayaanimotawaad
bwaanzhii-nagamo vai sing war songs; hg
imbwaanzhii-nagam; pn bwayaanzhii-
nagamod
bwaanzhii-niimi vai dance a war dance; hg
imbwaanzhii-niim; pn bwayaanzhii-niimid
bwaanzhii-niimi'idiwag /bwaanzhii-niimi'idi-/ vai
they dance a war dance; Ipl imbwaanzhii-
niimi'idimin; prt bwayaanzhii-niimi'idijig
bwaanzhii-niimi'idiwin ni war dance; pi
bwaanzhii-niimi'idiwinan
bwaanzhiiwi'o vai wear a dance outfit; hg
imbwaanzhiiwi'; pn bwayaanzhiiwi'od

bwaanzhiiwi'on—dakib
40
bwaanzhiiwi'on m dance outfit; pi
bwaanzhiiwi'onan; loc bwaanzhiiwi'oning;
dim bwaanzhiiwi'onens
bwaawane vai hardly be able to carry a pack; Isg
imbwaawane; prt bwayaawaned
D
da- pvl future verb prefix in independent verbs with no
personal prefix
dabasagoode mi hang low; prt debasagoodeg; aug
dabasagoodemagad; prt aug
debasagoodemagak
dabasagoodoon vti2 hang s.t. low; Isg
indabasagoodoon; prt debasagoodood
dabasagoojin vai hang low; prt debasagoojing
dabasagoozh /dabasagooN-/ vta hang s.o. low;
Isg indabasagoonaa; prt debasagoonaad
dabasakamigaa vii be low ground; prt
debasakamigaag; aug dabasakamigaamagad;
prt aug debasakamigaamagak
dabasaa vii be low; prt debasaag; aug
dabasaamagad; prt aug debasaamagak
dabasendan vti hold s.t. in low regard; Isg
indabasendaan; prt debasendang
dabasendaagozi vai be held in low regard; Isg
indabasendaagoz; prt debasendaagozid
dabasendaagwad vii be held in low regard; prt
debasendaagwak
dabasenim vta hold s.o. in low regard; Isg
indabasenimaa; prt debasenimaad
dabazhish pc low
dabazi vai dodge; Isg indabaz; prt debazid; also
dabazii*
dabinoo'igan ni shelter; pi dabinoo'iganan; loc
dabinoo'iganing; dim dabinoo'igaans
dadaabas— < dabas=
dadaakw= < dakw=
dadaakwanagweyaa vii have short sleeves; prt
dedaakwanagweyaag; aug
dadaakwanagweyaamagad; prt aug
dedaakwanagweyaamagak
dadaakwaanikwe vai have short hair; Isg
indadaakwaanikwe; prt dedaakwaanikwed
dadaatabanaamo vai have fast respiration; Isg
indadaatabanaam; prt dedaatabanaamod
dadaatabaanagidoon vai talk quickly; Isg
indadaatabaanagidoon; prt
dedaatabaanagidoong
dadaatabii vai be quick; Isg indadaatabii; prt
dedaatabiid
dadibaajimo vai tell stories, report, narrate; Isg
indadibaajim; prt dedibaajimod
dadibaajimotaw vta tell stories to s.o., narrate to
s.o.; Isg indadibaajimotawaa; prt
ded i baaj i m otawaad
dadibaajimoowinini na storyteller; /)/
dadibaajimoowininiwag
daga pc please!, come on!
dago- pv4 in a place with
dagode vii be cooked with something else; prt
degodeg; aug dagodemagad; prt aug
degodemagak
dagon /dago-/ vii be in a certain place, be situated
in a certain place; prt endagog
dagon vta add s.o. in, mix s.o. in; Isg indagonaa;
prt degonaad
dagonan vti add s.t. in, mix s.t. in; Isg
indagonaan; prt degonang
dagonigaade vii be added in, be mixed in; prt
degonigaadeg; aug dagonigaademagad; prt
aug degonigaademagak
dagonigaazo vai be added in, be mixed in; prt
degonigaazod
dagonige vai mix things in; Isg indagonige; prt
degoniged
dagoshim vta arrive with s.o., get s.o. to
destination; Isg indagoshimaa; prt
degoshimaad
dagoshin vai arrive; Isg indagoshin; prt degoshing
dagoshinoomagad vii arrive; prt
degoshinoomagak
dagoz /dagozw-/ vta cook s.o. with something else;
Isg indagozwaa; pn degozwaad
dagozan vti cook s.t. with something else; Isg
indagozaan; pn degozang
dagozo vai be cooked with something else; Isg
indagoz; pn degozod
dagwagim vta count s.o. in; Isg indagwagimaa;
prt degwagimaad
dagwagindan vti count s.t. in; Isg
indagwagindaan; prt degwagindang
dagwaginde vii be included, be counted in; prt
degwagindeg; aug dagwagindemagad; prt aug
degwagindemagak
dagwaginzo vai be included, be counted in; Isg
indagwaginz; prt degwaginzod
dagwaagin /dagwaagi-/ vii be fall, be autumn; pn
degwaagig
dagwaagishi vai spend the fall somewhere; Isg
indagwaagish; prt degwaagishid
dagwaagong pc last fall, last autumn
dakaji vai get a chill, have a cold; Isg indakaj; pn
dekajid
dakamanji'o vai be chilled, feel cold; Isg
indakamanji'; pn dekamanji'od
dakate vii be cold (as a house or room); prt
dekateg; aug dakatemagad; pn aug
dekatemagak
dakaa vii be cool (of a thing); prt dekaag; aug
dakaamagad; pn aug dekaamagak
dakaagamin /dakaagami-/ vii be cold (as a liquid);
prt dekaagamig
dakaagamisin vii cool off (as a liquid); prt
dekaagamising
dakaanimad vii be a cold wind; prt dekaanimak
dakaashi vai be cooled by the wind; prt dekaashid
dakaasin vii be cooled by the wind; prt dekaasing
dakaayaa vii be cool (weather); prt dekaayaag;
aug dakaayaamagad; prt aug
dekaayaamagak; also daki-ayaa
dakib ni cold water

41
dakibiisaa—danitaagozi
dakibiisaa mi be -cold rain; prt dekibiisaag; aug
dakibiisaamagad; prt aug dekibiisaamagak
dakininjii vai have a cold hand; Isg indakininjii; pn
dekininjiid
dakise vai cool; prt dekised
dakise vii cool; prt dekiseg; aug dakisemagad; prt
aug dekisemagak
dakishim vta set s.o. to cool; Isg indakishimaa; pn
dekishimaad
dakishin vai cool off; pn dekishing
dakisidoon vti2 set s.t. to cool; Isg indakisidoon;
prt dekisidood
dakisijigan ni refrigerator, freezer; pi dakisijiganan;
loc dakisijiganing; dim dakisijigaans
dakisin vii cool off; pn dekising
dakizi vai be cool (of a thing); pn dekizid
dakobide vii be tied, be bound; prt dekobideg; aug
dakobidemagad; prt aug dekobidemagak
dakobidoo vai tie wild rice; Isg indakobidoo; pn
dekobidood
dakobidoon vti2 tie s.t., bind s.t.; Isg
indakobidoon; prt dekobidood
dakobijigan ni tied wild rice
dakobijige vai tie things, bind things; Isg
indakobijige; pn dekobijiged
dakobinaawaso vai have a baby in a cradle board;
Isg indakobinaawaso; pn dekobinaawasod
dakobinaawaswaan na baby in a cradle board; pi
dakobinaawaswaanag; dim
dakobinaawaswaanens
dakobizh /dakobiN-/1 vta tie s.o., bind s.o.; Isg
indakobinaa; pn dekobinaad
dakobizo vai be tied, be bound, be in a cradle
board; Isg indakobiz; pn dekobizod
dakokaadan vti step on s.t.; Isg indakokaadaan;
pn dekokaadang
dakokaazh /dakokaa.N-/ vta step on s.o.; Isg
indakokaanaa; pn dekokaanaad
dakokii vai step; Isg indakokii; pn dekokiid
dakon vta hold s.o., take hold of s.o., arrest s.o.;
Isg indakonaa; prt dekonaad
dakonamaw vta hold (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
indakonamawaa; pn dekonamawaad
dakonan ra hold s.t., take hold of s.t.; Isg
indakonaan; pn dekonang
dakoniwe vai arrest people; Isg indakoniwe; prt
dekoniwed
dakoniwewidaabaan na police car; pi
dakoniwewidaabaanag; loc
dakoniwewidaabaaning; dim
dakoniwewidaabaanens
dakoniwewigamig ni police station; pi
dakoniwewigamigoon; loc
dakoniwewigamigong
dakoniwewinini na sheriff, policeman; pi
dakoniwewininiwag
dakoonagad viibe short (as a boat);prt
dekoonagak
dakoozi vai be short; Isg indakooz; prt dekoozid
dakwam vtabite s.o.; Isgindakwamaa;prt
dekwamaad
dakwandan vti bite St.; Isg indakwandaan; pn
dekwandang
dakwange vai bite people; Isg indakwange; pn
dekwanged
dakwanjigan ni pliers; pi dakwanjiganan; loc
dakwanjiganing; dim dakwanjigaans
dakwanjige vai bite things; Isg indakwanjige; pn
dekwanjiged
dakwaa vii be short; pn dekwaag; aug
dakwaamagad; pn aug dekwaamagak
dakwaabikad vii be short (as something mineral);
pn dekwaabikak
dakwaabikizi vai be short (as something mineral);
prt dekwaabikizid
dakwaabiigad vii be short (as something string-
like); pn dekwaabiigak
dakwaabiigizh /dakwaabiigizhw-/ vta cut s.o.
short (as something string-like); Isg
indakwaabiigizhwaa; pn dekwaabiigizhwaad
dakwaabiigizhan vti cut s.t. short (as something
string-like); Isg indakwaabiigizhaan; pn
dekwaabiigizhang
dakwaabiigizi vai be short (as something string-
like); pn dekwaabiigizid
dakwaakozi vai be short (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn dekwaakozid
dakwaakwad vii be short (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt dekwaakwak
dakwegad vii be short (as something sheet-like);
prt dekwegak
dakwegizi vai be short (as something sheet-like);
prt dekwegizid
danakamigad vii take place in a certain place,
happen in a certain place; prt endanakamigak
danakamigizi cai'have an event in a certain place,
play in a certain place; Isg indanakamigiz; prt
endanakamigizid
danakii vai live in a certain place; Isg indanakii; pn
endanakiid
dananjige vai eat in a certain place; Isg
indananjige; prt endananjiged
dananokii vai work in a certain place; Isg
indananokii; pn endanokiid
danaadodan vti tell of s.t. in a certain place; Isg
indanaadodaan; prt endanaadodang
danaajim vta tell of s.o. in a certain place; Isg
indanaajimaa; pn endanaajimaad
danendan vti think s.t. to be in a certain place, ex-
pect s.t. to be in a certain place; Isg
indanendaan; prt endanendang
danenim vta think s.o. to be in a certain place, ex-
pect s.o. to be in a certain place; Isg
indanenimaa; pn endanenimaad
danens na club suite card; pi danensag
dangishkan vti kick s.t.; Isg indangishkaan; prt
dengishkang
dangishkaw vta kick s.o.; Isg indangishkawaa; pn
dengishkawaad
dangishkaage vai kick people; Isg
indangishkaage; pn dengishkaaged
dangishkige vai kick things; Isg indangishkige; prt
dengishkiged
dani vai be rich; Isg indan; prt denid
danitan vti hear s.t. in a certain place; Isg
indanitaan; pn endanitang
danitaw vta hear s.o. in a certain place; Isg
indanitawaa; pn endanitawaad
danitaagozi vai be heard in a certain place; Isg
indanitaagoz; pn endanitaagozid

danitaagwad—dazhiike
42
danitaagwad vii be heard in a certain place; prt
endanitaagwak
daniwin ni wealth, riches, property, belongings; pi
daniwinan; loc daniwining; dim daniwinens
danwewe vii there is noise in a certain place; pn
endanweweg; aug danwewemagad; prt aug
endanwewemagak
danwewidam vai2 be heard speaking in a certain
place; Isg indanwewidam; pn
endanwewidang
dapaabam via peek through an opening at s.o.,
look through a window at s.o.; hg
indapaabamaa; prt depaabamaad
dapaabandan vti peek through an opening at s.t.,
look through a window at s.t.; hg
indapaabandaan; pn depaabandang
dapaabi vai peek through an opening, look
through a window; Isg indapaab; prt depaabid
dapine vai suffer in a certain place, die in a certain
place; Isg indapine; prt endapined
dash pc and; also idash, -sh
dashiwag /dashi-/ vai they are a certain number,
they are so many; Ipl indashimin; prt
endashijig
dasing pc a certain number of times, so many times
dasinoon /dasin-/ vii they are a certain number,
they are so many; prt endasingin
daso- pv3 a certain number, so many, every
daso-anama'e-giizhik pc a certain number of
weeks, so many weeks
daso-anama'e-giizhikwagad vii be a certain
number of weeks, be so many weeks; prt
endaso-anama'e-giizhikwagad; also
daswanama'e-giizhikwagad
daso-biboon pc a certain number of years, so many
years
daso-biboonagad vii be a certain number of years,
be so many years; prt endaso-biboonagak
daso-biboonagizi vaibe a certain number of years
old, be so many years old; Isg indaso-
biboonagiz; prt endaso-biboonagizid
daso-diba'igan pc a certain number of hours, so
many hours, a certain number of miles, so
many miles
daso-diba'iganed vii be a certain hour, be a certain
time in hours; prt endaso-diba'iganek
daso-diba'igaans /)i a certain number of minutes, a
certain number of acres, so many minutes, so
many acres
daso-diba'iminaan pc a certain number of bushels,
so many bushels
daso-dibaabiishkoojigan pc a certain number of
pounds, so many pounds
daso-dibikpc a certain number of nights, so many
nights
daso-gikinoonowin pc a certain number of years,
so many years
daso-giizhigad viibe a certain date;prtendaso-
giizhigak
daso-giizhik />< a certain number of days, so many
days
daso-giizis pc a certain number of months, so
many months
dasogon pc a certain number of days, so many
days
dasogonagad vii be a certain number of days, be
so many days; prt endasogonagak
dasogonagizi vai be a certain day of the month, be
a certain number of days old; prt
endasogonagizid
dasogonendi vai be gone a certain number of
days, be absent a certain number of days; Isg
indasogonend; pn endasogonendid
dasonaagaans pc a certain number of cupfuls, so
many cupfuls
dasoninj pc a certain number of inches, so many
inches
dasosagoons nm a certain number of thousands,
so many thousand
dasozid pc a certain number of feet, so many feet
dasoonaagan ni trap; pi dasoonaaganan; loc
dasoonaaganing; dim dasoonaagaans
dasooshkin pc certain number of bags, so many
bags
dasoozh /dasooN-/ vta trap s.o.; Isg indasoonaa;
prt desoonaad
dasoozo vai be trapped, be pinned down; Isg
indasooz; prt desoozod
daswaabik pc a certain number of dollars, so many
dollars
daswewaan pc a certain number of sets, so many
sets, a certain number of pairs, so many pairs
daswi nm a certain number, so many
datak= < dak=
datakw= < dakw=
datang= < dang=
datap= < dap=
dawaa vii be space, be room; prt dewaamagak;
aug dawaamagad; prt aug dewaamagak
dawibidoon vti2 pull s.t. apart to form a gap; Isg
indawibidoon; pn dewibidood
dawibijige vai pull things apart to form a gap; Isg
indawibijige; pn dewibijiged
dawibizh /dawibiN-/ vta pull s.o. apart to form a
gap; /s£indawibinaa;p«dewibinaad
dazhi- pv3 in a certain place, of a certain place,
there
dazhim vta talk about s.o., gossip about s.o.; Isg
indazhimaa; pn endazhimaad
dazhindan vti talk about s.t., gossip about s.t.; hg
indazhindaan; prt endazhindang
dazhinge vai talk about people, gossip; hg
indazhinge; pn endazhinged
dazhishimo vai dance in a certain place; hg
indazhishim; prt endazhishimod
dazhishin vai lie in a certain place, be buried in a
certain place; hg indazhishin; pn
endazhishing
dazhisin vii lie in a certain place; prt endazhising
dazhitaa vai spend time in a certain place, play in
a certain place; hg indazhitaa; pn
endazhitaad
dazhiikan vti work on s.t., be involved with s.t.; hg
indazhiikaan; prt endazhiikang
dazhiikaw vta work on s.o., be involved with s.o.;
Isg indazhiikawaa; pn endazhiikawaad
dazhiike vai stay in a certain place, spend time in a
certain place; hg indazhiike; prt endazhiiked

43
dazhiikigaade—debishkan
dazhiikigaade vii be worked on; pn
endazhiikigaadeg; aug dazhiikigaademagad;
prt aug endazhiikigaademagak
daa vai live in a certain place; Isg indaa; prt
endaad
daa- pvl would modal, could modal, should modal,
can modal, might modal
daadwaa= < dwaa=
daangam vta taste a sample of s.o.; Isg
indaangamaa; prt dayaangamaad
daangandan vti taste a sample of s.t.; Isg
indaangandaan; pn dayaangandang
daangigwanenan vti sign s.t.; Isg
indaangigwanenaan; prt dayaangigwanenang
daangigwanenige vai sign things; Isg
indaangigwanenige; prt dayaangigwaneniged
daangin vta touch s.o. with hand; Isg
indaanginaa; prt dayaanginaad
daanginan vti touch s.t. with hand; Isg
indaanginaan; prt dayaanginang
daangishim vta put s.o. touching; Isg
indaangishimaa; prt dayaangishimaad
daangishin vai lie touching; Isg indaangishin; pn
dayaangishing
daangisidoon vti2 put s.t. touching; Isg
indaangisidoon; prt dayaangisidood
daangisin vii lie touching; prt dayaangising
daashkaa vii be split, be torn apart; prt
dayaashkaag; aug daashkaamagad; prt aug
dayaashkaamagak
daashkibidoon vti2 split s.t. lengthwise with
hands, tear s.t. apart; Isg indaashkibidoon; prt
dayaashkibidood
daashkibizh /daashkibiN-/ vta split s.o. lengthwise
with hands, tear s,.o. apart; Isg indaashkibinaa;
prt dayaashkibinaad
daashkiboodoon vti2 saw s.t. apart lengthwise; Isg
indaashkiboodoon; pn dayaashkiboodood
daashkiboojigan na saw mill, ripsaw; pi
daashkiboojiganag; he daashkiboojiganing;
dim daashkiboojigaans
daashkiboojige vai saw things apart lengthwise;
Isg indaashkiboojige; pn dayaashkiboojiged
daashkiboozh /daashkibooN-/ vta saw s.o. apart
lengthwise; Isg indaashkiboonaa; prt
dayaashkiboonaad
daashkiga' /daashkiga'w-/ vta split s.o. by chop-
ping (as something of wood); Isg
indaashkiga'waa; prt dayaashkiga'waad
daashkiga'an vti splil s.t. by chopping (as some-
thing of wood); Isg indaashkiga'aan; prt
dayaashkiga'ang
daashkiga'ige vai split wood; Isg indaashkiga'ige;
prt dayaashkiga'iged
daashkiga'ise vai split firewood; Isg
indaashkiga'ise; prt dayaashkiga'ised
daashkigishkaa vai split (as something of wood);
prt dayaashkigishkaad
daashkigishkaa vii split (as something of wood);
pn dayaashkigishkaag; aug
daashkigishkaamagad; prt aug
dayaashkigishkaamagak
daashkikaa vii split apart, crack apart; pn
dayaashkikaag; aug daashkikaamagad; pn
aug dayaashkikaamagak
daashkikwadin vii there is a crack in the ice; pn
dayaashkikwading
daashkizh /daashkizhw-/ vta split s.o. by cutting;
Isg indaashkizhwaa; pn dayaashkizhwaad
daashkizhan vti split s.t. by cutting; Isg
indaashkizhaan; prt dayaashkizhang
daataagwa*igan ni rolled oats, oatmeal; pi
daataagwa'iganan; loc daataagwa'iganing;
dim daataagwa'igaans
daataang= < daang=
daataaw= < daaw=
daawani vai open one's mouth; Isg indaawan; pn
dayaawanid
de- pv4 sufficient, suitable, enough
deba'ookii vai have enough to give away; Isg
indeba'ookii; prt dayeba'ookiid
deba'oozh /deba'ooN-/ vta have enough to give to
or feed s.o.; Isg indeba'oonaa; pn
dayeba'oonaad
debakii'ige vai determine the depth; Isg
indebakii'ige; pn dayebakii'iged
debashkine vai fit, adequately hold; pn
dayebashkined
debashkine vii fit, adequately hold; pn
dayebashkineg; aug debashkinemagad; pn
aug dayebashkinemagak
debaabam vta have s.o. in sight, see s.o. at a dis-
tance; Isg indebaabamaa; pn
dayebaabamaad
debaabaminaagozi vai be in sight, be visible at a
distance; Isg indebaabaminaagoz; pn
dayebaabaminaagozid
debaabaminaagwad vii be in sight, be visible at a
distance; pn dayebaabaminaagwak
debaabandan vti have s.t. in sight, see s.t. at a dis-
tance; Isg indebaabandaan; prt
dayebaabandang
debibidaw vta grab (s.t.) for s.o., catch (s.t.) for
s.o., get hold of (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
indebibidawaa; pn dayebibidawaad
debibidoon mi2 grab s.t., catch s.t., get hold of
s.t.; Isg indebibidoon; pn dayebibidood
debibizh /debibiN-/ vta grab s.o., catch s.o., get
hold of s.o.; Isg indebibinaa; prt dayebibinaad
debibii vii fit (as something liquid), adequately
hold (something liquid); prt dayebibiig; aug
debibiimagad; pn aug dayebibiimagak
debi' vta satisfy s.o., benefit s.o., give s.o. some-
thing appropriate; Isg indebi'aa; prt
dayebi'aad
debinaakpc badly, carelessly, any old way
debisachige vai have enough of things; Isg
indebisachige; pn dayebisachiged
debisa' vta have enough of s.o.; Isg indebisa'aa;
pn dayebisa'aad
debisatoon vti2 have enough of s.t.; Isg
indebisatoon; pn dayebisatood
debise vai be enough, be sufficient; prt dayebised
debise vii be enough, be sufficient; pn dayebiseg;
aug debisemagad; prt aug dayebisemagak
debisewendam vai2 feel satisfied, think there is
enough; Isg indebisewendam; pn
dayebisewendang
debishkan vti fit s.t. with foot or body; Isg
indebishkaan; prt dayebishkang

debishkaw—diba'igiiziswaanens
44
debishkaw vta fit s.o. with foot or body; Isg
indebishkawaa; pn dayebishkawaad
debisinii vai eat enough, be full (after eating); Isg
indebisinii; pn dayebisiniid
debizi vai be satisfied, be lucky, have enough; Isg
indebiz; prt dayebizid
debwe vai tell the truth; Isg indebwe; pn
dayebwed
debwetam vai2 believe, agree; Isg indebwe tarn;
prt dayebwetang
debwetan vti believe s.t.; Isg indebwetaan; pn
dayebwetang
debwetaw vta believe s.o., agree with s.o., obey
s.o.; Isg indebwetawaa; pn dayebwetawaad
debwetaagozi vai be believable, be believed; Isg
indebwetaagoz; prt dayebwetaagozid
debwetaagwad vii be believable, be believed; pn
dayebwetaagwak
debwewidam vai2 be heard speaking at a distance;
Isg indebwewidam; pn dayebwewidang
debweyendam vai2 believe; Isg indebweyendam;
prt dayebweyendang
debweyendan vti believe in s.t.; Isg
indebweyendaan; pn dayebweyendang
debweyenim vta believe in s.o.; Isg
indebweyenimaa; prt dayebweyenimaad
dekaag ni-pt ice cream
de-miijin vti3 eat enough of s.t.; Isg inde-miijin;
prt daye-miijid
desabi vai sit astride; Isg indesab; prt dayesabid
desa'an ^tt'prop s.t. up to be a level surface; Isg
indesa'aan; prt dayesa'ang
desa'on ni platform, bench, bed (in wigwam); pi
desa'onan; loc desa'oning; dim desa'onens
desaa vii be a level surface; pn dayesaag; aug
desaamagad; prt aug dayesaamagak
desaabaan ni shelf; pi desaabaanan; he
desaabaaning; dim desaabaanens
desinaagan ni dinner plate; pi desinaaganan; loc
desinaaganing; dim desinaagaans
desinaagaans ni saucer; pi desinaagaansan; loc
desinaagaansing
deteba'agonjichigan ni bobber, float; pi-
deteba'agonjichiganan; loc
deteba'agonjichiganing; dim
deteba'agonjichigaans
detibised na-pt wheel; pi detibisejig
detiwe^c man's exclamation at making a small
mistake
dewaabide vai have a toothache; Isg
indewaabide; prt dayewaabided
dewaawigan vai have a backache; Isg
indewaawigan; pn dayewaawigang
dewe'igan na drum; pi dewe'iganag; loc
dewe'iganing; dim dewe'igaans
dewe*iganaak na drumstick; pi dewe'iganaakoon;
loc dewe'iganaakong; dim dewe'iganaakoons;
also dewe'iganaatig
dewigaade vai have an ache in one's leg; Isg
indewigaade; pn dayewigaaded
dewikwe vai have a headache; Isg indewikwe; prt
dayewikwed
dewikwe-mashkikiins ni aspirin; pi dewikwe-
mashkikiinsan; loc dewikwe-mashkikiinsing
dewikwese vai get a sudden headache; Isg
indewikwese; prt dayewikwesed
dewinike vai have an ache in one's arm; Isg
indewinike; prt dayewiniked
dewininjii vai have an ache in one's hand; Isg
indewininjii; prt dayewininjiid
dewipikwan Dai have a backache; Isg
indewipikwan; pn dayewipikwang
dewizi vai ache; Isg indewiz; prt dayewizid
dewizide vai have an ache in one's foot; Isg
indewizide; pn dayewizided
di- vai be in a certain condition, have a certain
thing the matter with one used primarily in the
conjunct, pn endid
diba' /diba'w-/ vta pay for s.o., bail s.o. out; Isg
indiba'waa; pn deba'waad
diba'akii vai survey land; Isg indiba'akii; pn
deba'akiid
diba'akiiwinini na surveyor; pi diba'akiiwininiwag
diba'amaw vta pay s.o. for (s.t.), pay (s.t.) to s.o.;
Isg indiba'amawaa; pn deba'amawaad
diba'amaadiwag /diba'amaadi-/ vai they pay each
other for (s.t.); Ipl indiba'amaadimin; pn
deba'amaadijig
diba'amaage vai pay people for (s.t.); Isg
indiba'amaage; prt deba'amaaged
diba'an vti pay for s.t.; Isg indiba'aan; pn
deba'ang
diba'aatigwaan ni yardstick, measuring stick for
timber; pi diba'aatigwaanan
diba'aatigwe vai scale timber; Isg indiba'aatigwe;
pn deba'aatigwed
diba'ige vai pay things, measure things; Isg
indiba'ige; prt deba'iged
diba'igese vii pay off, pay for itself; pn
deba'igeseg; aug diba'igesemagad; prt aug
deba'igesemagak
diba'igiiziswaan na clock; pi diba'igiiziswaanag;
loc diba'igiiziswaaning; dim
diba'igiiziswaanens
diba'igiiziswaanens na watch; pi
diba'igiiziswaanensag; loc
diba'igiiziswaanensing
dewe'igan (drum), dewe'iganaak (drumstick)

45
dibaabam—diitiba'an
dibaabam vta inspect s.o., look s.o. over, check up
on s.o.; hg indibaabamaa; prt debaabamaad
dibaabandan vti inspect s.t., look s.t. over; Isg
indibaabandaan; prt debaabandang
dibaabiigin vta measure s.o. (as with something
string-like); hg indibaabiiginaa: prt
debaabiiginaad
dibaabiiginan vti measure s.t. (as with something
string-like); hg indibaabiiginaan; prt
debaabiiginang;
dibaabiishkoodoom vti2 weigh s.t.; hg
indibaabiishkoodoon; pn debaabiishkoodood
dibaabiishkoojigan ni scale; pi
dibaabiishkoojiganan; he
dibaabiishkoojiganing; dim
dibaabiishkoojigaans
dibaabiishkoojige vai weigh things; Isg
indibaabiishkoojige; prt debaabiishkoojiged
dibaabiishkoozh /dibaabiishkooN-/ vta weigh
s.o.; hg indibaabiishkoonaa; prt
debaabiishkoonaad
dibaadodan z;;ztell of s.t.; hg indibaadodaan; prt
debaadodang
dibaajim vta tell of s.o.; hg indibaajimaa; prt
debaajimaad
dibaajimo vai tell, narrate; hg indibaajim; prt
debaajimod
dibaajimotaw vta tell (s.t.) to s.o., narrate (s.t.) to
s.o.; hg indibaajimotawaa; prt
debaajimotawaad
dibaajimowin ni story, narrative; pi
dibaajimowinan; dim dibaajimowinens
dibaakon vta judge s.o.; hg indibaakonaa; prt
debaakonaad
dibaakonan vti judge s.t.; hg indibaakonaan; prt
debaakonang
dibaakonigaade vai be a court matter; hg
indibaakonigaa.de; prt debaakonigaaded
dibaakonigaazo vai be judged, be sentenced; prt
debaakonigaazod
dibaakonige vai judge things, be in politics; hg
indibaakonige; prt debaakoniged
dibaakonigewigamig ni courthouse; pi
dibaakonigewigamigoon; loc
dibaakonigewigamigong
dibaakonigewinini na judge, lawyer; pi
dibaakonigewininiwag
dibendan vti control s.t., be the master of s.t.,
own s.t., earn s.t.; hg indibendaan; prt
debendang
dibendaagozi vai be controlled, be owned, belong,
be a member; hg indibendaagoz; prt
debendaagozicl
dibendaagwad vii be controlled, be owned,
belong; prt debendaagwak
dibendaaso vai own for oneself; hg indibendaas;
prt debendaasod
dibenim vta control s.o., own s.o., be the master of
s.o.; hg indiberiimaa; prt debenimaad
dibenindizo vai be independent, be one's own
master; hg indibenindiz; prt debenindizod
dibenjigaade vii be owned; prt debenjigaadeg;
aug dibenjigaademagad; prt aug
debenjigaademagak
dibenjigaazo vai be owned, be an initiated
member; prt debenjigaazod
dibi pc I don't know where, I wonder where
dubitative
dibi go pc wherever, anywhere dubitative
dibi' vta keep up even with s.o.; hg indibi'aa; prt
debi'aad
dibikad vii be night; pn debikak
dibikate vii be dark (as in a room or house); prt
debikateg; aug dibikatemagad; prt aug
debikatemagak
dibikaabaminaagwad vii be twilight; prt
debikaabaminaagwak
dibik-giizis na moon; pi dibik-giizisoog; also
dibiki-giizis
dibiki-ayaa vai be dark; pn debiki-ayaad
dibikong />i last night
dibinawe pc by oneself, inherently
dibishkaa vai have a birthday; hg indibishkaa; pn
debishkaad
dibishkoo pc just like, even, equal, direct
dibishkookamigpc right across, opposite
didibibide vii roll; prt dedibibideg; aug
didibibidemagad; pn aug dedibibidemagak
didibibizo vai'roll; ;.(? indidibibii: prrdedibibizod
didibin via roll s.o.; hg indidibinaa; prt
dedibinaad
didibinan vti roll s.t.; hg indidibinaan; prt
dedibinang
didibininjiibizon na ring; pi didibininjiibizonag; loc
didibininjiibizoning; dim didibininjiibizonens
didibise-apabiwin ni rocking chair; pi didibise-
apabiwinan; loc didibise-apabiwining; dim
didibise-apabiwinens
digow na wave; pi digowag; also digo
dikinaagan ni cradle board; pi dikinaaganan; loc
dikinaaganing; dim dikinaagaans
dikineyaab ni cradle board wrapper; pi
dikineyaabiin; loc dikineyaabiing; dim
dikineyaabiins
dimii vii be deep (of a body of water); pn demiig;
aug dimiimagad; pn aug demiimagak
dino pr sort inanimate, kind inanimate; also dinowa
dino pr sort animate, kind animate; also dinowa
ditibibide vii roll along; pn detibibideg; aug
ditibibidemagad; pn aug detibibidemagak
ditibidaabaan na wagon, truck; pi
ditibidaabaanag; he ditibidaabaaning; dim
ditibidaabaanens
ditibise vai roll, go around (e.g., a wheel); pn
detibised
ditibise vii roll, go around; pn detibiseg; aug
ditibisemagad; pn aug detibisemagak
ditibiwebishkigan na bicycle; pi
ditibiwebishkiganag; loc
ditibiwebishkiganing; dim
ditibiwebishkiganens
ditibiwebishkige vai pedal, roll things along by
kicking; hg inditibiwebishkige; pn
detibiwebishkiged
diindiisi na blue jay; pi diindiisiwag; dim
diindiisiins
diitiba'an vti knock s.t. down effusing something;
hg indiitiba'aan; prt daatiba'ang

diitiba'—gabaa'
46
diitiba' /diitiba'w-/ via knock s.o. down off using
something; hg indiitiba'waa; pn
daatiba'waad
diitibibidoon vti2 knock s.t. down off something
with hands; Isg indiitibibidoon; pn
daatibibidood
diitibibizh /diitibibiN-/ vta knock s.o. down off
something with hands; hg indiitibibinaa; pn
daatibibinaad
diitibishkan vti bump s.t. down off, knock s.t.
down off something with foot or body; hg
indiitibishkaan; pn daatibishkang
diitibishkaw vta bump s.o. down off, knock s.o.
down off something with foot or body; Isg
indiitibishkawaa; pn daatibishkawaad
doodam vai2 do something; Isg indoodam; pn
endoodang
doodan vti do something to s.t.; Isg indoodaan;
pn endoodang
doodaw vta do something to s.o.; Isg
indoodawaa; pn endoodawaad
doodaadiwag /doodaadi-/ vai they do something
to each other; Ipl indoodaadimin; pn
endoodaadijig
doodaadizo vai do something to oneself; Isg
indoodaadiz; pn endoodaadizod
doodaazo vai do something to oneself; Isg
indoodaaz; pn endoodaazod
doodooshaaboo ni milk; loc doodooshaaboong
doodooshaaboo-bimide ni butter; loc
doodooshaaboo-bimideng
doonoo na bull; pi doonoog
dooskaabi vai open one's eyes; Isg indooskaab;
pn dwaaskaabid
dootooban vti be springy ground; pn
dwaatoobang
dwaa'ibaan ni hole made in the ice for water; pi
dwaa'ibaanan; loc dwaa'ibaaning; also
dwaa'igan
dwaa'ibii vai make a water hole in the ice; Isg
indwaa'ibii; prt dwayaa'ibiid; also dwaa'ige
dwaa'ige vai make a hole in the ice; Isg
indwaa'ige; prt dwayaa'iged
dwaashin vai fall through the ice; Isg indwaashin;
prt dwayaashing
E
edawayi'ii pc on both sides of it
edawi-zaka'o vai use crutches; Isg indedawi-
zaka'; pn ayedawi-zaka'od
edawi-zaka'on ni crutch; pi edawi-zaka'onan; dim
edawi-zaka'onens
eko- pv3 since, a certain length, as long as (in
time): changed form o/ako-
eko-nising pc the third
eko-niizhing pc the second
emikwaan ni spoon, ladle; pi emikwaanan; loc
emikwaaning; dim emikwaanens
emikwaanens ni spoon, teaspoon; pi
emikwaanensan; loc emikwaanensing
enange pc sure! you bet!
enda- pv4 just, real, very nonitially: wenda-
endaso- pv3 so many, every: changed form of: daso-
endaso-dibik pc every night
endaso-gigizheb pc every morning
endaso-giizhikpc every day
endaso-giizis />c every month
endazhi- pv3 in a certain place: changed form of
dazhi-
endazhi-ataading ni-pt casino
endazhi-booniimagak ni-pt airport; pi endazhi-
booniirnagakin
endaad vai his/her home: changed form of: daa
endogwen pc I don't know, I am not sure
en' pc yes
eni- pv2 going away from the speaker, coming up
to in time changed form of ani-
enigok pc with effort, harder
enigoons na ant; pi enigoonsag; also enig
eniwek pc somewhat, a little bit, just so, middling
en/an' pc yes; also en', eya'
es na clam, shell; pi esag
eshkam pc gradually, more and more, less and less
eshkan na horn (of an animal); pi eshkanag
eshkan ni ice chisel; pi eshkanan
eshkandaming ni-pt watermelon; pi
eshkandamingin
eshkwaa pc while
eshpabid na-pt leader, chairman; pi eshpabijig
esiban na raccoon; pi esibanag; dim esibanens
eta pc only
eya' pc yes
eyishwaaswi nm eight each; also nenishwaaswi*
eyiidawayi'H pc on both sides of it
eyiidawininj pc at both hands
eyiizh pc both
ezhi- pv3 in a certain way, to a certain place, thus,
so, there changed form o/izhi-
ezhininjiishin vai leave a handprint; Isg
indezhininjiishin; pn ayezhininjiishing
ezhishin vai leave a mark; Isg indezhishin; prt
ayezhishing
ezhisin vii leave a mark; pn ezhising
ezigaa na wood tick; pi ezigaag; dim ezigaans
G
ga- pvl future tense prefix after a personal prefix'., also
gad-
gabaa vai get off a vehicle or boat, disembark; Isg
in gabaa, pn gebaad
gabaa' vta get s.o. off a vehicle or boat, disembark
s.o.; Isg ingabaa'aa; prt gebaa'aad

47
gabaanaazha'—gagwaanisagenim
gabaanaazha' /gabaanaazha'w-/ vta tell s.o. to get
off, tell s.o. to disembark; hg
ingabaanaazha'waa; pn gebaanaazha'waad
gabaashim vta cook s.o. by boiling; Isg
ingabaashimaa; pn gebaashimaad
gabaatoon vti2 cook s.t. by boiling; Isg
ingabaatoon; pn gebaatood
gabe- pv4 whole extent of, throughout
gabe-ayi'ii pc throughout it, a long time; also
gabeyi'ii
gabe-dibik pi all night
gabe-dibikwe vai spend the whole night; Isg
ingabe-dibikwe; pn gebe-dibikwed
gabe-gikendaasoowigamig ni college, university;
pi gabe-gikendaasoowigamigoon; loc gabe-
gikendaasoowigamigong
gabe-giizhik pc all day
gabekanapc at the end of the road or trail
gabenaw vta win from s.o. in a game, beat s.o. in
a game; Isg ingabenawaa; pn gebenawaad
gabenaage vai score in a game, win; Isg
ingabenaage; pn gebenaaged
gabe-onaagosh pc all evening
gabeshi vai camp, set up camp; hg ingabesh; pn
gebeshid
gabeshiwin ni campsite; pi gabeshiwinan; loc
gabeshiwining; dim gabeshiwinens
gabeshkan vti go to the end of s.t.; Isg
ingabeshkaan;pngebeshkang
gabeshkaa vai go to the end; Isg ingabeshkaa; pn
gebeshkaad
gabikan vti pass s.t. by; Isg ingabikaan; pn
gebikang
gabikaw vta pass s.o. by; Isg ingabikawaa; pn
gebikawaad
gad- pvl future tense prefix after a personal prefix,
optional form before vowels
gaganoonidiwag /gaganoonidi-/ vai they talk to
each other, they converse with each other; Ipl
ingaganoonidimin; pn geganoonidijig
gaganoozh /gaganooN-/ vta talk to s.o., converse
with s.o.; Isg ingaganoonaa; pn geganoonaad
gagaanonagweyaa vii have long sleeves; pn
gegaanonagweyaag; aug
gagaanonagweyaamagad; pn aug
gegaanonagweyaamagak
gagaanw= < ginw=
gagaanwaanikwe vai have long hair; Isg
ingagaanwaanikwe; prt gegaanwaanikwed
gagaanwaawan /gagaanwaa-/ vii be long plural;
prt gegaanwaagin; aug gagaanwaamagadoon;
pn aug gegaanwaamagakin
gagaanzitaw vta act contrary to s.o.'s instructions;
Isg ingagaanzitawaa; pn gegaanzitawaad
gagaanzom vta persuade s.o., urge s.o., convince
s.o.; Isg ingagaanzomaa; pn gegaanzomaad
gagaapag= < gipag=
gagiib= < gib=
gagiibanagaskwe vai stutter; Isg
ingagiibanagaskwe; pn gegiibanagaskwed
gagiibaadad vii be foolish; pn gegiibaadak
gagiibaadaatese vii be a comedy, be a funny
movie; pn gegiibaadaateseg; aug
gagiibaadaatesemagad; prt aug
gegiibaadaatesemagak
gagiibaadizi vai be foolish; Isg ingagiibaadiz; prt
gegiibaadizid
gagiibaajichige vai do foolish things; Isg
ingagiibaajichige; pn gegiibaajichiged
gagiibijaane vai have a stuffed-up nose; hg
ingagiibijaane; pn gegiibijaaned
gagiibishe vai be deaf; Isg ingagiibishe; pn
gegiibished
gagiibiingwe vai be blind; Isg ingagiibiingwe; prt
gegiibiingwed
gagiibw= < gibw=
gagiichii vai take off one's shoes, take off one's
moccasins; Isg ingagiichii; pn gegiichiid
gagiidag= < gidag=
gagiidisk= < gidisk=
gagiigin vta select from s.o., pick from s.o.; Isg
ingagiinaa; pn gegiiginaad
gagiiginan vti select from s.t., pick from s.t.; Isg
ingagiiginaan; prt gegiiginang
gagiij= < gij=
gagiik= < gik=
gagiikim vta preach to s.o.; Isg ingagiikimaa; pn
gegiikimaad
gagiikimaawasowin ni education by preaching
and exhortation
gagiikwe wri preach; Isg ingagiikwe; pr/
gegiikwed
gagiikwe-mazina'igan ni bible; pi gagiikwe-
mazina'iganan; loc gagiikwe-mazina'iganing;
dim gagiikwe-mazina'igaans
gagiikwewinini na preacher, minister; pi
gagiikwewininiwag
gagiimood= < gimood=
gagiinawishki vai be a habitual liar; Isg
ingagiinawishk; prt gegiinawishkid
gagiipidoon vai have chapped lips; Isg
ingagiipidoon; pn gegiipidoong
gagiipizi vai be chapped; Isg ingagiipiz; prt
gegiipizid
gagiipiingwe oaihave a chapped face; Isg
ingagiipiingwe; pn gegiipiingwed
gagiizh= < gizh=
gagiizhibaa= < gizhibaa=
gagiizhiib= < gizhiib=
gagwaadagitoo vai suffer; hg ingagwaadagitoo;
prt gegwaadagitood
gagwaanisagad vii be terrible; pn gegwaanisagak
gagwaanisagakamig pc terrible, awful
gagwaanisagendam vai2 consider things to be
terrible, suffer in one's mind; hg
ingagwaanisagendam; prt
gegwaanisagendang
gagwaanisagendan vti consider s.t. terrible,
consider s.t. disgusting; Isg
ingagwaanisagendaan; pn
gegwaanisagendang
gagwaanisagendaagozi vai be considered terrible,
be considered disgusting; Isg
ingagwaanisagendaagoz; pn
gegwaanisagendaagozid
gagwaanisagendaagwad vii be considered
terrible, be considered disgusting; prt
gegwaanisagendaagwak
gagwaanisagenim vta consider s.o. to be terrible,
consider s.o. disgusting; Isg

gagwaanisagizi—ganawendamaw
48
ingagwaanisagenimaa; prt
gegwaanisagenimaad
gagwaanisagizi vai be mean, be terrible; hg
ingagwaanisagiz; pn gegwaanisagizid
gagwaayakw= < gwayakw=
gagwaazigw= < gozigw=
gagwe- pv4 try
gagwedaganaam vta box s.o.; hg
ingagwedaganaamaa; prt
gegwedaganaamaad
gagwedaganaandiwag /gagwedaganaandi-/ vai
they box each other; Ipl
ingagwedaganaandimin; pn
gegwedaganaandijig
gagwedaganewinini na boxer; pi
gagwedaganewininiwag
gagweda'aakwe vai practice shooting; hg
ingagweda'aakwe; pn gegweda'aakwed
gagwedin vta test s.o. by touch; hg
ingagwedinaa; prt gegwedinaad
gagwedinan vti test s.t. by touch; hg
ingagwedinaan; prt gegwedinang
gagwedoomigo vai practice riding on horseback;
hg ingagwedoomig; prt gegwedoomigod
gagwedwe vai ask questions, inquire; hg
ingagwedwe; pn gegwedwed
gagwejichige vai try things; hg ingagwejichige;
pn gegwejichiged
gagweji' vta try to get s.o. to...; hg ingagweji'aa;
pn gegweji'aad
gagwejikada' /gagwejikada'w-/ vta race s.o. in
boats; hg ingagwejikada'waa; pn
gegwejikada'waad
gagwejikada'odiwag /gagwejikada'odi-/ vai they
race each other in boats; Ipl
ingagwejikada'odimin; prt gegwejikada'odijig
gagwejikanidiwag /gagwejikanidi-/ vai they race
each other; Ipl ingagwejikanidimin; pn
gegwejikanidijig
gagwejikazh /gagwejikaN-/ vta race s.o.; hg
ingagwejikanaa; prt gegwejikanaad
gagwejikazhiwe vai race people; hg
ingagwejikazhiwe; prt gegwejikazhiwed
gagwejikazhiwewidaabaan «« race car; p/
gagwejikazhiwewidaabaanag
gagwejim vta ask s.o. questions; hg
ingagwejimaa; pn gegwejimaad
gagwejindiwag /gagwejindi-/ vai they ask each
other questions; Ipl ingagwejindimin; pn
gegwejindijig
gagwejitoon vti2 try s.t., test s.t.; hg
ingagwejitoon; pn gegwejitood
gagwejii vai test one's strength; hg ingagwejii; prt
gegwejiid
gagwejiiwaanidiwag /gagwejiiwaanidi-/ vai they
wrestle each other; Ipl ingagwejiiwaanidimin;
prt gegwejiiwaanidijig
gagwejiiwaazh /gagwejiiwaaN-/ vta wrestle s.o.;
hg ingagwejiiwaanaa: pn gegwejiiwaanaad
gagwejiiwaazoowinini na wrestler; p/
gagwejiiwaazoowininiwag
gagwezikan vti test s.t. with foot or body; Isg
ingagwezikaan; prt gegwezikang
gagwezikaw vta test s.o. with foot or body; hg
ingagwezikawaa; prt gegwezikawaad
gakakaa vii be square; pn gekakaag; aug
gakakaamagad; pn aug gekakaamagak
gakakaabikad vii be square (as something
mineral); pn gekakaabikak
gakakaabikizi vai be square (as something
mineral); prt gekakaabikizid
gakakaakozi vai be square (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn gekakaakozid
gakakaakwad vii be square (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt gekakaakwak
gakaki' vta make s.o. square; hg ingakaki'aa; prt
gekaki'aad
gakakishin vai have a square pattern; prt
gekakishing
gakakisin vii have a square pattern; prt gekakising
gakakitoon vti2 make s.t. square; hg
ingakakitoon; pn gekakitood
gakakizi vai be square; prt gekakizid
gakakiigad vii be square (as something sheet-like);
pn gekakiigak
gakakiigizi vai be square (as something sheet-like);
pn gekakiigizid
Gakaabikaang place Minneapolis
gakaaga'ogaan ni house-like lodge; pi
gakaaga'ogaanan; loc gakaaga'ogaaning; dim
gakaaga'ogaanens
gakaamikijiwan vii be a waterfall; pn
gekaamikijiwang
gakeyaapc in the direction of; also akeyaa, keyaa,
nakakeyaa*
gakijiwan vii be a waterfall; pn gekijiwang
gakina pc all; also akina, kina
gakina awiya pr everybody; also akina awiya, kina
awiya
gakina gegoo pr everything; also akina gegoo,
kina gegoo
gakiiwe vai go over a point, portage; hg
ingakiiwe; prt gekiiwed
gakiiwenige vai carry things over a portage; hg
ingakiiwenige; pn gekiiweniged
ganabaj pc perhaps, maybe
ganage pc in the least, by any means
ganakin vta take a handful of s.o.; hg
inganakinaa; pn genakinaad
ganakinan Mi take a handful of s.t.; hg
inganakinaan; prt genakinang
ganawaabam vta look at s.o., watch s.o.; hg
inganawaabamaa; pn genawaabamaad
ganawaabandan ztfz'look at s.t., watch s.t.; hg
inganawaabandaan; pn genawaabandang
ganawaabandiwag /ganawaabandi-/ vai they look
at each other, diey watch each other; Ipl
inganawaabandimin; prt genawaabandijig
ganawaabanjigaade vii be looked at, be watched;
prt genawaabanjigaadeg; aug
ganawaabanjigaademagad; pn aug
genawaabanjigaademagak
ganawaabanjigaazo vai be looked at, be watched,
be on parole; prt genawaabanjigaazod
ganawaabanjige vai look at things, watch things;
hg inganawaabanjige; prt genawaabanjiged
ganawaabi vai look, watch; hg inganawaab; prt
genawaabid
ganawendamaw vta take care of (s.t.) for s.o.; hg
inganawendamawaa; pn genawendamawaad

49
ganawendan—gashkidaasebizon
ganawendan vti take care of s.t.; Isg
inganawendaan; prr genawendang
ganawendaagwad vii be taken care of; prt
genawendaagwak
ganawendaawaso vai take care of a child; Isg
inganawendaawas; pit genawendaawasod
ganawenim vta take care of s.o.; Isg
inganawenimaa; pn genawenimaad
ganawenindiwag /ganawenindi-/ vai they take
care of each other; Ipl inganawenindimin; pn
genawenindijig;
ganawenjigaade vii be taken care of; pn
genawenjigaadeg; aug
ganawenjigaademagad; pn aug
genawenjigaademagak
ganawenjigaazo vai be taken care of, be on parole;
pn genawenjigaazod
ganawenjige vai take care of things; Isg
inganawenjige; pn genawenjiged
ganoodan vti speak to s.t.; Isg inganoodaan; pn
genoodang
ganoonidiwag /ganoonidi-/ vai they speak to each
other; Ipl inganoonidimin; pn genoonidijig
ganoozh /ganooN-/ vta address s.o., speak to s.o.,
call s.o. on the phone; Isg inganoonaa; pn
genoonaad
gashkadin vii freeze over, be frozen over; pn
geshkading
gashkadino-giizis na November
gashka'oode vii be knotted, be tangled; pn
geshka'oodeg; aug gashka'oodemagad; prt
aug geshka'oodemagak
gashka'oodoon vti2 tie s.t. with a knot; Isg
ingashka'oodoon; prt geshka'oodood
gashka'oojigan ni knot; pi gashka'oojiganan: dim
gashka'oojigaans
gashka'oozh /gashka'ooN-/ vta tie s.o. with a
knot; Isg ingashka'oonaa; pn geshka'oonaad
gashka'oozo vai be knotted, be tangled; pn
geshka'oozod
gashkanokii vai be able to work; Isg
ingashkanokii; pn geshkanokiid
gashkapidoon vti2 tie s.t. shut, tie s.t. in a bundle;
Isg ingashkapidoon; prt geshkapidood
gashkapizh /gashkapiN-/ vta tie s.o. shut, tie s.o.
in a bundle; Isg ingashkapinaa; pn
geshkapinaad
gashkawan vii be a dense fog; prt geshkawang
gashkaabika' /gashkaabika'w-/ vta lock s.o.; Isg
ingashkaabika'waa; pn geshkaabika'waad
gashkaabika'an vti lock s.t.; Isg
ingashkaabika'aan; pn geshkaabika'ang
gashkaabika'igan ni lock; pi gashkaabika'iganan;
loc gashkaabika'iganing; dim
gashkaabika'igaans
gashkaabika'igaade vii be locked; pn
geshkaabika'igaadeg; aug
gashkaabika'igaademagad; pn aug
geshkaabika'igaademagak
gashkaabika'igaazo vai be locked; prt
geshkaabika'igaazod
gashkaabika'ige vai lock things; Isg
ingashkaabika'ige; pn geshkaabika'iged
gashkaakonan vti bar s.t. (as something stick- or
wood-like), lock s.t. (as or as with something
stick- or wood-like; Isg ingashkaakonaan; pn
geshkaakonang
gashkaakwa'amaw vta lock (s.t.) for s.o. (as or as
with something stick- or wood-like); Isg
ingashkaakwa'amawaa; pn
geshkaakwa'amawaad
gashkaaso vai be sunburned; Isg ingashkaas; prt
geshkaasod
gashkendam vai2 be lonely, be sad; Isg
ingashkendam; prt geshkendang
gashkibidaagan na bag with closeable top, tobacco
bag, pipe bag, bandolier bag; pi
gashkibidaaganag; loc gashkibidaaganing;
dim gashkibidaagaans
gashkibidaagan (bandolier bag;); see also
aazhooningwa'igan
gashkibide vii be wrapped and tied in a bundle; prt
geshkibideg; aug gashkibidemagad; pn aug
geshkibidemagak
gashkibidoon vti2 wrap and tie s.t. in a bundle; Isg
ingashkibidoon; pn geshkibidood
gashkibijigan ni bundle, package, packet; pi
gashkibijiganan; loc gashkibijiganing; dim
gashkibijigaans
gashkibijigaade vii be wrapped and tied in a
bundle; prt geshkibijigaadeg; aug
gashkibijigaademagad; prt aug
geshkibijigaademagak
gashkibijigaazo vai be wrapped and tied in a
bundle; prt geshkibijigaazod
gashkibijige vai wrap and tie things in a bundle;
Isg ingashkibijige; pn geshkibijiged
gashkibizh /gashkibiN-/ vta wrap and tie s.o. in a
bundle; Isg ingashkibinaa; pn geshkibinaad
gashkichige vai acquire, earn, be able (to do
something); Isg ingashkichige; pn
geshkichiged
gashkidaasebizo vai wear leg garters; Isg
ingashkidaasebiz; pn geshkidaasebizod
gashkidaasebizon ni leg garter; pi
gashkidaasebizonan; loc

gashkigwaadan—gaajigaazo
50
gashkidaasebizoning; dim
gashkidaasebizonens
gashkigwaadan vti sew s.t.; Isg
ingashkigwaadaan; prt geshkigwaadang
gashkigwaade vii be sewn; prt geshkigwaadeg;
aug gashkigwaademagad; prt aug
geshkigwaademagak
gashkigwaaso vai sew; Isg ingashkigwaas; prt
geshkigwaasod
gashkigwaason na sewing machine; pi
gashkigwaasonag: loc gashkigwaasoning; dim
gashkigwaasonens
gashkigwaasoneyaab ni sewing thread; pi
gashkigwaasoneyaabiin; loc
gashkigwaasoneyaabiing; dim
gashkigwaasoneyaabiins
gashkigwaazh /gashkigwaaN-/ vta sew s.o. (e.g., a
pair of pants); Isg ingashkigwaanaa; /»r
geshkigwaanaad
gashkigwaazo vai be sewn; prt geshkigwaazod
gashki' vta prevail over s.o., manage s.o., earn s.o.
(e.g., money); Isg ingashki'aa; prt geshki'aad
gashki'ewizi vai accomplish, succeed, have power;
Isg ingashki'ewiz; prt geshki'ewizid
gashki'o vai be able, get free; Isg ingashki'; prt
geshki'od
gashkitaw vta be able to get (s.t.) for s.o., be able
to manage (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg ingashkitawaa; prt
geshkitawaad
gashkitoon vti2 be able to do s.t., succeed at s.t.,
manage s.t.; Isg ingashkitoon; prt geshkitood
gashkiwidoon vti2 be able to take s.t., be able to
carry s.t.; Isg ingashkiwidoon; prt
geshkiwidood
gashkiwizh /gashkiwiN-/ vta be able to take s.o.,
be able to carry s.o.; Isg ingashkiwinaa; pn
geshkiwinaad
gashkii-dibikad vii be very dark at night; pn
geshkii-dibikak
gashkii-dibik-ayaa vii be dark as night; prt geshkii-
dibik-ayaag; aug gashkii-dibik-ayaamagad;
pn aug geshkii-dibik-ayaamagak
gawa* /gawa'w-/ vta fell s.o., chop s.o. down; Isg
ingawa'waa; pn gewa'waad
gawa'an vti fell s.t., chop s.t. down; Isg
ingawa'aan; prt gewa'ang
gawa'igaade vii be chopped down; prt
gewa'igaadeg; aug gawa'igaademagad; prt
aug gewa'igaademagak
gawa'igaazo vai be chopped down; prt
gewa'igaazod
gawaji vai freeze to death; Isg ingawaj; prt gewajid
gawanaandam vai2 starve; Isg ingawanaandam;
prt gewanaandang
gawanokii vai collapse from overwork; Isg
ingawanokii; prt gewanokiid
gawaabaagwe vai suffer from thirst; Isg
ingawaabaagwe; prt gewaabaagwed
gawaakose vai fall over (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt gewaakosed
gawaakose vii fall over (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt gewaakoseg; aug
gawaakosemagad; prt aug gewaakosemagak
gawaashi vai be blown over; pn gewaashid
gawaasin vii be blown over; prt gewaasing
gawin vta upset s.o. by hand, tip s.o. over by hand;
Isg ingawinaa; prt gewinaad
gawinan vti upset s.t. by hand, tip s.t. over by
hand; Isg ingawinaan; pn gewinang
gawingwashi vai fall asleep; Isg ingawingwash; pn
gewingwashid
gawise vai fall over; pn gewised
gawise vii fall over; prt gewiseg; aug
gawisemagad; prt aug gewisemagak
gawishimo vai lie down, go to bed; Isg
ingawishim; prt gewishimod
gawiwebin vta throw s.o. down, knock s.o. down,
pull s.o. down with hands; 7^f ingawiwebinaa;
prt gewiwebinaad
gawiwebinan vti throw s.t. down, knock s.t. down,
pull s.t. down with hands; Isg
ingawiwebinaan; prt gewiwebinang
gayat pc formerly, previously, some time ago
gayaashk na seagull; pi gayaashkwag; dim
gayaashkoons
gaye pc as for, also, too, and; also ge
gaa- pvl past tense prefix under initial change
gaadaw vta hide (s.t.) from s.o.; Isg ingaadawaa;
prt gayaadawaad
gaadoon vti2 hide s.t.; Isg ingaadoon; prt
gayaadood
gaag na porcupine; pi gaagwag; dim gaagoons
gaagaagiw na raven; pi gaagaagiwag; dim
gaagaagiins; also gaagaagi*
gaagige- pv4 forever
gaagiidaawigan vai have a sore back; Isg
ingaagiidaawigan; pn gayaagiidaawigang
gaagiidizi vaibe sore; /s» ingaagiidiz;/>rr
gayaagiidizid
gaagiigido vai talk, speak; Isg ingaagiigid; prt
gayaagiigidod
gaagiigidoo-bineshiinh na parrot; pi gaagiigidoo-
bineshiinyag
gaagiigidoo-makakoons ni telephone,
phonograph, record player; pi gaagiigidoo-
makakoonsan; loc gaagiigidoo-
makakoonsing
gaagiigidoowinini na councillor; pi
gaagiigidoowininiwag
gaagiijidooskwan vai have a sore elbow; Isg
ingaagiijidooskwan; prt gayaagiijidooskwang
gaagiijigaade vai have a sore leg; Isg
ingaagiijigaade; prt gayaagiijigaaded
gaagiijinike vai have a sore arm; Isg ingaagiijinike;
prt gayaagiijiniked
gaagiijininjii am have a sore hand, have a sore
finger; Isg ingaagiijininjii; prt gayaagiijininjiid
gaagiijizide vai have a sore foot; Isg ingaagiijizide;
prt gayaagiijizided
gaagiizom vta appease s.o., apologize to s.o.; Isg
ingaagiizomaa; prt gayaagiizomaad
gaajigaade vii be hidden; prt gayaajigaadeg; aug
gaajigaademagad; prt aug
gayaajigaademagak
gaajigaazo vai be hidden; prt gayaajigaazod

51
gaajige—gaaskizan
gaajige vaihide things; hg ingaajige; prt
gayaajiged
gaakaabishiinh na screech owl; pi
gaakaabishiinyag
gaakaand= < gaand=
gaakaanj= < gaanj"
gaakaanz= < gaanz=
gaakaasii2 < gaasii-
gaakaask= < gaask=
gaa mashi pc not yet; also gaawiin mashi
Gaa-miskwaawaakokaag place Cass Lake
gaanda'igwaason ni thimble; pi
gaanda'igwaasonan; loc gaanda'igwaasoning;
dim gaanda'igwaasonens
gaandakii'an m pole s.t.; Isg ingaandakii'aan; pn
gayaandakii'ang
gaandakii'iganaak ni push pole; pi
gaandakii'iganaakoon; loc
gaandakii'iganaakong; dim
gaandakii'iganaakoons; also
gaandakii'iganaatig
gaandakii'ige vai pole a boat; hg ingaandakii'ige;
pn gayaandakii'iged
gaandakii'o vai pole a boat; hg ingaandakii'; pn
gayaandakii'od
gaandin vta push s.o.; Isg ingaandinaa; prt
gayaandinaad
gaandinamaw vta push (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
ingaandinamawaa; pn gayaandinamawaad
gaandinan UK push s.t.; hg ingaandinaan;p?t
gayaandinang
gaandinige vai push things; Isg ingaandinige; prt
gayaandiniged
gaanjida' /gaanjida'w-/ vta push s.o. with a stick;
Isg ingaanjida'waa; pn gayaanjida'waad
gaanjida'an vti push s.t. with a stick; hg
ingaanjida'aan; prt gayaanjida'ang
gaanjida'ige vai push things with a stick; Isg
ingaanjida'ige; pn gayaanjida'iged
gaanjweba* /gaanjweba'w-/ vta shove s.o. using
something; Isg ingaanjweba'waa; prt
gayaanjweba'waad
gaanjweba'an vti shove s.t. using something; hg
ingaanjweba'aan: pn gayaanjweba'ang
gaanjweba'ige vai shove things using something,
pole logs; hg ingaanjweba'ige; pn
gayaanjweba'iged
gaanjwebin ma shove s.o.; Isg ingaanjwebinaa; pn
gayaanjwebinaad
gaanjwebinan vti shove s.t.; hg ingaanjwebinaan;
pn gayaanjwebinang
gaanjwebishkan vti shove s.t. with foot or body;
Isg ingaanjwebishkaan; pn
gayaanjwebishkang
gaanjwebishkaw vta shove s.o. with foot or body;
hg ingaanjwebishkawaa; prt
gayaanj webish kawaad
gaanoo na diamond suite card; pi gaanoog
gaanzikan vti push s.t. with foot or body; hg
ingaanzikaan; pn gayaanzikang
gaanzikaw via push s.o. with foot or body; hg
ingaanzikawaa.; prt gayaanzikawaad
gaapam vta crunch s.o. in mouth; hg
ingaapamaa; prt gayaapamaad
gaapan vii be brittle; prt gayaapang; also gaapaa
gaapandan vti crunch s.t. in mouth; hg
ingaapandaan; pn gayaapandang
gaapanjige vai crunch things in mouth; hg
ingaapanjige; pn gayaapanjiged
gaapizan vti parch s.t.; hg ingaapizaan; prt
gayaapizang
gaapizi vai be brittle; prt gayaapizid
gaapizigan ni popped wild rice; pi gaapiziganan;
loc gaapiziganing; dim gaapizigaans
gaapizige vai parch things; hg ingaapizige; pn
gayaapiziged
gaapii ni coffee
gaashkakokwe'igan ni paddle for stirring boiling
maple sap; pi gaashkakokwe'iganan; dim
gaashkakokwe'igaans
gaashkibaajigan ni razor; pi gaashkibaajiganan;
loc gaashkibaajiganing; dim
gaashkibaajigaans
gaashkibaazh /gaashkibaaN-/ vta shave s.o.; hg
ingaashkibaanaa; prt gayaashkibaanaad
gaashkibaazo vai shave; Isg ingaashkibaaz; pn
gayaashkibaazod
gaasiibii'an vti erase s.t.; hg ingaasiibii'aan; pn
gayaasiibii'ang
gaasiibii'igan na eraser; pi gaasiibii'iganag; loc
gaasiibii'iganing; dim gaasiibii'igaans
gaasiibii'ige vai erase things; hg ingaasiibii'ige; prt
gayaasiibii'iged
gaasiidoone'o vai wipe one's mouth; hg
ingaasiidoone'; prt gayaasiidoone'od
gaasii' /gaasii'w-/ vta wipe s.o. using something;
hg ingaasii'waa; pn gayaasii'waad
gaasii'an vti wipe s.t. using something; Isg
ingaasii'aan; prt gayaasii'ang
gaasii'ige vai wipe things using something; hg
ingaasii'ige; pn gayaasii'iged
gaasiinaagane vai wipe dishes; Isg
ingaasiinaagane; prt gayaasiinaaganed
gaasiininjii vai wipe one's hands; hg ingaasiininjii;
pn gayaasiininjiid
gaaskanazo vai whisper; hg ingaaskanaz; prt
gayaaskanazod
gaaskanazootaw vta whisper to s.o.; hg
ingaaskanazootawaa; pn
gayaaskanazootawaad
gaaskanaamo vai wheeze; Isg ingaaskanaam; pn
gayaaskanaamod
gaaskaaska' /gaaskaaska'w-/ vta scrape s.o. using
something; hg ingaaskaaska'waa; prt
gayaaskaaska'waad
gaaskaaska'an vti scrape s.t. using something; hg
ingaaskaaska'aan; pn gayaaskaaska'ang
gaaskide vii be dried out, be shrivelled; prt
gayaaskideg; ang gaaskidemagad; prt aug
gayaaskidemagak
gaaskiz /gaaskizw-/ vta dry s.o. by smoking; hg
ingaaskizwaa; prt gayaaskizwaad
gaaskizan vti dry s.t. by smoking; hg
ingaaskizaan; prt gayaaskizang

gaas kizo—gibaakwa'i gaad e
52
gaaskizo vai be dried out, be shrivelled; Isg
ingaaskiz; prt gayaaskizod
gaawarn vta be jealous of s.o.; Isg ingaawamaa;
prt gayaawamaad
gaawaa vii be rough; prt gayaawaag; aug
gaawaamagad; prt aug gayaawaamagak
Gaa-waabaabiganikaag/>/,«v White Earth
Reservation
gaawaabikad vii be rough (as something mineral);
prt gayaawaabikak
gaawaabikizi vai'be rough (as something mineral);
prt gayaawaabikizid
gaawaandag na white spruce; pi gaawaandagoog;
he gaawaandagong; dim gaawaandagoons
gaawe vai be jealous; Isg ingaawe; prt gayaawed
gaawegad ui't'be rough (as something sheet-like);
prt gayaawegak
gaawegizi uat'be rough (as something sheet-like);
prt gayaawegizid
gaawendam vai2 be jealous; Isg ingaawendam;
prt gayaawendang
gaawesapc can't do it!, no way!, not at all
gaawizi vai be rough; prt gayaawizid
gaa wiikaa pc never; also gaawiin wiikaa
gaawiin pc no, not negative
gaawiin awiyapr nobody; also gaawiin awiiya
gaawiin ganage pc not in the least
gaawiin gegoo pr nothing
gaawiin geyaabi pc no more, no longer
gaawiin mashi pc not yet; also gaa rnashi
gaawiin memwech pc it's not necessary, you don't
have to
gaawiin wiikaa pc never; also gaa wiikaa
gaa-wiisagang ni-pt pepper
Gaa-zagaskwaajimekaag place Leech Lake
Reservation
gaazh /gaaN-/ vta hide s.o.; Isg ingaanaa; prt
gayaanaad
gaazhagens na cat; pi gaazhagensag
gaazo vai hide self; Isg ingaaz; prt gayaazod
gaazootaw vta hide from s.o.; Isg ingaazootawaa;
prt gayaazootawaad
ge pc as for, also, too; also gaye
ge- pvl future tense prefix under initial change
gebaakwa'ond na-pt prisoner; pi gebaakwa'onjig
gegapii pc after a while, eventually, finally
gegaa /v nearly, almost
geget pc sure, indeed, certainly, really
gego pc don't
gego binapc just don't
gego ganage pc don't in any way
gego wiikaa pc don't ever
gegoo pr something inanimate definite., anything
inanimate indefinite
gekek na hawk; pi gekekwag; dim gekekoons
gekinoo'amawind na-pt student; pi
gekinoo'amawinjig
gekinoo'amaaged na-pt teacher; pi
ge ki noo 'am aage j i g
gemaa^c or, or maybe; also gemaa gaye
genwaabiigigwed na-pt giraffe; pi
genwaabiigigwejig
genwaakwak apabiwin ni couch; pi
genwaakwakin apabiwinan; loc genwaakwak
apabiwining; dim genwaakwak apabiwinens
geshawishim vtaputs.o. loosely; Isg
ingeshawishimaa; prt gayeshawishimaad
geshawishkan vti fit s.t. loosely; Isg
ingeshawishkaan; prt gayeshawishkang
geshawishkaw vta fit s.o. loosely; Isg
ingeshawishkawaa; prt gayeshawishkawaad
geshawisidoon vti2 put s.t. loosely; Isg
ingeshawisidoon; prt gayeshawisidood
gete- pv4 old, old-time
gete-aya'aa na someone old; pi gete-aya'aag
gete-ayi'ii ni something old; pi gete-ayi'iin
geyaabi pc still, yet
gezikapc suddenly
gezikwendam vai2 vaguely remember; Isg
ingezikwendam; prt gayezikwendang
gezikwendan vti vaguely remember s.t.; Isg
ingezikwendaan; prt gayezikwendang
gezikwenim vta vaguely remember s.o.; Isg
ingezikwenimaa; prt gayezikwenimaad
gi= pre second person prefix before consonants in nouns
and verbs
gibadoonh na button; pi gibadoonyag; loc
gibadoons; also gibodoonh
gibagoojigan ni cloth partition; pi gibagoojiganan;
loc gibagoojigan ing; dim gibagoojigaans
giba' /giba'w-/ vta stop s.o. up, plug s.o.; Isg
ingiba'waa; prt geba'waad
giba'an vti stop s.t. up, plug s.t.; Isg ingiba'aan; prt
geba'ang
giba'igaade vii be stopped up, be plugged; prt
geba'igaadeg; aug giba'igaademagad; prt aug
geba'igaademagak
giba'i gaazo vai be stopped up, be plugged; prt
geba*igaazod
giba'ige vai stop things up, plug things; Isg
ingiba'ige; prt geba'iged
gibaabowe' /gibaabowe *w-/ vta put a lid on s.o.;
Isg ingibaabowe'waa; pn gebaabowe'waad
gibaabowe'an vti put a lid on s.t.; Isg
ingibaabowe'aan; prt gebaabowe'ang
gibaabowe'igan ni pot lid; pi gibaabowe'iganan;
loc gibaabowe'igan ing; dim gibaabowe'igaans
gibaabowe'ige vai put a lid on things; Isg
ingibaabowe'ige; prt gebaabowe'iged
gibaakobidoon vti2 can s.t., pull s.t. shut (as
something stick- or wood-like); Isg
ingibaakobidoon; prt gebaakobidood
gibaakobijigan ni canned goods; pi
gibaakobijiganan
gibaakowebinan vti slam s.t. shut (as something
stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door); Isg
ingibaakowebinaan; prt gebaakowebinang
gibaakwadin vii be frozen shut; prt gebaakwading
gibaakwa' /gibaakwa'w-/ vta shut s.o. (as or as
with something stick- or wood-like), dam s.o.,
obstruct s.o., jail s.o.; Isg ingibaakwa'waa; prt
gebaakwa'waad
gibaakwa'an vti shut s.t. (as or as with something
stick- or wood-like), dam s.t., obstruct s.t.; Isg
ingibaakwa'aan; prt gebaakwa'ang
gibaakwa'igan ni dam, stopper, plug; pi
gibaakwa'iganan; loc gibaakwa'iganing; dim
gi baakwa' igaan s
gibaakwa'igaade vii be shut (as or as with
something stick- or wood-like); prt

53
gibaakwa'igaazo—gichigamiiwashk
gebaakwa'igaadeg; aug
gibaakwa'igaademagad; pn aug
gebaakwa'igaademagak
gibaakwa'igaazo vai be imprisoned; pn
gebaakwa'igaazod
gibaakwa'ige vai dam things, plug things; Isg
ingibaakwa'ige; pn gebaakwa'iged
gibaakwa'odiiwigamig m jail, prison; pi
gibaakwa'odiiwigamigoon; loc
gibaakwa'odii wigam igong; dim
gibaakwa'odiiwigamigoons
gibaakwaji vai be frozen shut; pn gebaakwajid
gibichiitaa vai take a break; Isg ingibichiitaa; prt
gebichiitaad
gibide'ebizon ni vest; pi gibide'ebizonan; loc
gibide'ebizoning; dim gibide'ebizonens
gibide'ebizon (vest)
gibijaane vai have a stuffed-up nose; Isg
ingibijaane; prt gebijaaned; also gagiibijaane
gibinewen ma choke s.o.; Isg ingibinewenaa; pn
gebinewenaad
gibishaganzhii vai be constipated; Isg
ingibishaganzhii; prt gebishaganzhiid
gibishe vaibe deaf (in one ear); Isg ingibishe; prt
gebished
gibishkan vti block s.t. with foot or body; Isg
ingibishkaan; pn gebishkang
gibishkaw vta block s.o. with foot or body; Isg
ingibishkawaa; prt gebishkawaad
gibishkwaande'on ni lodge door cover; pi
gibishkwaand e'on
gibiskwe vai be hoarse; Isg ingibiskwe; pn
gebiskwed
gibitan vai have a nosebleed; Isg ingibitan; pn
gebitang; also gibitane*
gibitaneganaam vta bloody s.o.'s nose; Isg
ingibitaneganaamaa; prt
gebitaneganaamaad
gibitaneshin vai bloody one's nose falling; Isg
ingibitaneshin; pn gebitaneshing
gibiiga'igan ni curtain, drapes; pi gibiiga'iganan;
loc gibiiga'iganing; dim gibiiga*igaans
gibiiga'iganiigin ni window shade; pi
gibiiga'iganiiginoon; loc gibiiga'iganiiginong;
dim gibiiga'iganiiginoons
gibiiga'igaade vii be curtained; pn
gebiiga'igaadeg; aug gibiiga'igaademagad; pn
aug gebiiga'igaademagak
gibokiwas /gibokiwasw-/ vta glue s.o. shut; Isg
ingibokiwaswaa; pn gebokiwaswaad
gibokiwasan vti glue s.t. shut; Isg ingibokiwasaan;
pn gebokiwasang
gibokiwasigaade vii be glued shut; pn
gebokiwasigaadeg; aug
gibokiwasigaademagad; prt aug
gebokiwasigaademagak
gibokiwasigaazo vai be glued shut; pn
gebokiwasigaazod
giboz /gibozw-/ vta bake s.o., roast s.o. in the
oven; Isg ingibozwaa; pn gebozwaad
gibozan un'bake s.t., roast s.t. in the oven; Isg
ingibozaan; pn gebozang
giboziganaabik ni roasting pan; pi
giboziganaabikoon; loc giboziganaabikong;
dim giboziganaabikoons
gibozige vai roast things in the oven, bake things;
Isg ingibozige; pn geboziged
giboobijiganeyaab ni drawstring; pi
giboobijiganeyaabiin; loc
giboobijiganeyaabiing; dim
giboobijiganeyaabiins
giboobinidizo vai zip oneself up; Isg
ingiboobinidiz: prt geboobinidizod
giboodiyegwaazon na pants; pi
giboodiyegwaazonag; loc
giboodiyegwaazoning; dim
giboodiyegwaazonens
giboodiyegwaazoniigin ni denim; pi
giboodiyegwaazoniiginoon
giboogwaadan vti sew s.t. shut; Isg
ingiboogwaadaan; pn geboogwaadang
giboogwaazh /giboogwaaN-/ vta sew s.o. shut; Isg
ingiboogwaanaa; pn geboogwaanaad
gibwanaabaawe vai drown; Isg
ingibwanaabaawe; pn gebwanaabaawed
gibwanaamode vii be full of smoke; pn
gebwanaamodeg; aug
gibwanaamodemagad; pn aug
gebwanaamodemagak
gibwanaamoz /gibwanaamozw-/ vta smoke s.o.
out; Isg ingibwanaamozwaa; pn
gebwanaamozwaad
gibwanaamozo vai suffocate from smoke; Isg
ingibwanaamoz; prt gebwanaamozod
gichi- pv4 big, great, very; also chi-
gichi-aniibiish ni cabbage; pi gichi-aniibiishan; he
gichi-aniibiishing; dim gichi-aniibiishens
gichi-aya'aa na adult, elder; pi gichi-aya'aag
gichi-aya'aawi vai be an adult, be an elder; Isg
ingichi-aya'aaw; pn gechi-aya'aawid
gichi-aya'aawinaagozi vai look old; Isg ingichi-
aya'aawinaagoz; pn gechi-aya'aawinaagozid
gichi-dibaakonigewinini na judge; pi gichi-
dibaakonigewininiwag
gichigami ni sea, one of the Great Lakes, Lake
Superior; pi gichigamiin; loc gichigamiing; dim
gichigamiins
gichigamiiwashk ni reed; pi gichigamiiwashkoon;
loc gichigamiiwashkong; dim
gichigamiiwashkoons

gichi-gigizheb—gigishkawaawaso
54
gichi-gigizheb pc early in the morning
gichi-gizhizo vai have pneumonia; Isg ingichi-
gizhiz; prt gechi-gizhizod
gichi-izhiwebad mi be stormy; prt gechi-
izhiwebak
gichi-manidoo tia Great Spirit, God; pi gichi-
manidoog
gichi-manidoo-giizis na January; also manidoo-
giizis
gichi-miikana in highway; pi gichi-miikanan; loc
gichi-miikanaang
gichi-mookomaan na white person, American; pi
gichi-mookomaanag; dim gichi-
mookomaanens
gichi-mookomaan m large knife, butcher knife; pi
gichi-mookomaanan; loc gichi-
mookomaaning; dim gichi-mookomaanens
Gichi-mookomaan-aki ni United States; loc Gichi-
mookomaan-akiing
gichi-mookomaanikwe na white woman; pi gichi-
mookomaanilcweg; dim gichi-
mookomaanikwens
gichi-mookomaanimo vai speak English; Isg
ingichi-mookomaanim; prt gechi-
mookomaanimod
gichinik ni right hand usually possessed', loc
gichinikaang
gichi-noodin vii be very windy, be a storm; prt
gechi-nooding
gichi-ogimaa na highest leader, king; pi gichi-
ogimaag; dim gichi-ogimaans
gichi-ogimaawi vai be the highest leader, be a
king; Isg ingichi-ogimaaw; pn gechi-
ogimaawid
gichi-ogin na tomato; pi gichi-oginiig; loc gichi-
oginiing; dim gichi-oginiins
gichi-onaagan ni large pan, dish pan; loc gichi-
onaaganing
Gichi-onigamiingp/ac£ Grand Portage Reservation
gichi-oodena ni city; pi gichi-oodenawan; loc
gichi-oodenaang
gichi-ziibi ni big river, Mississippi River; pi gichi-
ziibiwan; loc gichi-ziibiing
gid=pre second person prefix before vowels in verbs and
non-dependent nouns
gidagagwadaashi na crappie;p/
gidagagwadaashiwag; dim
gidagagwadaashiins
gidagaa vii be variegated, be spotted; prt
gedagaag; aug gidagaamagad; pn aug
gedagaamagak
gidagaa-bizhiw na bobcat; pi gidagaa-bizhiwag;
dim gidagaa-bizhiwens
gidagaakoons na fawn; pi gidagaakoonsag
gidagizi vai be variegated, be spotted; prt
gedagizid
gidagiigad vii be variegated (as something sheet-
like), be spotted (as something sheet-like) ',prt
gedagiigak
gidagiigin ni calico, cotton cloth; pi gidagiiginoon
gidagiigizi vai be variegated (as something sheet-
like), be spotted (as something sheet-like); prt
gedagiigizid
gida* /gida'w-/ vta remove s.o. using something;
Isg ingida'waa; prt geda'waad
gida'an vti remove s.t. using something; Isg
ingida'aan; prt geda'ang
gidamo /gidamw-/ vta eat up s.o.; Isg
ingidamwaa; prt gedamwaad
gidasan vti parch s.t. (e.g., wild rice); Isg
ingidasaan; prt gedasang
gidasige vai parch things (e.g., wild rice); Isg
ingidasige; prt gedasiged
gidaan /gidaam-/ vti3 eat up s.t.; Isg ingidaan; prt
gedaang
gidaanawe vai eat everything up; Isg
ingidaanawe; prt gedaanawed
gidimaagenim vta pity s.o.; Isg
ingidimaagenimaa; prt gedimaagenimaad
gidimaaginaagozi vai look poor; Isg
ingidimaaginaagoz; pn gedimaaginaagozid
gidimaaginaagwad vii look poor; prt
gedimaaginaagwak
gidimaagizi vai be poor; Isg ingidimaagiz; prt
gedimaagizid
gidiskaabiigishkaa vii come unconnected (as
something string-like), come loose (as some-
thing string-like); prt gediskaabiigishkaag; aug
gidiskaabiigishkaamagad; prt aug
gediskaabiigishkaamagak
gidiskibidoon vti2 pull s.t. free, disconnect s.t.
with hands; Isg ingidiskibidoon; prt
gediskibidood
gidiskibizh /gidiskibiN-/ vta pull s.o. free, discon-
nect s.o. with hands; Isg ingidiskibinaa; prt
gediskibinaad
gidiskin vta free s.o., take s.o. off, disconnect s.o.;
Isg ingidiskinaa; prt gediskinaad
gidiskinan vti free s.t., take s.t. off, disconnect s.t.;
Isg ingidiskinaan; pn gediskinang
gidiskise vai come apart, come off; prt gediskised
gidiskise vii come apart, come off; prt gediskiseg;
aug gidiskisemagad; prt aug gediskisemagak
gidoonagise vai fall out of a boat; Isg
ingidoonagise; prt gedoonagised
gigazhigane vai wear socks; Isg ingigazhigane; prt
gegazhiganed
gigaatigwaan ni sliver (in one's body); pi
gigaatigwaanan; loc gigaatigwaaning; dim
gigaatigwaanens
gigaatigwe vai have a sliver; Isg ingigaatigwe: pn
gegaatigwed
gigibabagiwayaane vai wear a shirt; Isg
ingigibabagiwayaane; pn
gegibabagiwayaaned
gigibabiinzikawaagane zw; wear a coat; Isg
ingigibabiinzikawaagane; prt
gegibabiinzikawaaganed
gigigiboodiyegwaazone »ai wear pants; Isg
ingigigiboodiyegwaazone; prt
gegigiboodiyegwaazoned
gigiminjikaawane DOZ wear mittens; Isg
ingigiminjikaawane; prt gegiminjikaawaned
gigishkan zitibear s.t. on one's body, have s.t. on
one's body; Isg ingigishkaan; prt gegishkang
gigishkaw vta bear s.o. on one's body, be pregnant
with s.o.; Isg ingigishkawaa; prt
gegishkawaad
gigishkawaawaso vai be pregnant; Isg
ingigishkawaawas; prt gegishkawaawasod

55
gigishkaajige—ginigawisin
gigishkaajige vai be pregnant; Isg ingigishkaajige;
prt gegishkaajiged
gigizheb pc in the morning
gigizhebaa-miijin vti3 eat s.t. for breakfast; Isg
ingigizhebaa-nniijin; prt gegizhebaa-miijid
gigizhebaawagad vii be morning; prt
gegizhebaawagak
gigizhebaa-wiisini vai eat breakfast; Isg
ingigizhebaa-wiisin; prt gegizhebaa-wiisinid
gigizhebaa-wiisini win ni breakfast
gijibidoon vti remove s.t. with hands, pull s.t. off;
Isg ingijibidoon; prt gejibidood
gijibizh /gijibiN-/ vta remove s.o. with hands, pull
s.o. off; Isg ingijibinaa; prt gejibinaad
gijigijigaaneshiinh na chickadee; pi
gijigijigaaneshiinyag
gijigwaadan vti remove s.t. with something sharp;
Isg ingijigwaadaan; prt gejigwaadang
gijigwaazh /gijigwaaN-/ vta remove s.o. with
something shaip; Isg ingijigwaanaa; prt
gejigwaanaad
gijikonayezigan na hominy; pi gijikonayezlganag
gijinagizhiin vta disembowel s.o., gut s.o.; Isg
ingijinagizhiinaa; prt gejinagizhiinaad
gijipizon ni belt; pi gijipizonan; loc gijipizoning;
dim gijipizonens
gijipizonaabik ni belt buckle; pi
gijipizonaabikoon; loc gijipizonaabikong; dim
gijipizonaabikoons
gijipizonens in fan belt; loc gijipizonensing
gikaa vai be elderly; Isg ingikaa; prt gekaad
gikendan vft'know s.t.; Isg ingikendaan; prt
gekendang
gikendaagozi vat be known; Isgmgikendaagoz;
prt gekendaagozid
gikendaagwad vii be known; prt gekendaagwak
gikendaaso vai be smart, be educated; Isg
ingikendaas; prt gekendaasod
gikenim vta know s.o.; Isg ingikenimaa; prt
gekenirnaad
gikenjige vai know things; Isg ingikenjige: prt
gekenjiged
gikinawaabam vta learn by observation of s.o.; Isg
ingikinawaabamaa; prt gekinawaabamaad
gikinawaabi vai learn by observation; Isg
ingikinawaab; prt gekinawaabid
gikinawaajichige vai mark things; Isg
ingikinawaajichige; prt gekinawaajichiged
gikinawaaji' vta mark s.o.; Isg ingikinawaaji'aa;
prt gekinawaaji'aad
gikinawaaji toon vti2 mark s.t.; Isg
ingikinawaajitoon; prt gekinawaajitood
gikinjigwen vta embrace s.o., hug s.o.; Isg
ingikinjigwenaa; prt gekinjigwenaad
gikinjigwenidiwag /gikinjigwenidi-/ vai they hug
each other; Ipl ingikinjigwenidimin; prt
gekinjigwenidijig
gikinoo'amaw vta teach (s.t.) to s.o.; Isg
ingikinoo'amawaa; prt gekinoo'amawaad
gikinoo'amaadizo vai teach oneself; Isg
ingikinoo'amaadiz; prt gekinoo'amaadizod
gikinoo'amaadii-mazina'igan ni schoolbook; loc
gikinoo'amaadii-mazina'iganing; t/m?
gikinoo'amaa.dii-mazina'igaans
gikinoo'amaadiiwigamig ni school; pi
gikinoo'amaadiiwigamigoon: loc
gikinoo'amaadiiwigamigong; dim
gikinoo'amaadiiwigamigoons
gikinoo'amaagan na student;/)/
gikinoo'amaaganag; dim gikinoo'amaagaans
gikinoo'amaage vai teach; Isg ingikinoo'amaage;
prt gekinoo'amaaged
gikinoo'amaagewikwe na teacher (female); pi
gikinoo'amaagewikweg
gikinoo'amaage win in i na teacher; pi
gikinoo'amaagewininiwag
gikinoo'amaagozi vai be taught, go to school; Isg
ingikinoo'amaagoz; prt gekinoo'amaagozid
gikinoonowagad vii a year passes; prt
gekinoonowagak
gikinoonowin ni year
gikinootaw vta say something after s.o., follow
s.o.'s instructions; Isg ingikinootawaa; prt
geki nootawaad
gikiwe'on ni flag; pi gikiwe'onan; loc
gikiwe'oning; dim gikiwe'onens
gimiwan vii rain; prt gemiwang
gimiwanoowayaan ni raincoat; pi
gimiwanoowayaanan; loc
gimiwanoowayaaning; dim
gi m iwanoowayaane ns
gimoodi vai+o steal (s.t.); 7s^ ingimood,
ingimoodin; prt gemoodid
gimoodim vta steal from s.o.; Isg ingimoodimaa;
prt gemoodimaad
gimoodindiwag /gimoodindi-/ vai they steal from
each other; Ipl ingimoodindimin; prt
gemoodindijig
gimoodishki vai be a thief; /^ ingimoodishk;prr
gemoodishkid
gimoodishkiiwinini na thief, robber; pi
gimoodishkiiwininiwag; dim
gimoodishkiiwininiins
ginagaapi vai laugh, giggle; Isg inginagaap; pn
genagaapid
ginagijiin vta tickle s.o. (at the mid-section); Isg
inginagijiinaa; prt genagijiinaad
gina'amaw vta forbid s.o. to, warn s.o. against
(s.t.); Isg ingina'amawaa; prt gena'amawaad
gina'amaadim /gina'amaadi-/ vai there is a
prohibition, it is forbidden; pn gena'amaading
ginebig na snake; pi ginebigoog; dim ginebigoons
ginebigwayaan na snakeskin; pi
ginebigwayaanag; loc ginebigwayaan ing; dim
ginebigwayaanens
ginigawin vta mix s.o.; Isg inginigawinaa; prt
genigawinaad
ginigawinan vti mix s.t.; Isg inginigawinaan; prt
genigawinang
ginigawinigaade vii be mixed; prt
genigawinigaadeg; aug
ginigawinigaademagad; prt aug
genigawinigaademagak
ginigawinigaazo vai be mixed; prt
genigawinigaazod
ginigawinige vai mix things; Isg inginigawinige;
pn genigawiniged
ginigawisin vii be mixed; prt genigawising

ginigawiwebin—gizhaagamide
56
ginigawiwebin vta mix s.o. by shaking; Isg
inginigawtwebinaa; prt genigawiwebinaad
ginigawiwebinan vti mix s.t. by shaking; Isg
inginigawiwebinaan; prt genigawiwebinang
giniw na golden eagle; pi giniwag; dim giniwens
ginjiba' •eta flee from s.o., run away from s.o.; Isg
inginjiba'aa; prt genjiba'aad
ginjiba'iwe vai flee from people, run away from
people; Isg inginjiba'iwe; prt genjiba'iwed
ginjida' /ginjida'w-/ vta tap s.o. in, pound s.o. in;
Isg inginjida'waa; prt genjida'waad
ginjida'an vti tup s.t. in, pound s.t. in; Isg
inginjida'aan; prt genjida'ang
ginoodaawangaa vii be a long stretch of sand
beach; prt genoodaawangaag; aug
ginoodaawangaamagad; prt aug
genoodaawangaamagak
ginoo* vta make s.o. long; Isg inginoo'aa; prt
genoo'aad
ginoonagad vii be a long boat; prt genoonagak
ginoondawaan HI long lodge; pi ginoondawaanan;
loc ginoondawaaning; dim ginoondawaanens
ginoozhe na northern pike; pi ginoozheg: dim
ginoozhens
ginoozi vai be tall, be long; Isg inginooz; pn
genoozid
ginwaa vii be long; pn genwaag; aug
ginwaamagad; prt aug genwaamagak
ginwaabikad vii be long (as something mineral);
prt genwaabikak
ginwaabikizi vai be long (as somediing mineral);
prt genwaabikizid
ginwaabiigad vii be long (as something string-
like); prt genwaabiigak
ginwaabiigizh /ginwaabiigizhw-/ vta cut s.o. long
(as something string-like); Isg
inginwaabiigizhwaa; prt genwaabiigizhwaad
ginwaabiigizhan vti cut s.t. long (as something
string-like); Isg inginwaabiigizhaan; prt
genwaabiigizhang
ginwaabiigizi vai be long (as something string-
like); pn genwaabiigizid
ginwaako-apabiwin ni couch; pi ginwaako-
apabiwinan; loc ginwaako-apabiwining; dim
ginwaako-apabiwinens
ginwaakozi vaibe tall (of a person), be long (as
something wood or stick-like); Isg
inginwaakoz; prt genwaakozid
ginwaakwad vii be long (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt genwaakwak
ginwaatoon vti2 make s.t. long; Isg inginwaatoon;
prt genwaatood
ginwegad vii be long (as something sheet-like); pn
genwegak
ginwegi' vta make s.o. long (as something sheet-
like); Isg inginwegi'aa; pn genwegi'aad
ginwegitoon vti2 make s.t. long (as something
sheet-like); Isg inginwegitoon; prt
genwegitood
ginwegizi vai be long (as something sheet-like); prt
genwegizid
ginwenzh pc for a long time
ginzhizhawizi vai be a hard worker; Isg
inginzhizhawiz; prt genzhizhawizid
gipagawe vai have thick fur; prt gepagawed
gipagaa vii be thick; pn gepagaag; aug
gipagaamagad; prt aug gepagaamagak
gipagaabikad vii be thick (as something mineral);
pn gepagaabikak
gipagaabikizi vai be thick (as something mineral);
pn gepagaabikizid
gipagaabiigad vii be thick (as something string-
like); prt gepagaabiigak
gipagaabiigizi vai be thick (as something string-
like); pn gepagaabiigizid
gipagaakwadin vii be frozen thick; prt
gepagaakwading
gipagaakwaji vai be frozen thick; prt
gepagaakwajid
gipagikodan vti slice s.t. thick; Isg
ingipagikodaan; prt gepagikodang
gipagikozh /gipagikoN-/ vta slice s.o. thick; Isg
ingipagikonaa; prt gepagikonaad
gipagishin vai lie in a thick layer; pn gepagishing
gipagisin vii lie in a thick layer; prt gepagising
gipagizi vai be thick; prt gepagizid
gipagiigad vii be thick (as something sheet-like);
pttgepagiigak
gipagiigizi vaibe thick (as something sheet-like);
pn gepagiigizid
gishkishenh na female dog; pi gishkishenyag
gisinaa vii be cold (weather); pn gesinaag; aug
gisinaamagad; pn aug gesinaamagak
gitigaadan vti plant s.t.; Isg ingitigaadaan; prt
getigaadang
gitigaade vii be planted; prt getigaadeg; aug
gitigaademagad; pn aug getigaademagak
gitigaan ni garden, field, farm; pi gitigaanan; loc
gitigaaning; dim gitigaanens
gitigaanens ni vegetable; pi gitigaanensan
gitigaazh /gitigaaN-/ via plant s.o.; Isg
ingitigaanaa; pn getigaanaad
gitigaazo vai be planted; pn getigaazod
gitige vai garden, farm, plant; Isg ingitige; prt
getiged
gitigewinini na farmer; pi gitigewininiwag
gitimi vai be lazy; Isg ingitim; pn getimid
gitimishki vai be habitually lazy, be a lazybones;
Isg ingitimishk; prt getimishkid
gitizi vai be older; prt getizid
gizhaabikiz /gizhaabikizw-/ via heat s.o. (as
something mineral); Isg ingizhaabikizwaa; prt
gezhaabikizwaad
gizhaabikizan ftt'heat s.t. (as something mineral);
Isg ingizhaabikizaan; prt gezhaabikizang
gizhaabikizigan ni stove; pi gizhaabikiziganan; loc
gizhaabikiziganing; dim gizhaabikizigaans
gizhaabikizige vai heat things (as something
mineral); Isg ingizhaabikizige; pn
gezhaabikiziged
gizhaadan vti guard s.t., watch over s.t.; Isg
ingizhaadaan; prt gezhaadang
gizhaadige vai guard things, watch over things; Isg
ingizhaadige; prt gezhaadiged
gizhaadigewinini na game warden; pi
gizhaadigewininiwag
gizhaagamide vii be hot (as a liquid); prt
gezhaagamideg; aug gizhaagamidemagad;
prt aug gezhaagamidemagak

57
gizhaagamizan—giziibweweshkaa
gizhaagamizan nn'heal s.t. (as a liquid); hg
ingizhaagamizaan; prt gezhaagamizang
gizhaagamizige vai heat things (as a liquid); hg
ingizhaagamizige; prt gezhaagamiziged
gizhaanimad vii be a hot wind; prt gezhaanimak
gizhaate vii be hot (weather); prt gezhaateg; aug
gizhaatemagad; prt aug gezhaatemagak
gizhaawaso vai protect one's young; hg
ingizhaawas; prt gezhaawasod
gizhaawenim vta be jealous of s.o.; hg
ingizhaawenimaa; prt gezhaawenimaad
gizhaawenjige vai be jealous of things; hg
ingizhaawenjige; prt gezhaawenjiged
gizhaazh /gizhaaN-/ vta guard s.o., watch over
s.o.; hg ingizhaanaa; pn gezhaanaad
gizhe-manidoo no, God (especially in Christian
usage)
gizhewaadizi vai be kind, be generous; hg
ingizhewaadiz; pn gezhewaadizid
gizhibaabide vii spin, whirl, revolve; prt
gezhibaabideg; aug gizhibaabidemagad; prt
aug gezhibaabidemagak
gizhibaabise vai spin, whirl, revolve; prt
gezhibaabised
gizhibaabise vii spin, whirl, revolve; prt
gezhibaabiseg; aug gizhibaabisemagad; prt
aug gezhibaabisemagak
gizhibaabizo vai spin, whirl, revolve; pn
gezhibaabizod
gizhibaayaanimad vii be a whirlwind; prt
gezhibaayaanimak
gizhibaayaasijigan in rotary fan; pi
gizhibaayaasijiganan; loc
gizhibaayaasijiganing; dim
gizhibaayaasijigaans
gizhide vii be hot; prt gezhideg; aug
gizhidemagad; pn aug gezhidemagak
gizhizo vai be hot, have a fever; hg ingizhiz; prt
gezhizod
gizhiibatoo vai run fast; hg ingizhiibatoo; pn
gezhiibatood
gizhiibazhe vai have itchy skin; hg ingizhiibazhe;
prt gezhiibazhed
gizhiibide vii move fast, speed fast, fly fast; pn
gezhiibideg; aug gizhiibidemagad; pn aug
gezhiibidemagak
gizhiibizi vai itch; hg ingizhiibiz;prrgezhiibizid
gizhiibizo vai move fast, speed fast, drive fast, fly
fast; hg ingizhiibiz; prt gezhiibizod
gizhiidaabii'iwe ; u; drive fast; hg
ingizhiidaabii'iwe; prt gezhiidaabiiMwed
gizhiigaa vii drip fast, leak fast; prt gezhiigaag; aug
gizhiigaamagad; pn aug gezhiigaamagak
gizhiigi vai grow fast; hg ingizhiig; pn gezhiigid
gizhiigin vii grow fast; pn gezhiiging
gizhiijiwan vii flow fast; prt gezhiijiwang
gizhiikaa vai go fast; hg ingizhiikaa; pn
gezhiikaad
gizhiikaabatoo vai run fast; hg ingizhiikaabatoo;
pn gezhiikaabatood
gizhiikaakwazhiwe vai'paddle fast; hg
ingizhiikaakwazhiwe; pn
gezhiikaakwazhiwed
gizhiise vai fly fast; hg ingizhiise; prt gezhiised
gizhiise vii fly fast; prt gezhiiseg; aug
gizhiisemagad; prt aug gezhiisemagak
gizhiiwe vai speak loud; hg ingizhiiwe; pn
gezhiiwed
gizhiiyaanimad vii wind blows fast; pn
gezhiiyaanimak
gizizan vti heat s.t.; hg ingizizaan; pn gezizang
giziibiiga' /giziibiiga'w-/ vta wash s.o. using
something; hg ingiziibiiga'waa; pn
geziibiiga'waad
giziibiiga'an vti wash s.t. (clothes); hg
ingiziibiiga'aan; prt geziibiiga'ang
giziibiiga'igan ni soap; pi giziibiiga'iganan; he
giziibiiga'iganing; dim giziibiiga'igaans
giziibiiga'ige vai wash things, wash clothes; hg
ingiziibiiga'ige; pn geziibiiga'iged
giziibiiga'ige-makak ni washtub, washing
machine; pi giziibiiga'ige-makakoon; he
giziibiiga'ige-makakong; dim giziibiiga'ige-
makakoons
giziibiiga'igewigamig ni laundromat; pi
giziibiiga'igewigamigoon; loc
giziibiiga'igewigamigong; dim
giziibiiga'igewigamigoons
giziibiigazhe vai take a bath, wash up; hg
ingiziibiigazhe; pn geziibiigazhed
giziibiigazhewaaboo ni rubbing alcohol
giziibiigin vta wash s.o. by hand; hg
ingiziibiiginaa; pn geziibiiginaad
giziibiiginakokwe vai wash pail, wash kettle; hg
ingiziibiiginakokwe; prt geziibiiginakokwed
giziibiiginan vti wash s.t. by hand; hg
ingiziibiiginaan; pn geziibiiginang
giziibiiginaagane vai wash dishes; hg
ingiziibiiginaagane; pn geziibiiginaaganed
giziibiiginaaganewaaboo ni liquid detergent
giziibiigindibe vai wash one's hair; hg
ingiziibiigindibe; prt geziibiigindibed
giziibiigindiben vta wash s.o.'s hair; hg
ingiziibiigindibenaa; prt geziibiigindibenaad
giziibiiginigaade vii be washed; prt
geziibiiginigaadeg; aug
giziibiiginigaademagad; pn aug
geziibiiginigaademagak
giziibiigininjii vai wash one's hands; hg
ingiziibiigininjii; pn geziibiigininjiid
giziibiigisaginige DO! wash floors; hg
ingiziibiigisaginige; pn geziibiigisaginiged
giziibiigisaginige-giizhigad viibe Saturday; £rr
geziibiigisaginige-giizhigak
giziibiigii vai wash; hg ingiziibiigii; prt geziibiigiid
giziibiigiingwe vai wash one's face; hg
ingiziibiigiingwe; prt geziibiigiingwed
giziibiigiingwewinaagan ni wash basin; loc
giziibiigiingwewinaaganing; dim
giziibiigiingwewinaagaans
giziibwewe vai squeak, creak; pn t«.ziibwewed
giziibwewe vii squeak, creak; pn geziibweweg;
aug giziibwewemagad; pn aug
geziibwewemagak
giziibweweshkaa vai squeak in motion, creak; prt
geziibweweshkaad
giziibweweshkaa vii squeak in motion, creak; pn
geziibweweshkaag; aug

giziibweweyaashi—giinetawind
58
giziibweweshkaamagad; prt aug
geziibweweshkaamagak
giziibweweyaashi vai creak in the wind; prt
geziibweweyaashid
giziibweweyaasin vii creak in the wind; prt
geziibweweyaasing
giziidoone'on ni napkin; pi giziidoone'onan; he
giziidoone'oning; dim giziidoone'onens
giziin vta wipe s.o. by hand; Isg ingiziinaa; prt
geziinaad
giziinan vti wipe s.t. by hand; Isg ingiziinaan; prt
geziinang
giziindime'o vai wipe oneself after defecating; Isg
ingiziindime'; prt geziindime'od
giziindime'on in toilet tissue; pi giziindime'onan;
loc giziindime'oning; dim giziindime'onens
giziingwe'o vai wipe one's face with something;
Isg ingiziingwe"; prt geziingwe'od
giziingwe'on ni towel; pi giziingwe'onan; loc
giziingwe'oning; dim giziingwe'onens
giziininjii'on ni napkin; pi giziininjii'onan; loc
giziininjii'oning; dim giziininjii'onens
giziiyaabide'o vai brush one's teeth; Isg
ingiziiyaabide'; pn geziiyaabide'od
giziiyaabide'odizo vai brush one's teeth; Isg
ingiziiyaabide'odiz; prt geziiyaabide'odizod
giziiyaabide'on ni toothbrush; pi
giziiyaabide'onan; loc giziiyaabide'oning; dim
giziiyaabide'onens
giziiyaabika'igan ni dish towel; pi
giziiyaabika'iganan; loc giziiyaabika'iganing;
dim giziiyaabika'igaans
gii- pvl past verb prefix
giichibabagiwayaane vai take off one's shirt; Isg
ingiichibabagiwayaane; prt
gaachibabagiwayaaned
giichibabiinzikawaagane vai take off one's coat;
Isg ingiichibabiinzikawaagane; pn
gaachibabiinzikawaaganed
giichigiboodiyegwaazone vai take off one's pants;
Isg ingiichigiboodiyegwaazone; prt
gaachigiboodiyegwaazoned
giichigobidoon vti2 pull s.t. off; Isg
ingiichigobidoon; prt gaachigobidood
giichigobizh /giichigobiN-/ vta pull s.t. off; Isg
ingiichigobinaa; prt gaachigobinaad
giichigon vta take s.o. off, extricate s.o.; Isg
ingiichigonaa; prt gaachigonaad
giichrgonan MI'take s.t. off, extricate s.t.; Isg
ingiichigonaan; prt gaachigonang
giichigwam vta pull s.o. off with teeth; Isg
ingiichigwamaa; prt gaachigwamaad
giichigwandan vti pull s.t. off with teeth; Isg
ingiichigwandaan; prt gaachigwandang
giichiminjikaawane vai take off one's mittens; Isg
ingiichiminjikaawane; pn
gaachiminjikaawaned
giichiwakwaane vai take off one's hat; Isg
ingiichiwakwaane; prt gaachiwakwaaned
giige vai heal up; Isg ingiige; prt gaaged
giigido vai speak; Isg ingiigid; prt gaagidod
giigidowin ni speech, telephone; pi giigidowinan;
loc giigidowining; dim giigidowinens
giigidoo-biiwaabikoons ni telephone, telephone
wire; pi giigidoo-biiwaabikoonsan; loc
giigidoo-biiwaabikoonsing
giigidoowinini na councillor, representative; pi
giigidoowininiwag
giigoonh na fish; pi giigoonyag
giigoonhwaaboo ni fish soup; loc
giigoonhwaaboong
giigoonyike vai fish; Isg ingiigoonyike; prt
gaagoonyiked
giigoonyikewinini na fisherman; pi
giigoonyikewininiwag
giigoozens na minnow; pi giigoozensag
gii' vta get away from s.o., escape from s.o.; Isg
ingii'aa; prt gaa'aad
gii'igoshimo vai fast for a vision; Isg ingiPigoshim;
prt gaa'igoshimod
gii'iwe vai escape from people; Isg ingii'iwe; pn
gaa'iwed
giikaji vai feel cold; Isg ingiikaj; pn gaakajid
giikanaamode vii be smoky inside; pn
gaakanaamodeg; aug giikanaamodemagad;
pn aug gaakanaamodemagak
giikanaamozigan na bacon
giikaam vta argue with s.o., quarrel with s.o.; Isg
ingiikaamaa; pn gaakaamaad
giikaandiwag /giikaandi-/ vai they argue with each
other, they quarrel with each other; Ipl
ingiikaandimin; pn gaakaandijig
giikimanizi vai feel numb, tingle; Isg ingiikimaniz;
pn gaakimanizid
giikiibingwashi vaibt sleepy; Isg ingiikiibingwash;
prt gaakiibingwashid
giimaabam vta peek at s.o., spy on s.o.; Isg
ingiimaabamaa; pn gaamaabamaad
giimaabi vai peek, spy; Isg ingiimaab; pn
gaamaabid
giimaadoode vai creep away; 7s^ingiimaadoode;
pn gaamaadooded
giimitaw vta eavesdrop on s.o.; Isg ingiimitawaa:
prt gaamitawaad
giimii vai flee, escape; Isg ingiimii; prt gaamiid
giimoodad vii be secret; prt gaamoodak
giimoodanjige vai eat things secretly; Isg
ingiimoodanjige; prt gaamoodanjiged
giimoodaapi vai laugh secretly; Isg ingiimoodaap;
prt gaamoodaapid
giimooj pc secretly
giimoozaabi vai peek; Isg ingiimoozaab; prt
gaamoozaabid
giimoozikaw vta sneak up on s.o.; Isg
ingiimoozikawaa; prt gaamoozikawaad
giin pr you second person singular personal pronoun
giinawaa pr you second person plural personal
pronoun
giinawind pr we first person inclusive personal
pronoun, us first person inclusive personal pronoun
giinaa vii be sharp; prt gaanaag; aug giinaamagad;
pn aug gaanaamagak
giinetapr only you second person singular personal
pronoun
giinetawaapr only you second personal plural
personal pronoun
giinetawind pr only us first person inclusive personal
pronoun

59
giiniboodoon—giiwashkwe
giiniboodoon vti2 file s.t. sharp; hg
ingiiniboodoon; pn gaaniboodood
giiniboozh /giinibooN-/ vta file s.o. sharp; hg
ingiiniboonaa; pn gaaniboonaad
giinitam pr your turn second person singular personal
pronoun
giinitamawaa pr your turn second person plural
personal pronoun
giinitamawind pr our turn first person inclusive
personal pronoun
giinizi vai be sharp; prt gaanizid
giishkada'igan ni cleaver, chopping tool; pi
giishkada'iganan; loc giishkada'iganing; dim
giishkada'igaans
giishkadinaa vii be a cliff, be a steep bank; pn
gaashkadinaag; aug giishkadinaamagad; prt
aug gaashkadinaamagak
giishka* /giishka'w-/ vta chop s.o. off; Isg
ingiishka'waa; prt gaashka'waad
giishka'an vtt chop s.t. off; hg ingiishka'aan; prt
gaashka'ang
giishka'aakwe vai cut timber; Isg
ingiishka'aakwe; prt gaashka'aakwed
giishka'aakwewigamig ni lumber camp; pi
giishka'aakwewigamigoon; loc
giishka'aakwewigamigong; dim
giishka'aakwewigamigoons
giishka'aakwewinini na lumberjack, logger;/)/
giishka'aakwewininiwag
giishkam vta bite through s.o. cleanly; Isg
ingiishkamaa; prt gaashkamaad
giishkanakad ni stump; pi giishkanakadoon; loc
giishkanakadong; dim giishkanakadoons
giishkandan vti bite through s.t. cleanly; Isg
ingiishkandaan; pn gaashkandang
giishkashkimod ni cedar bark bag; pi
giishkashkimodan; loc giishkashkimodaang;
dim giishkashkimodens
giishkaabaagwe vai be thirsty; Isg
ingiishkaabaagwe; pn gaashkaabaagwed
giishkaabikaa vii be a steep rock face; prt
gaashkaabikaag; aug giishkaabikaamagad; prt
aug gaashkaabikaamagak
giishkaamikaa vii there is a drop-off; pn
gaashkaamikaag; aug giishkaamikaamagad;
pn aug gaashkaamikaamagak
giishkaazhibikaa vii there is a rock cliff; prt
gaashkaazhibikaag; aug
giishkaazhibikaamagad; pn aug
gaashkaazhibikaamagak
giishkibidoon vti2 tear s.t. off; Isg
ingiishkibidoon; prt gaashkibidood
giishkibijigaade vii be torn off; pn
gaashkibijigaadeg; aug
giishkibijigaademagad; pn aug
gaashkibijigaademagak
giishkibijigaazo vai be torn off; prt
gaashkibijigaaxod
giishkibijige vai tear things off; Isg ingiishkibijige;
pn gaashkibijiged
giishkibizh /giishkibiN-/ vta tear s.o. off; Isg
ingiishkibinaa; pn gaashkibinaad
giishkiboodoon vti2 saw s.t. off; Isg
ingiishkiboodoon; prt gaashkiboodood
giishkiboojigan ni crosscut saw; pi
giishkiboojiganan; loc giishkiboojiganing; dim
giishkiboojigaans
giishkiboojige vai saw things off; Isg
ingiishkiboojige; pn gaashkiboojiged
giishkiboozh /giishkibooN-/ vta saw s.o. off; Isg
ingiishkiboonaa; prt gaashkiboonaad
giishkiga' /giishkiga'w-/ vta chop s.o. off; Isg
ingiishkiga'waa; prt gaashkiga'waad
giishkiga'an vti chop s.t. off; Isg ingiishkiga'aan;
pn gaashkiga'ang
giishkiganzhiikonidizo vai cut one's own nails; Isg
ingiishkiganzhiikonidiz; prt
gaashkiganzhiikonidizod
giishkijiin vta hug s.o., embrace s.o.; Isg
ingiishkijiinaa; pn gaashkijiinaad
giishkijiinidiwag /giishkijiinidi-/ vai they hug each
other, they embrace each other; Ipl
ingiishkijiinidimin; pn gaashkijiinidijig
giishkijiiwagooday ni skirt; pi
giishkijiiwagoodayan; dim
giishkijiiwagoodayens
giishkikaa vai tear, rip; pn gaashkikaad
giishkikaa vii tear, rip; pn gaashkikaag; aug
giishkikaamagad; pn aug gaashkikaamagak
giishkikozhiwe vai cut hair; Isg ingiishkikozhiwe;
pn gaashkikozhiwed
giishkikozhiwewikwe na barber (female); pi
giishkikozhiwewikweg
giishkikozhiwewinini na barber; pi
giishkikozhiwewininiwag
giishkishin vai get cut falling; Isg ingiishkishin; pn
gaashkishing
giishkizh /giishkizhw-/ vta cut s.o. off, cut through
s.o.; Isg ingiishkizhwaa; pn gaashkizhwaad
giishkizhan vti cut s.t. off, cut through s.o.; Isg
ingiishkizhaan; pn gaashkizhang
giishkizhigan ni scythe; pi giishkizhiganan; loc
giishkizhiganing; dim giishkizhigaans
giishkizhige vai cut things off, cut things; Isg
ingiishkizhige; pn gaashkizhiged
giishkizhodizo vai cut oneself; Isg
ingiishkizhodiz; pn gaashkizhodizod
giishkowe vai stop crying, stop making vocal
noise; Isg ingiishkowe; pn gaashkowed
giishpinpc if
giitagoode vai take off one's dress; Isg
ingiitagoode; pn gaatagooded
giitazhigane vai take off one's socks; Isg
rngiitazhigane: pn gaatazhiganed
giiwanaadingwaam vai have a bad dream, have a
nightmare; Isg ingiiwanaadingwaam; pn
gaawanaadingwaang
giiwanaadizi vai be crazy, be insane; Isg
ingiiwanaadiz; prt gaawanaadizid
giiwanaadiziiwigamig ni mental hospital; pi
giiwanaadiziiwigamigoon; loc
giiwanaadiziiwigamigong
giiwanim vta lie to s.o., deceive s.o. in speech; Isg
ingiiwanimaa; prt gaawanimaad
giiwanimo yaz'lie, be deceptive in speech; Isg
ingiiwanim; prt gaawanimod
giiwashkwe vai be dizzy; Isg ingiiwashkwe; pn
gaawashkwed

giiwashkwebazh—giizhi'
60
giiwashkwebazh /giiwashkwebaN-/ vta make s.o.
drunk; Isg ingiiwashkwebanaa; pn
gaawashkwebanaad
giiwashkwebii vai be drunk; hg ingiiwashkwebii;
pn gaawashkwebiid
giiwashkweganaam vta knock s.o. senseless; Isg
ingiiwashkweganaamaa; pn
gaawashkweganaamaad
giiwashkwe'ogo vai be seasick; hg
ingiiwashkwe'og; prt gaawashkwe'ogod
giiwashkweshin vaibe knocked senseless in
impact; hg ingiiwashkweshin; prt
gaawashkweshing
giiwashkweshkaw- vta make s.o. dizzy (especially
of a substance) in inverse forms: hg
ingiiwashkweshkaagon; prt
gaawashkweshkaagod
giiwashkweyaabandam vai2 be dizzy, feel
unsteady; hg ingiiwashkweyaabandam; prt
gaawashkweyaabandang
giiwashkweyendam vai2 be confused; hg
ingiiwashkweyendam; pn
gaawashkweyendang
giiwe vai go home, return; hg ingiiwe; prt gaawed
giiwebatoo vai run back, run home; hg
ingiiwebatoo; prt gaawebatood
giiwe-biboon vii be after mid-winter, be late
winter; prt gaawe-biboong
giiwedaabii'iwe vai drive home; hg
ingiiwedaabii'iwe; pn gaawedaabii'iwed
giiwedin ni north wind, north; loc giiwedinong
giiwegidaazo vai go home mad; hg
ingiiwegidaaz; prt gaawegidaazod
giiwe'o vai go home by boat; hg ingiiwe'; prt
gaawe'od
giiwekii vai return to one's own country; Isg
ingiiwekii; prt gaawekiid
giiwenamaw vta give presents to s.o. in exchange;
hg ingiiwenamawaa; prt gaawenamawaad
giiwenaazha' /giiwenaazha'w-/ vta tell s.o. to go
home; hg ingiiwenaazha'waa; prt
gaawenaazha'waad
giiwenh pc so the story goes, so it is said
giiwenige vai give presents to relatives of someone
deceased in completion of mourning on anni-
versary of the death; hg ingiiwenige; prt
gaaweniged
giiwe-niibin rabe after mid-summer, late summer;
prt gaawe-niibing
giiwewidaw vta take (s.t.) home for s.o., carry
(s.t.) home for s.o.; hg ingiiwewidawaa; prt
gaawewidawaad
giiwewidoon vti2 take s.t. home, carry s.t. home;
hg ingiiwewidoon; prt gaawewidood
giiwewizh /giiwewiN-/ vta take s.o. home, carry
s.o. home; hg ingiiwewinaa; prt gaawewinaad
giiweyendam vai2 think about returning, think
about going home again; hg ingiiweyendam;
prt gaaweyendang
giiwitaa-ayi'ii pc all around it; also giiwitaayi'ii
giiwitaabatoo vai run around something; hg
ingiiwitaabatoo; prt gaawitaabatood
giiwitaabatwaadan vti run around s.t.; hg
ingiiwitaabatwaadaan; prt
gaawitaabatwaadang
giiwitaashim vta lay s.o. down around; hg
ingiiwitaashimaa; pn gaawitaashimaad
giiwitaashkan vti walk around s.t.; hg
ingiiwitaashkaan; prt gaawitaashkang
giiwitaashkaw vta walk around s.o.; hg
ingiiwitaashkawaa; prt gaawitaashkawaad
giiwitaashkaa vai go around, encircle; hg
ingiiwitaashkaa; prt gaawitaashkaad
giiwitaashkode pc around the fire
giiwitaasidoon vti2 lay s.t. down around; hg
ingiiwitaasidoon; prt gaawitaasidood
giiwitaawose vai walk around something; hg
ingiiwitaawose; prt gaawitaawosed; also
giiwitaa'ose
giiwitaayaazhagaame vai walk around the edge,
walk around a lake; hg
ingiiwitaayaazhagaame; prt
gaawitaayaazhagaamed
giiwizi vai be orphaned; hg ingiiwiz; prt gaawizid
giiwose vai hunt; hg ingiiwose; prt gaawosed;
also giiyose
giiwosewasim na hunting dog; pi
giiwosewasimoog; also giiyosewasim
giiwosewinini na hunter; pi giiwosewininiwag;
also giiyosewinini
giiwoon na heart suite card; pi giiwoonag; also
giiyoon
giizhakidoon vti2 finish setting s.t. up; hg
ingiizhakidoon; pn gaazhakidood
giizhakizh /giizhakiN-/ vta finish setting s.o. up;
hg ingiizhakinaa; pn gezhakinaad
giizhaa pc beforehand, in advance
giizhaajimo vai tell all; hg ingiizhaajim; prt
gaazhaajimod
giizhaande vii be fully ripe; pn gaazhaandeg; aug
giizhaandemagad; prt aug gaazhaandemagak
giizhaanzo vai be fully ripe; prt gaazhaanzod
giizhendam vai2 have one's mind made up;
resolve; hg ingiizhendam; prt gaazhendang
giizhi- pv4 finish, complete
giizhichigaade vii be finished; prt
gaazhichigaadeg; aug giizhichigaademagad;
pn aug gaazhichigaademagak
giizhichigaazo vai be finished; pn
gaazhichigaazod
giizhide vii be done cooking; prt gaazhideg; aug
giizhidemagad; prt aug gaazhidemagak
giizhig ni sky, heaven, day; loc giizhigong
giizhigad vii be day; pn gaazhigak
giizhigamide vii finish boiling; pn
gaazhigamideg; aug giizhigamidemagad; pn
aug gaazhigamidemagak
giizhigamizige vai finish boiling things; hg
ingiizhigamizige; pn gaazhigamiziged
giizhigaate vii there is moonlight; pn
gaazhigaateg; aug giizhigaatemagad; pn aug
gaazhigaatemagak
giizhige vai finish building a dwelling; hg
ingiizhige; prt gaazhiged
giizhigi vai be ripe, be full grown; hg ingiizhig; pn
gaazhigid
giizhigin vii be ripe, be full grown; prt gaazhiging
giizhi' vta finish s.o., finish making s.o.; hg
ingiizhi'aa; prt gaazhi'aad

61
giizhik—gotaajishki
giizhik na white cedar; pi giizhikag; loc giizhiking;
dim giizhikens
giizhikaandag na cedar bough; pi
giizhikaandagoog; loc giizhikaandagong; dim
giizhikaandagoons
giizhitoon vti2 finish s.t., finish making s.t.; hg
ingiizhitoon; prt gaazhitood
giizhiikan vti finish with s.t.; hg ingiizhiikaan; prt
gaazhiikang
giizhiikaw via finish with s.o.; hg ingiizhiikawaa:
prt gaazhiikawaad
gilzhiitaa vai finish a task, finish work; Isg
ingiizhiitaa; prt gaazhiitaad
giizhoo'o vai dress warmly; hg ingiizhoo*; prt
gaazhoo'od
giizhoopizo vai be wrapped up warm; Isg
ingiizhoopiz; prt gaazhoopizod
giizhoopizon na scarf; pi giizhoopizonag; loc
giizhoopizoning; dim giizhoopizonens
giizhooshin vai lie in warmth; Isg ingiizhooshin;
prt gaazhooshing
giizhootawage'o vai wear earmuffs; hg
ingiizhootawage*; prt gaazhootawage'od
giizhootawage'on na earmuff; pi
giizhootawage'onag; dim
giizhootawage'onens
giizhoote vii be hot inside; prt gaazhooteg; aug
giizhootemagad; prt aug gaazhootemagak
giizikan vti take s.t. off the body (e.g., clothes); Isg
ingiizikaan; pn gaazikang
giizikaw vta take s.o. off the body (e.g., clothes);
Isg ingiizikawaa; prt gaazikawaad
giizikonaye vai undress, take off one's clothes; Isg
ingiizikonaye; prt gaazikonayed
giizikonaye* vta undress s.o.; Isg ingiizikonaye'aa;
prt gaazikonaye'aad
giizis na sun, moon, month; pi giizisoog; loc
giizisong; dim giizisoons
giizisoo-mazina'igan ni calendar; pi giizisoo-
mazina'iganari; loc giizisoo-mazina'iganing;
dim giizisoo-miazina'igaans
giiziz /giizizw-/ vta finish cooking s.o.; Isg
ingiizizwaa; prt gaazizwaad
giizizamaw vta cook (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
ingiizizamawaia; prt gaazizamawaad
giizizan vti finish cooking s.t.; hg ingiizizaan; pn
gaazizang
giizizekwe vai cook; Isg ingiizizekwe; prt
gaazizekwed
giizizo vai be done cooking; prt gaazizod; also
giizhizo
go pc emphatic word; also igo
goda pc emphatic word
god am vta take a taste of s.t.; Isg ingodamaa; prt
gwedamaad
godandan ^rz take a taste of s.o.; /v^ingodandaan:
prt gwedandarig
godigoshin vai fall and be injured; Isg
ingodigoshin; prt gwedigoshing
godin vta test s.o. with hand; Isg ingodinaa; prt
gwedinaad
godinan vti test s.t. with hand; hg ingodinaan; pn
gwedinang
godotaagan ni bell; pi godotaaganan; loc
gototaaganing; dim gototaagaans
goji- pv4 try, attempt
gojichige vai try things; hg ingojichige; prt
gwejichiged
goji'ewizi vai try, make an effort; Isg ingoji'ewiz;
prt gweji'ewizid
gojimaam vta take a smell of s.o.; hg
ingojimaamaa; prt gwejimaamaad
gojimaandan vft take a smell of s.t.; hg
ingojimaandaan; prt gwejimaandang
goji-nagamo vai practice singing; Isg \ngo\\-
nagam; prt gweji-nagamod
gojipidan vti take a taste of s.t., check s.t. by
tasting; hg ingojipidaan; prt gwejipidang
gojipijige vai taste things; hg ingojipijige; prt
gwejipijiged
gojipozh /gojipw-/ vta take a taste of s.o., check
s.o. by tasting; hg ingojipwaa; pn gwejipwaad
gomaapc some amount, to a middling degree
gomaapii pc for some time, some distance
gondan vti swallow s.t.; hg ingondaan; prt
gwendang
gondaabiigin vta put s.o. in water, dip s.o.; hg
ingondaabiiginaa; pn gwendaabiiginaad
gondaabiiginan vti put s.t. in water, dip s.t.; Isg
ingondaabiiginaan; prt gwendaabiiginang
gonzaabii vii sink in water; prt gwenzaabiig; aug
gonzaabiimagad; prt aug gwenzaabiimagak
gonzaabiishkoojigan ni sinker (fishing tackle); pi
gonzaabiishkoojiganan; loc
gonzaabiishkoojigan ing; dim
gonzaabiishkoojigaans
gonzhi /gonN-/ vta swallow s.o.; hg ingonaa; prt
gwenaad
gopibatoo vai run inland; hg ingopibatoo; prt
gwepibatood
gopimine vai take wild rice inland; hg
ingopimine; pn gwepimined
gopiwidoon vti2 take s.t. inland, carry s.t. inland;
hg ingopiwidoon; pn gwepiwidood
gopiwizh /gopiwiN-/ vta take s.o. inland, carry s.o.
inland; hg ingopiwinaa; prt gwepiwinaad
gopii vai go away from the water, go inland; hg
ingopii; prt gwepiid
gosha pc emphatic panicle
goshi /goS-/ vta fear s.o.; hg ingosaa; pn gwesaad
goshko* vta surprise s.o.; Isg ingoshko'aa; pn
gweshko'aad
goshkokaa vai be surprised, be startled; Isg
ingoshkokaa; prt gweshkokaad
goshkom vta surprise s.o. verbally; Isg
ingoshkomaa; prt gweshkomaad
goshkozi vai wake up, be awake; hg ingoshkoz;
prt gweshkozid
goshkwaawaadabi vai sit quietly, remain tran-
quilly in place; hg ingoshkwaawaadab; prt
gweshkwaawaadabid
goshkwaawaadizi vaibe still, be quiet; hg
ingoshkwaawaadiz; pn gweshkwaawaadizid
gotan vtibe afraid of s.t., fear s.t.; hg ingotaan;
pn gwetang
gotaaji vai be afraid, have fear; 7sjpingotaaj;prr
gwetaajid
gotaajishki vai be timid; 7^ingotaajishk;prr
gwetaajishkid

gotaamigoz i—gwayakwaakwad
62
gotaamigozi vai be a good worker, be a good
provider; Isg ingotaamigoz; pn
gwetaamigozid
gotigobide vii roll over, go out of place; pn
gwetigobideg; aug gotigobidemagad; prt aug
gwetigobidemagak
gotigobidoon vti2 roll s.t. over, tip s.t.; Isg
ingotigobidoon; pn gwetigobidood
gotigobizh /gotigobiN-/ vta roll s.o. over, tip s.o.;
Isg ingotigobinaa; prt gwetigobinaad
gotigobizo vai'roll over, go out of place; Isg
ingotigobiz; prt gwetigobizod
gozi vai move one's residence; Isg ingoz; prt
gwezid
gozigwan vii be heavy; prt gwezigwang
gozigwani vaibe heavy; Isg ingozigwan;prt
gwezigwanid
gozigwaakomin na Juneberry; pi
gozigwaakominag
gozigwaakominagaawanzh na Juneberry bush; pi
gozigwaakominagaawanzhiig; loc
gozigwaakominagaawanzhiing; dim
gozigwaakominagaawanzhiins
gozikan vii test s.t. with foot or body, try on s.t.
(e.g., clothes); Isg ingozikaan; prt gwezikang
gozikaw vta test s.o. with foot or body, try on s.o.
(e.g., clothes); Isg ingozikawaa; prt
gwezikawaad
googa'am vai2 jump out of the water as a fish; prt
gwaaga'ang
googii vai dive; Isg ingoogii; prrgwaagiid
gookooko'oo na owl; pi gookooko'oog; dim
gookooko'oons
gookoosh na pig, pork; pi gookooshag; dim
gookooshens
gookooshi-bimide ni lard
gookooshi-wiiyaas HI pork; loc gookooshi-
wiiyaasing
goon na snow; loc gooning; dim goonens
goonikaa vii be much snow; pn gwaanikaag; aug
goonikaamagad; prt aug gwaanikaamagak
goopadendan vti consider s.t. worthless; Isg
ingoopadendaan; prt gwaapadendang
goopadenim vta consider s.o. worthless; Isg
ingoopadenimaa; pn gwaapadenimaad
goopadizi vai be worthless, be useless; Isg
ingoopadiz; prt gwaapadizid
goopaji' vta mistreat s.o., ruin s.o.; Isg
ingoopaji'aa; prt gwaapaji'aad
goopajitoon vti2 mistreat s.t., ruin s.t.; Isg
ingoopajitoon; pn gwaapajitood
gwanabishkan vti tip s.t. with foot or body; Isg
ingwanabishkaan; pn gwenabishkang
gwanabishkaa vai capsize, tip; Isg
ingwanabishkaa; prt gwenabishkaad
gwayak pc straight, right, correct
gwayakobidoon vti2 pull s.t. straight, tear s.t.
straight; Isg ingwayakobidoon; pn
gweyakobidood
gwayako-bimaadizi vai live a proper life; Isg
ingwayako-bimaadiz; prt gweyako-
bimaadizid
gwayakobizh /gwayakobiN-/ vta pull s.o. straight,
tear s.o. straight; Isg ingwayakobinaa; prt
gweyakobidood
gwayakobii'an vti write s.t. correctly; Isg
ingwayakobii'aan; pn gweyakobii'ang
gwayakobii'ige vai write correctly; Isg
ingwayakobii'ige; pn gweyakobii'iged
gwayakoboodoon vti2 saw s.t. straight; Isg
ingwayakoboodoon; pn gweyakoboodood
gwayakoboozh /gwayakobooN-/ vta saw s.o.
straight; Isg ingwayakoboonaa; pn
gweyakoboonaad
gwayakochige vai make things right, do things
right; Isg ingwayakochige; pn gweyakochiged
gwayakogaabawi vai stand straight, have good
posture; Isg ingwayakogaabaw; prt
gweyakogaabawid
gwayakogi vai grow straight; Isg ingwayakog; prt
gweyakogid
gwayakogin vii grow straight; prt gweyakoging
gwayakokweni vai hold one's head straight; Isg
ingwayakokwen; pn gweyakokwenid
gwayakoshim vta lay s.o. straight; Isg
ingwayakoshimaa; prt gweyakoshimaad
gwayakoshin vai lie straight, lie correctly; Isg
ingwayakoshin; pn gweyakoshing
gwayakoshkaa vai go straight, go the right way;
Isg ingwayakoshkaa; pn gweyakoshkaad
gwayakosidoon vti2 lay s.t. straight; Isg
ingwayakosidoon; pn gweyakosidood
gwayakosin vii lie straight, lie correctly; prt
gweyakosing
gwayakotam vai2 hear the right thing, find out the
truth; Isg ingwayakotam; prt gweyakotang
gwayakowe vai speak correctly; Isg
ingwayakowe; prt gweyakowed
gwayakozh /gwayakozhw-/ vta cut s.o. straight;
Isg ingwayakozhwaa; pn gweyakozhwaad
gwayakozhan vti cut s.t. straight; Isg
ingwayakozhaan; pn gweyakozhang
gwayako-zhooniyaa na cash, ready money
gwayakozi vai be straight; pn gweyakozid
gwayakwakamigaa vii be level ground; pn
gweyakwakamigaag; aug
gwayakwakamigaamagad; pn aug
gweyakwakamigaamagak
gwayakwaa vii be straight, be correct; prt
gweyakwaag; aug gwayakwaamagad; prt aug
gweyakwaamagak
gwayakwaabidoo'an an'thread s.t. correctly, bead
s.t. correctly (on a loom); Isg
ingwayakwaabidoo'aan; pn
gweyakwaabidoo'ang
gwayakwaabidoo'ige vai bead things correctly (on
a loom); 7s£ ingwayakwaabidoo'ige; prt
gweyakwaabidoo'iged
gwayakwaabikad vii be straight (as something
mineral); prt gweyakwaabikak
gwayakwaabikizi vai be straight (as something
mineral); prt gweyakwaabikizid
gwayakwaabiigad vii be straight (as something
string-like); prt gweyakwaabiigak
gwayakwaabiigizi vai be straight (as somediing
string-like); prt gweyakwaabiigizid
gwayakwaakozi vai be straight (as something
stick- or wood-like); pn gweyakwaakozid
gwayakwaakwad vii be straight (as something
stick- or wood-like); pn gweyakwaakwak

63
gwayakwendam—hay'
gwayakwendam vai2 think correctly, be certain;
Isg ingwayakwendam; pn gweyakwendang
gwayakwendan vti consider s.t. right; Isg
ingwayakwendaan; pn gweyakwendang
gwayakwendaagozi vai be considered right; Isg
ingwayakwendaagoz; prt
gweyakwendaagozid
gwayakwendaagwad mi be considered right; prt
gweyakwendaagwak
gwaaba' vta scoop s.o. up; Jji'ingwaaba'aaj^rr
gwayaaba'aad
gwaaba'amaw vta scoop (s.t.) up for s.o., get
water for s.o.; Isg ingwaaba'amawaa; prt
gwayaaba'amawaad
gwaaba'an vti scoop s.t. up; Isg ingwaaba'aan; prt
gwayaaba'ang
gwaaba'ibii vai draw water, scoop up water; Isg
ingwaaba'ibii; pn gwayaaba'ibiid
gwaaba'igan m dipper; pi gwaaba'iganan; loc
gwaaba'iganing; dim gwaaba'igaans
gwaaba'ige vai scoop up things, dip up things; Isg
ingwaaba'ige; prt gwayaaba'iged
gwaaba'waawangwaan ni shovel (for dirt); pi
gwaaba'waawangwaanan; loc
gwaaba'waawangwaaning; dim
gwaaba'waawangwaanens
gwaashkwani vai jump; Isg ingwaashkwan; prt
gwayaashkwanid
gwaashkwaashkw= < gwaashkw=
gwaashkwesin vii bounce; pn gwayaashkwesing
gwaashkwezi vai be eager, be ambitious, be
energetic; 7sjiingwaashkwez;prr
gwayaashkwezid
gwech pc enough, sufficient
gwekabi vai turn around while sitting; Isg
ingwekab; pn gwayekabid
gwekaanimad vii wind shifts; pn gwayekaanimak
gwekendam vai change one's mind; Isg
ingwekendam; pn gwayekendang
gwekibagizo vai turn quickly, right self; Isg
ingwekibagiz; pn gwayekibagizod
gwekibatoo vai turn running; Isg ingwekibatoo;
pn gwayekibatood
gwekibidoon vti2 turn s.t. with hands; Isg
ingwekibidoon; prt gwayekibidood
gwekibizh /gwekibiN-/ vta turn s.o. with hands;
hg ingwekibinaa; pn gwayekibinaad
gwekibizo vai turn driving; Isg ingwekibiz; pn
gwayekibizod
gwekigaabawi vai turn while standing; Isg
ingwekigaabaw; pn gwayekigaabawid
gwekikweni vai turn one's head around; Isg
ingwekikwen; pn gwayekikwenid
gwekin vta turn s.o. by hand; hg ingwekinaa: prt
gwayekinaad
gwekinan vti turn s.t. by hand; Isg ingwekinaan;
pn gwekinang
gwekinige vai turn things by hand; Isg
ingwekinige; pn gwayekiniged
gwekishim vta put s.o. turned; Isg
ingwekishimaa; pn gwayekishimaad
gwekishin vai turn lying in place; Isg ingwekishin;
pn gwayekishing
gwekisidoon vti2 put s.t. turned; Isg
ingwekisidoon; prt gwayekisidood
gwekisin vii turn lying in place; pn gwayekising
gwekitaa vai turn (one's body); Isg ingwekitaa;
pn gwayekitaad
gwekiwebinigan na pancake; pi
gwekiwebiniganag; loc gwekiwebiniganing;
dim gwekiwebinigaans
gwekiigin vta turn s.o. over (as something sheet-
like); Isg ingwekiiginaa; pn gwayekiiginaad
gwekiiginan vti turn s.t. over (as something sheet-
like); Isg ingwekiiginaan; pn gwekiiginang
gwekwek= < gwek=
gwendaaseg ni-pt liniment; pi gwendaasegin
gwiikwiin= < gwiin=
gwiinawaabann vta fail to see s.o.; Isg
ingwiinawaabamaa; pn gwaanawaabamaad
gwiinawaabandan vti Ml to see s.t.; Isg
ingwiinawaabandaan; prt
gwaanawaabandang
gwiinawendan vti miss s.t. absent; Isg
ingwiinawendaan; pn gwaanawendang
gwiinawenim vta miss s.o. absent; Isg
ingwiinawenimaa; prt gwaanawenimaad
gwiinawi- pv4 not knowing, not able
gwiinawi-doodam vai2 not know what to do; Isg
ingwiinawi-doodam: pn gwaanawi-doodang
gwiinawi-inendam vai2 not know what to think;
Isg ingwiinawi-inendam; pn gwaanawi-
inendang
gwiingwa'aage na wolverine; pi gwiingwa'aageg;
dim gwiingwa'aagens
gwiinobii vai be unable to find a drink; Isg
ingwiinobii; prt gwaanobiid
gwiishkoshi vai whistle; Isg ingwiishkosh; pn
gwaashkoshid
gwiishkoshim vta whistle to s.o.; Isg
ingwiishkoshimaa; pn gwaashkoshimaad
gwiishkoshwewegamide vii whistle from boiling;
prt gwaashkoshwewegamideg; aug
gwiishkoshwewegamidemagad; pn aug
gwaashkoshwewegamidemagak
gwiishkoshwewegamizo vai whistle from boiling;
pn gwaashkoshwewegamizod
gwiiwizens na boy; pi gwiiwizensag
gwiiwizensiwi vai be a boy; Isg ingwiiwizensiw;
pn gwaawizensiwid
H
hay* pc expression of displeasure at accident or mistake

idan—ina'o
64
I
idan vti say so to s.t., speak to s.t.; Isg indidaan; prt
edang
idash pc and, but; also dash, -sh
idiwag /idi-/ vai they say to each other, they speak
to each other in a certain way; Ipl indidimin:
prt edijig
igaye pc and, as for; also gaye, ge
igiw* pr those animate plural demonstrative; also
ingiw, ingi, agiw*
igiwedig* pr those over there animate plural
demonstrative'., also ingiwedig
igo pc emphatic word:, also go
i'imaa/jc there; also imaa
i'iw pr that inanimate singular demonstrative; also iw,
*iw, i*i, *i
i'lwedi pr that over there inanimate singular
demonstrative; also iwedi, 'iwedi
ikido vai say, speak so; Isg indikid; prt ekidod
ikidowin ni word; pi ikidowinan; dim ikidowinens
\kopc used to, formerly, it was the custom to...;
also ko
ikogaabawi vai stand out of the way; Isg
indikogaabaw; prr ekogaabawid
ikon vta set s.o. out of the way; Isg indikonaa; prt
ekonaad
ikonan vti set s.t. out of the way; Isg indikonaan;
prt ekonang
ikonaazhikaw vta chase s.o. out of the way; Isg
indikonaazhikawaa; prt ekonaazhikawaad
ikonigaade vii be set out of the way; prt
ekonigaadeg; aug ikonigaademagad; prt aug
e kon i gaadem agak
ikonigaazo vai be set out of the way, be evicted;
prt ekonigaazod
ikoshim vta put s.o. out of the way; Isg
indikoshimaa; prt ekoshimaad
ikoshin vai lie out of the way; Isg indikoshin; prt
ekoshing
ikosidoon vti2 put s.t. out of the way; Isg
indikosidoon; prt ekosidood
ikosin vii lie out of the way; prt ekosing
ikoweba* /ikoweba'w-/ vta shove s.o. out of the
way with something; Isg indikoweba'waa; prt
ekoweba'waad
ikoweba'an vti shove s.t. out of the way with
something; Isg indikoweba'aan; pn
ekoweba'ang
ikowebin vta toss s.o. aside, shove aside s.o.; Isg
indikowebinaa; prt ekowebinaad
ikowebinan vn toss s.t. aside, shove aside s.t.; Isg
indikowebinaan; prt ekowebinang
ikowebishkan vti kick s.t. out of the way; Isg
indikowebishkaan; prt ekowebishkang
ikowebishkaw vta kick s.o. out of the way; Isg
indikowebishkawaa; prt ekowebishkawaad
ikwa na louse; pi ikwag
ikwabi vai sit aside, move out of the way sitting;
Isg indikwab: prt ekwabid
ikwanagweni vai roll up one's sleeve; Isg
indikwanagwen; prt ekwanagwenid
ikwanaamo vai draw breath in; Isg indikwanaam;
prt ekwanaamod
ikwe na woman, queen (card); pi ikwewag; dim
ikwens
ikwe-biizikiigan nz item of women's clothing; loc
ikwe-biizikiiganing; dim ikwe-biizikiigaans
ikwe-niimi vai dance the women's dance; Isg
indikwe-niim; prt ekwe-niimid
ikwe-niimi'idiwag /ikwe-niimi'idi-/ vai they dance
the women's dance; Ipl indikwe-niimi'idimin;
prt ekwe-niimi'idijig
ikwe-niimi'idiwin ni women's dance; pi ikwe-
niimi'idiwinan
ikwewi vai be a woman; Isg indikwew; prt
ekwewid
ikwezens na girl; pi ikwezensag
ikwezensiwi vai be a girl; Isg indikwezensiw; prt
ekwezensiwid
im= pre first person prefix before b-; also nim=, m=
imaa pc there; also maa, i'imaa
imbaabaa /-baabaay-/ nad my father; pi
imbaabaayag
imbaabaayinaan nad our father = grandfather; also
imbaabaanaan, baabaanaan
imbwaam /-bwaam-/ nid my thigh (back of thigh),
my hindquarter; pi imbwaaman; loc
imbwaaming; dim imbwaamens
\n= pre first person prefix before d-,j-} g-, z, zh-\ also
nin=, n=
ma. pc yes-no question word; also na
inabi vai sit a certain way; Isg indinab; prt enabid
inademo vai cry a certain way, go to a certain
place crying; Isg indinadem; prt enademod
inagim vta set a certain price on s.o.; Isg
indinagimaa; prt enagimaad
inagindamaw vta set a certain price on (s.t.) for
s.o.; /^;Mndinagindamawaa;/<r/
e nagi n d amawaad
inagindan vti set a certain price on s.t.; Isg
indinagindaan; prt enagindang
inaginde vii have a certain cost, have a certain
price; pn enagindeg; aug inagindemagad; prt
aug enagindemagak
inaginzo vai have a certain cost, have a certain
price, be a certain date of the month; pn
enaginzod
inagoode vii hang a certain way; prt enagoodeg;
aug inagoodemagad; prt aug enagoodemagak
inagoodoon vti2 hang s.t. a certain way; Isg
indinagoodoon; prt enagoodood
inagoojin vai'hang a certain way; Isg indinagoojin;
prt enagoojing
inagoozh /inagooN-/ vta hang s.o. a certain way;
Isg indinagoonaa; prt enagoonaad
ina'adoon vti2 follow s.t. as a trail to a certain
place; Isg indina'adoon; prt ena'adood
ina'am vai2 sing a certain way; Isg indina'am; pn
ena'ang
ina'azh /ina'aN-/ vta follow s.o.'s trail to a certain
place; Isg indina'anaa; pn ena'anaad
ina'e vai shoot in a certain way or place; Isg
indina'e; prt ena'ed
ina'o vai paddle to a certain place; Isg indina'; prt
ena'od

65
ina'oodoo—inaakonigaazo
ina'oodoo vai pole a boat to a certain place; Isg
indina'oodoo; pn ena'oodood
ina'oodoon vti2 take s.t. to a certain place by boat;
Isg indina'oodoon; pn ena'oodood
ina'oozh /ina'ooN •/ ma take s.o. to a certain place
by boat; Isg inclina'oonaa; pn ena'oonaad
inakamigad vii be a certain event, happen a certain
way; pn enakamigak
inakamigizi vai do a certain thing, have certain
things happen to one; Isg indinakamigiz; pn
enakamigizid
inakwazhiwe vai paddle a certain way, paddle to a
certain place, swim to a certain place (as a
fish); Isg indinakwazhiwe; prt enakwazhiwed
inamanji'o vai feel a certain way; Isg indinamanji';
prt enamanji'od
inamon /inamo-/ vii lead to a certain place (as a
road or trail); pn enamog
inanjige vai eat a certain way, have a certain diet;
Isg indinanjige; pn enanjiged
inanokii vai work z certain way, have a certain job;
Isg indinanokii; pn enanokiid
inanokiitaw vta do a certain job for s.o.; Isg
indinanokiitawaa; pn enanokiitawaad
inanoozh /inanooN-/ vta hire s.o. to do a certain
job, hire s.o. to go to a certain place; Isg
indinanoonaa; pn enanoonaad
inapizowin in kitchen apron; pi inapizowinan; loc
inapizowining; dim inapizowinens
inashkepc look!, behold!; also nashke
inawem vta be related to s.o.; Isg indinawemaa;
prt enawemaad
inawendiwag /inawendi-/ vai they are related to
each other; 7pnhdinawendimm;prf
enawendijig
ImoLpc emphatic particle; also naa
inaabadad vii be useful in a certain way, be em-
ployed in a certain way; pn enaabadak
inaabadizi vai be useful in a certain way, be em-
ployed in a certain way; Isg indinaabadiz; prt
enaabadizid
inaabajichige vai use things a certain way; Isg
indinaabajichige; pn enaabajichiged
inaabaji' vta use s.o. a certain way; Isg
indinaabaji'aa; pn enaabaji'aad
inaabajitoon vti2 use s.t. a certain way; Isg
indinaabajitoon; prt enaabajitood
inaabam vta see s.o. a certain way as in a dream;
Isg indinaabamaa; pn enaabamaad
inaabaminaagozi vai appear a certain way (espe-
cially as in a dream); pn enaabaminaagozid
inaabaminaagwad vii appear a certain way (espe-
cially as in a dream); pn enaabaminaagwak
inaabandam vai2 dream a certain way; Isg
indinaabandarn; pn enaabandang
inaabandan vti see s.t. a certain way as in a dream;
Isg indinaabandaan; pn enaabandang
inaabasige vai send smoke to a certain place; Isg
indinaabasige; pn enaabasiged
inaabate vii go a certain direction (as smoke); prt
enaabateg; aug inaabatemagad; pn aug
enaabatemagak
inaabi vai peek, look to a certain place; Isg
indinaab; prt enaabid
inaabikad vii be a certain way (as something min-
eral); prt enaabikak
inaabikizi vai be a certain way (as something min-
eral); prt enaabikizid
inaabiwin ni lightning
inaabiigad vii be a certain way (as something
string-like); pn enaabiigak
inaabiigin vta string s.o. a certain way; Isg
inaabiiginaa; pn enaabiiginaad
inaabiiginan vti string s.t. a certain way; Isg
indinaabiiginaan; prt enaabiiginang
inaabiigizi vai be a certain way (as something
string-like); pn enaabiigizid
inaadagaa vai swim to a certain place; Isg
indinaadagaa; prt enaadagaad
inaadagaako vai go to a certain place on the ice;
Isg indinaadagaak; pn enaadagaakod
inaadagaazii vai wade to a certain place; Isg
indinaadagaazii; pn enaadagaaziid
inaada'e vai skate to a certain place; Isg
indinaada'e; pn enaada'ed
inaadizi vai have a certain character, have a certain
way of life; Isg indinaadiz; pn enaadizid
inaadiziwin ni way of life; pi inaadiziwinan
inaadodan vti tell a certain way about s.t., narrate
a certain way about s.t.; Isg indinaadodaan; pn
enaadodang
inaagamin /inaagami-/ vii be a certain way (as a
liquid); pn enaagamig
inaagin vta bend s.o. a certain way; Isg
indinaaginaa; pn enaaginaad
inaaginan vti bend s.t. a certain way; Isg
indinaaginaan; prt enaaginang
inaaginigaade vii be bent a certain way; prt
enaaginigaadeg; aug inaaginigaademagad;
pn aug enaaginigaademagak
inaaginigaazo vai be bent a certain way; prt
enaaginigaazod
inaajim vta tell of s.o. a certain way, narrate of s.o.
a certain way; Isg indinaajimaa; pn
enaajimaad
inaajimo vai tell a certain way, narrate a certain
way; Isg indinaajim; pn enaajimod
inaajimotaw vta tell s.o. of (s.t.) a certain way,
narrate (s.t.) to s.o. a certain way; Isg
indinaajimotawaa; pn enaajimotawaad
inaakide vii burn a certain way; pn enaakideg; aug
inaakidemagad; pn aug enaakidemagak
inaakiz /inaakizw-/ vta bum s.o. a certain way; Isg
indinaakizwaa; pn enaakizwaad
inaakizan vti burn s.t. a certain way; Isg
indinaakizaan; pn enaakizang
inaakizo vai burn a certain way; pn enaakizod
inaakon vta decide about s.o. a certain way, judge
s.o. a certain way, sentence s.o. a certain way;
Isg indinaakonaa; prt enaakonaad
inaakonan vti decide a certain way about s.t.,
judge s.t. a certain way; Isg indinaakonaan; prt
enaakonang
inaakonigaade vii be decided in a certain way, be
decreed a certain way; prt enaakonigaadeg;
aug inaakonigaademagad
inaakonigaazo vai be judged a certain way, be
sentenced a certain way; pn enaakonigaazod

i n aako n ige—i n ge
66
inaakonige vai make a certain judgement, decide
things a certain way, agree on something; Isg
indinaakonige; prt enaakoniged
inaakonigewin ni law; pi inaakonigewinan
inaakozi vai be a certain way (as something stick-
or wood-like); prt enaakozid
inaakwad vii be a certain way (as something stick-
or wood-like); prt enaakwak
inaandawe vai'climb to a certain place; Isg
indinaandawe; prt enaandawed
inaande vii be colored a certain way; prt
enaandeg; aug inaandemagad; prt aug
enaandemagak
inaanzo vai be colored a certain way; prt
enaanzod
inaapine vai be sick in a certain way; Isg
indinaapine; prt enaapined
inaasamabi vai sit facing in a certain way; Isg
indinaasamab; pn enaasamabid
inaasamigaabawi vai stand facing a certain way;
Isg indinaasamigaabaw; prt
e naasam igaabawi d
inaasamishin vai lie facing a certain way; Isg
indinaasamishin; prt enaasamishing
inaashi vai be blown a certain way, sail to a certain
place; />,e mdinaash; prt enaashid
inaasin vii be blown a certain way, sail to a certain
place; prt enaasing
inaatese vii be a certain kind of movie; prt
enaateseg; aug inaatesemagad; prt aug
enaatesemagak
inaawadaaso vai haul something to a certain
place; Isg indinaawadaas; prt enaawadaasod
inaawadoon vti2 haul s.t. to a certain place; Isg
indinaawadoon; prt enaawadood
inaawanidiwag /inaawanidW vailhey travel in a
group to a certain place; Ipl
indinaawanidimin; prt enaawanidijig
inaawazh /inaawaN-/ vta haul s.o. to a certain
place; Isg indinaawanaa; prt enaawanaad
inaazakonenjige vai go to a certain place with
light; Isg indinaazakonenjige; prt
enaazakonenjiged
inaazhagaame vai walk along shore to a certain
place; Isg indinaazhagaame; prt
enaazhagaamed
ind= pre first person prefix before vowels in verbs and
non-dependent nouns', also nind=, nd=
indawaaj pc therefore, consequently, rather,
preferably
indawemaa /-dawemaaw-/ nad my sibling of the
opposite sex (brother or sister), my parallel
cousin of the opposite sex; pi indawemaag
inday /-day-/ nad my dog, my horse; pi indayag;
dim in day ens
indaamikan /-daamikan-/ nid my chin, my jaw; pi
indaamikanan; loc indaamikanaang
indaan /-daan-/ nad my daughter; pi indaanag; also
indaanis
indaangoshenh /-daangosheny-/ nad my (fe-
male's) female cross-cousin (mother's brother's
daughter or father's sister's daughter); pi
i n d aan gosh e nyag
indaangwe /-daangwew-/ nad my (female's) sister-
in-law, my (female's) female friend; pi
indaangweg
indaanis /-daanis-/ nad my daughter; pi
indaanisag; loc indaanisens; also indaan
indede /-dedey-/ nad my father; pi indedeyag
indedeyinaan nad our father = grandfather
inde' /-de'-/ nid my heart; pi inde'an; loc indexing
indenaniw /-denaniw-/ nid my tongue; pi
indenaniwan; loc indenaniwaang
indengway /-dengway-/ nid my face; pi
indengwayan; loc indengwaang
indenigom /-denigom-/ nad my nostril; pi
indenigomag; loc indenigom aan g
indigo pc just like, as if; also nindigo*
indindawaa /-dindawaa-/ nad my fellow parent-in-
law; pi indindawaag
indinimaangan /-dinimaangan-/ mdmy shoulder;
pi indinimaanganan; loc indinimaanganaang
indiniigan /-diniigah-/ nad my shoulder blade; pi
indiniiganag; loc indiniiganaang
indis /-disy-/ nid my navel, my umbilical cord; loc
indisiing; dim indisiins
indiskweyaab nid my vein; pi indiskweyaabiin
indiy /-diy-/ nid my rump, my rear end; loc
indiyaang; also indiyaash
indoodem /-doodem-/ nad my totem, my clan; pi
indoodemag
indoodikosiw /-doodikosiw-/ na my kidney; pi
indoodikosiwag
indoodooshim /-doodooshim-/ nad my breast; pi
indoodooshimag; loc indoodooshimaang
indoon /-doon-/ nid my mouth; pi indoonan; loc
indooning
indoondan /-doondan-/ nid my heel; pi
indoondanan; loc indoondanaang
indooskwan /-dooskwan-/ nid my elbow; pi
indooskwanan; loc indooskwanaang
indoozhim /-doozhim-/ nad my parallel nephew
(male's brother's son or female's sister's son);
pi indoozhimag
indoozhimikwem /-doozhimikwem-/ nad my
stepdaughter; pi indoozhimikwemag
indoozhimis /-doozhimis-/ nad my parallel niece
(male's brother's daughter or female's sister's
daughter); pi indoozhimisag
ine pc exclamation of denial
inendam vai2 think a certain way, feel a certain
way, decide, be of a certain mind, agree; Isg
indinendam; prt enendang
inendan un'think a certain way of s.t.; Isg
indinendaan; prt enendang
inendaagozi vai be thought of a certain way, seem
to be a certain way, have a certain destiny; Isg
indinendaagoz; /i>/ enendaagozid
inendaagwad vii be thought of a certain way, seem
to be a certain way; prt enendaagwak
inendi vaibe gone a certain length of time, be
absent a certain length of time; Isg indinend;
prt enendid
inenim vta think of s.o. a certain way; Isg
indinenimaa; prt enenimaad
inga nad my mother archaic; obviative ogiin
inge pc woman's expression of mild displeasure or
disdain

67
i ngi d ig—i n igokwad eyaab i kad
ingidig /-gidigw-/ nod my knee; pi ingidigwag; loc
ingidigwaang
ingitiziim /-gitiziim-/ nad my parent; pi
ingitiziimag
ingiwpr those animate plural demonstrative:, also
'ng'» igiw*, igi*,h agiw*
ingiwedigpr those over there animate plural
demonstrative; also igiwedig*
ingo- /ningo-/ pv4 one; also ningo-*
ingo-anama'e-giizhik pc one week; also ningo-
anama'e-giizhik*
ingo-biboon pc one year; also ningo-biboon*
ingo-biboonagad /ningo-biboonagad-/ vii be one
year; prt nengo-biboonagak; also ningo-
biboonagad *
ingo-biboonagizi /ningo-biboonagizi-/ vai be one
year old; Isg niningo-biboonagiz;prr nengo-
biboonagizid; also ningo-biboonagizi*
ingo-diba'igan pc one hour, one mile; also ningo-
diba'igan*
ingo-diba'iganed /ningo-diba'iganed-/ vii'be one
o'clock; prt nengo-diba'iganek; also ningo-
diba'iganed*
ingo-diba'igaans/v one minute, one acre; also
n i n go-d i ba* i gaan s*
ingo-dibikpc one night; also ningo-dibik*
ingodingpc sometime, at one time; also
ningoding*
ingodobaneninj pc one handful; also
ningodobaneninj*
ingodoninj pc one inch; also ningodoninj*
ingodosagoons nm one thousand; also
ningodosagooins*
ingodozid pc one foot; also ningodozid*
ingodooshkin pc one bag; also ningodooshkin*
ingodwaaching pc six times; also
n i ngodwaach i ng*
ingodwaachinoon /ningodwaachin-/ we'they are
six; pn nengodwaaching; also
n i ngod waac h i noon *
ingodwaachiwag /iningodwaachi-/ vai they are six;
Ipl niningodwaachimin; prt ne ngodwaach i jig;
also n ingodwaachiwag*
ingodwaak nm one hundred; also ningodwaak*
ingodwaasimidana nm sixty; also
n i ngod waasi mi i d ana*
ingodwaaso- /ningodwaaso-/ pv4 six; also
ningodwaaso*
i n godwaaso-an anna' e-gi izh igad /n i n godwaaso-
anama'e-giizhigad-/ vii be six weeks; pn
nengodwaaso-anama'e-giizhigak; also
ningodwaaso-anama'e-giizhigad*
ingodwaaso-anama'e-giizhikpc six weeks; also
ningodwaaso-anama'e-giizhik*
ingodwaaso-biboon pc six years; also
n i n godwaaso- bi boo n*
i ngod waaso-bi boo nagad /ningodwaaso-
biboonagad-/ vii be six years; prt
nengodwaaso-biboonagak; also
ningodwaaso-lbiboonagad*
ingodwaaso-biboonagizi /ningodwaaso-
biboonagizi-/ vai be six years old; Isg
niningodwaaso-biboonagiz; prt
nengodwaaso-biboonagizid; also
ningodwaaso-biboonagaizi*
ingodwaaso-diba'igan pc six hours, six miles; also
ningodwaaso-diba'igan*
ingodwaaso-diba'iganed/ningodwaaso-
diba'iganed-/ vii be six o'clock; prt
nengodwaaso-diba'iganek; also
ningodwaaso-diba'iganed*
ingodwaaso-diba'igaans pc six minutes, six acres;
also ningodwaaso-diba'igaans*
ingodwaaso-dibikpc six nights; also ningodwaaso-
dibik*
ingodwaaso-giizhik /v six days; also ningodwaaso-
giizhik*
ingodwaaso-giizis pc six months; also
n i n god waaso-gi iz i s*
ingodwaasogon pc six days; also
ningodwaasogon*
ingodwaasogonagad /ningodwaasogonagad-/ vii
be six days; prt nengodwaasogonagak; also
n i ngodwaasogo n agad*
ingodwaasogonagizi /ningodwaasogonagizi-/ vai
be the sixth day of the month, be six days old;
prt nengodwaasogonagizid; also
ningodwaasogonagizi*
ingodwaasoninj pc six inches; also
n i ngodwaason i n j*
ingodwaasosagoons /ningodwaasosagoons-/ nm
six thousand; also ningodwaasosagoons*
ingodwaasoobii'igan na six (card);p/
ingodwaasoobii'iganag; also
ningodwaasoobii'igan*
ingodwaasooshkin pc six bags; also
n i n godwaasoosh ki n*
ingodwaaswaabikpc six dollars; also
n i n godwaaswaabi k*
ingodwaaswaak nm six hundred; also
ningodwaaswaak*
ingodwaaswi nm six; also ningodwaaswi*
ingodwaaswewaan pc six sets, six pairs; also
n i ngodwaaswewaan*
ingo-giizhikpc one day; also ningo-giizhik*
ingo-giizis pc one month; also ningo-giizis*
ingoji pc somewhere, approximately, nearly; also
ningoji*
ingondashkway /-gondashkway-/ nid my throat; pi
ingondashkway; loc ingondashkwaang
ingos /-gos-/ nad my son; pi ingosag; also ingwis*
ingozis /-gozis-/ nad my son; pi ingozisag; also
ingwizis*
ingoodaas /-goodaas-/ nid my dress; pi
ingoodaasan
ingwanapc it was just so, it turns out that, so it
was that; also nangwana, ngwana
inigaa* vta be mean to s.o., injure s.o.; Isg
indinigaa'aa; prt enigaa'aad
inigaazi vai be poor, be pitiable, mourn; Isg
indinigaaz; prt enigaazid
inigini vai be a certain size, be so big; Isg indinigin;
/v/ eniginid
inigokwadeyaa vii be a certain width, be so wide;
prt enigokwadeyaag; aug
in igokwad eyaamagad; pn aug
en igokwadeyaam agak
inigokwadeyaabikad vii be a certain width (as
something mineral), be so wide (as something
mineral); prt enigokwadeyaabikak

inigokwadeyaabikizi—inoode
68
inigokwadeyaabikizi vai be a certain width (as
something mineral), be so wide (as something
mineral); prt enigokwadeyaabikizid
inigokwadeyaabiigad viz be a certain width (as
something string-like), be so wide (as some-
thing string-like); prt enigokwadeyaabiigak
inigokwadeyaabiigizi vai be a certain width (as
something string-like), be so wide (as some-
thing string-like); prt enigokwadeyaabiigizid
inigokwadeyaakozi vai be a certain width (as
something stick- or wood-like), be so wide (as
something stick- or wood-like); prt
enigokwadeyaakozid
inigokwadeyaakwad vii be a certain width (as
something stick- or wood-like), be so wide (as
something stick- or wood-like); prt
e n igokwad eyaakwak
inigokwadeyiigad vii be a certain width (as some-
thing sheet-like), be so wide (as something
sheet-like); prt enigokwadeyiigak
inigokwadeyiigizi vai be a certain width (as some-
thing sheet-like), be so wide (as something
sheet-like); prt enigokwadeyiigizid
in igokwad ezi vai be a certain width, be so wide;
prt enigokwadezid
inigokwaa vii be a certain size, be so big; prt
enigokwaag; aug inigokwaamagad; prt aug
enigokwaamagak
inigokwaabikad vii be a certain size (as something
mineral), be so big (as something mineral); prt
e n igokwaabi kak
inigokwaabikizi vai be a certain size (as something
mineral), be so big (as something mineral); prt
enigokwaabikizid
inigokwaabiigad vii be a certain size (as something
string-like), be so big (as something string-
like); prt enigokwaabiigak
inigokwaabiigizi vai be a certain size (as some-
thing string-like), be so big (as something
string-like); prt enigokwaabiigizid
inigokwaakozi vai be a certain size (as something
stick- or wood-like), be so big (as something
stick- or wood-like); prt enigokwaakozid
inigokwaakwad vii be a certain size (as something
stick- or wood-like) j be so big (as something
stick- or wood-like); prt enigokwaakwak
inigokwegad vii be a certain size (as something
sheet-like), be so big (as something sheet-like);
prt enigokwegak
inigokwegizi vai be a certain size (as something
sheet-like), be so big (as something sheet-like);
prt enigokwegizid
inikodan vti slice s.t. a certain way; Isg
indinikodaan; prt enikodang
inikonaye vai dress a certain way; hg
indinikonaye; prt enikonayed
inikozh /inikoN-/ vta slice s.o, a certain way; Isg
indinikonaa; prt enikonaad
inikwe' /inikwe'w-/ vta steer s.o. a certain way; Isg
indinikwe'waa; prt enikwe'waad
inikwe'an vti steer s.t. a certain way; Isg
indinikwe'aan; prt enikwe'ang
inikweni vai put one's head a certain way; Isg
indinikwen; prt enikwenid
inikweshin vai lie with one's head a certain way;
Isg indinikweshin; prt enikweshing
inikwe taw vta nod one's head to s.o. a certain
way; Isg indinikwetawaa; prt enikwetawaad
inin vta hold s.o. a certain way, handle s.o. a
certain way; Isg indininaa; prt eninaad
ininamaw vta hand (s.t.) to s.o. a certain way; Isg
indininamawaa; prt eninamawaad
ininan vti hold s.t. a certain way, handle s.t. a
certain way; Isg indininaan; prt eninang
ininaatig na maple; pi ininaatigoog; he
ininaatigong; also aninaatig
mini na man; pi ininiwag; dim ininiins
ininigaade vii be held a certain way, be handled a
certain way; prt eninigaadeg; aug
ininigaademagad; prt aug eninigaademagak
ininigaazo vai be held a certain way, be handled a
certain way; prt eninigaazod
ininishib na mallard; pi ininishibag; dim
ininishibens
ininii-biizikiigan m'item of men's clothing; pi
ininii-biizikiiganan; he ininii-biizikiiganing;
dim ininii-biizikiigaans
ininiiwi vai be a man; Isg indininiiw; prt eniniiwid
initam vai2 hear a certain noise, understand a cer-
tain way; hg indinitam; pn enitang
initan vti hear s.t. a certain way, understand s.t. a
certain way; hg indinitaan; prt enitang
initaw vta hear s.o. a certain way, understand s.o.
a certain way; Isg indinitawaa; prt enitawaad
initaagozi vaibe heard a certain way, be
understood a certain way; prt enitaagozid
initaagwad vii be heard a certain way, be under-
stood a certain way; prt enitaagwak
iniw^r those inanimate plural demonstrative, that
obviative, those obviative; also niw, ini, ni,
aniw*
iniwedin pr those over there inanimate plural, that
over there obiative, those over there obviative-.,
also niwedin
iniz /inizw-/ vta cook s.o. a certain way; Isg
indinizwaa; prt enizwaad
inizan vti cook s.t. a certain way; Isg indinizaan;
prt enizang
inizekwe vai cook (something) a certain way; Isg
indinizekwe; prt enizekwed
inizh /inizhw-/ vta cut s.o. a certain way; Isg
indinizhwaa; prt enizhwaad
inizhan vti cut s.t. a certain way; Isg indinizhaan;
prt enizhang
injaanzh /-jaanzh-/ nid my nose; pi injaanzhan; loc
injaanzhing
injichaag /-jichaagw-/ nad my soul, my spirit; pi
injichaagwag; loc injichaagong
injiid /-jiidy-/ nid my rectum; pi injiidiin; loc
injiidiing; also injiidiish
injiingwan /-ji ing wan-/ nad my lap, my thigh (front
of thigh); />/injiingwanag; loc injiingwanaang
injiitad /-jiitad-/ nid my sinew; pi injiitadan; loc
injiitadaang
inose vai walk to a certain place, walk a certain
way; 7s£ indinose; pntenosed
inoode vai crawl to a certain place, crawl a certain
way; Isg indinoode; prt enooded

69
inoom—ishkwaase
inoom ma carry s.o. to a certain place on one's
back; hg indinoomaa; prt enoomaad
inoomaawaso vai carry a baby to a certain place
on one's back; hg indinoomaawas; pn
enoomaawasod
inoomigo vai ride to a certain place on horseback;
Isg indinoomig; prt enoomigod
inoondan mi carry s.t. to a certain place on one's
back; hg indinoondaan; prt enoondang
inootaw vta quote s.o. a certain way; Isg
indinootawaa; prt enootawaad
inootaage vai report what people say, quote
people; Isg indinootaage; prt enootaaged
inwe z'a/make a characteristic call (neigh, etc.),
speak a certain language; hg indinwe; pn
enwed
inwewe vii make a certain noise; pn enweweg; aug
inwewemagad; pn aug enwewemagak
inwewidam vai be heard speaking going to a cer-
tain place; hg indinwewidam; pn
enwewidang
inwewin ni language; pi inwewinan
inzhaga'ay /-zhaga'ay-/ nid my skin; loc
inzhaga'aang
inzhigwan /zhigwani-/ nid my tail (of a fish)
inzhishenh /-zhisheiny-/ nod my cross-uncle
(mother's brother); pi inzhishenyag
inzhiigan /-zhiigan-/ nid the small of my back; loc
inzhiiganaang
inzid /-zid-/ nid my foot; pi inzidan; loc inzidaang;
dim inzidens
inzigos /-zigos-/ nod my cross-aunt (father's
sister); pi inzigosag
inzigozis /-zigozis-/ nod my mother-in-law; pi
inzigozisag
inzinis /-zinis-/ nad my father-in-law; pi inzinisag
inzow /-zow-/ nid my tail (of an animal); pi
inzowan; loc inzowaang
ipide vii speed to a certain place, drive to a certain
place, fly to a certain place; prt epideg; aug
ipidemagad; pn aug epidemagak
ipizo vai drive to a certain place, speed to a certain
place, fly to a certain place; hg indipiz; pn
epizod
ipizoni' ma drive s.o. to a certain place; hg
indipizoni'aa; pn epizoni'aad
ipizonitoon mi2 drive s.t. to a certain place; Isg
indipizonitoon; prt epizonitood
ipogozi vai have a certain taste; prt epogozid
ipogwad vii have a certain taste; pn epogwak
isa pc emphatic word; also sa
ise pc for shame!
ishkendam vai2 be disturbed, be upset; hg
indishkendam; pn eshkendang
ishkode ni fire; pi islhkoden; he ishkodeng; dim
ishkodens
ishkode-bingwi mashes
ishkode-jiimaan ni steamboat, ship; pi ishkode-
jiimaanan; loc ishkode-jiimaaning; dim
ishkode-jiimaanens
ishkodekaan ni lighter; pi ishkodekaanan; he
ishkodekaaning; dim ishkodekaanens
ishkodeke vai make a fire; hg indishkodeke; pn
eshkodeked
ishkode-makakoons ni battery; pi ishkode-
makakoonsan; loc ishkode-makakoonsing
ishkodens ni match; pi ishkodensan; loc
ishkodensing
ishkodewan vii be on fire; prt eshkodewang
ishkodewaaboo ni liquor; loc ishkodewaaboong
ishkodewidaabaan na train; pi
ishkodewidaabaanag; loc
ishkodewidaabaaning; dim
ishkodewidaabaanens; also
mashkodewidaabaan*
ishkodewidaabaanikana ni train track; pi
ishkodewidaabaanikanan; he
ishkodewidaabaanikanaang
ishkon vta reserve s.o., save s.o. back; Isg
indishkonaa; pn eshkonaad
ishkonamaw vta reserve (s.t.) for s.o., save (s.t.)
back for s.o.; hg indishkonamawaa; prt
eshkonamawaad
ishkonan vti reserve s.t., save s.t. back; hg
indishkonaan; pn eshkonang
ishkonigan ni reservation; pi ishkoniganan; loc
ishkoniganing; dim ishkonigaans
ishkonigaade vii be reserved, be saved back; pn
eshkonigaadeg; aug ishkonigaademagad; pn
aug eshkonigaademagak
ishkonigaazo vai be reserved, be saved back; prt
eshkonigaazod
ishkwam vta leave s.o. behind uneaten; hg
indishkwamaa; pn eshkwamaad
ishkwandan vti leave s.t. behind uneaten; hg
indishkwandaan; pn eshkwandang
ishkwanjigan ni leftover food; pi ishkwanjiganan;
he ishkwanjiganing; dim ishkwanjigaans
ishkwanjige vai leave leftovers; hg
indishkwanjige; pn eshkwanjiged
ishkwaa- pv4 after
ishkwaa-anama'e-giizhigad vii be Monday; prt
eshkwaa-anama'e-giizhigak; also ishkwaa-
aname-giizhigad
ishkwaabiisaa vii stop raining; pn
eshkwaabiisaag; aug ishkwaabiisaamagad; pn
aug eshkwaabiisaamagak
ishkwaagamizige vai finish boiling sap; hg
indishkwaagamizige; pn eshkwaagamiziged
ishkwaagaa vii be the last run of sap; prt
eshkwaagaag; aug ishkwaagaamagad; pn aug
eshkwaagaamagak
ishkwaaj pc last, finally
ishkwaakajanokii-giizhigad vii be Saturday; prt
eshkwaajanokii-giizhigak
ishkwaakamigad vii be over (of an event); prt
eshkwaakamigak
ishkwaanaamo vai stop breathing; hg
indishkwaanaam; pn eshkwaanaamod
ishkwaa-naawakwe vii be afternoon; prt eshkwaa-
naawakweg; aug ishkwaa-naawakwemagad;
prt aug eshkwaa-naawakwemagak
ishkwaandem ni door; pi ishkwaandeman; he
ishkwaandeming; dim ishkwaandemens
ishkwaapon /ishkwaapo-/ vii stop snowing; prt
eshkwaapog
ishkwaase vii come to an end; pn eshkwaaseg;
aug ishkwaasemagad; pn aug
eshkwaasemagak

ishkwaataa—ishwaasozid
70
ishkwaataa vai be at the end of an activity, stop an
activity; Isg indishkwaataa; pn eshkwaataad
ishkwaayaanimad vii wind dies down; prt
eskwaayaanimak
ishkwe-ayi'ii pc at the end of it; also iskweya'ii
ishkwebi vai sit at the end; Isg indishkweb; pn
eshkwebid
ishkwegaabawi vai stand at the end; Isg
indishkwegaabaw; pn eshkwegaabawid
ishkwege vai live at the end of town, live in the last
house; Isg indishkwege; pn eshkweged
ishkwegoode vii hang at the end; pn
eshkwegoodeg; aug ishkwegoodemagad; pn
aug eshkwegoodemagak
ishkwegoodoon vti2 hang s.t. at the end; Isg
indishkwegoodoon; pn eshkwegoodood
ishkwegoojin vai hang at the end; pn
eshkwegoojing
ishkwegoozh /ishkwegooN-/ vta hang s.o. at the
end; Isg indishkwegoonaa;/>n
eshkwegoonaad
ishkwejaagan na last born child, youngest child; pi
ishkwejaaganag
ishkwenikaazo vai have a last name; Isg
indishkwenikaaz; pn eshkwenikaazod
ishkwenikaazowin ni last name; pi
ishkwenikaazowinan
ishkweninj ni little finger; pi ishkweninjiin
ishkwesa'igan na toy top; pi ishkwesa'iganag; loc
ishkwesa'iganing: dim ishkwesa'igaans
ishkweshin vai lie at the end; Isg indishkweshin;
prt eshkweshing
ishkwesin vii lie at the end; pn eshkwesing
ishkweyaang^c behind, in the back, back (in time)
ishkwii vai stay behind; Isg indishkwii; pn
eshkwiid
ishpadinaa vii be a hill, be a high place; prt
eshpadinaag; aug ishpadinaamagad; pn aug
eshpadinaamagak
ishpagindan vti charge a high price for s.t,; Isg
indishpagindaan; prt eshpagindang
ishpagindaaso vai charge a high price; Isg
indishpagindaas; prt eshpagindaasod
ishpaginde vii be high-priced; pn eshpagindeg;
aug ishpagindemagad; prt aug
eshpagindemagak
ishpaginzo vai be high-priced, be high in status or
office; Isg indishpaginz; prt eshpaginzod
ishpagoode vii hang up high; prt eshpagoodeg;
aug ishpagoodemagad; pn aug
eshpagoodemagak
ishpagoodoon uri2hang s.t. up high; Isg
indishpagoodoon; prt eshpagoodood
ishpagoojin vai hang up high, be high (e.g., the
sun); Isg indishpagoojin; pn eshpagoojing
ishpagoozh /ishpagooN-/ vta hang s.o. up high;
Isg indishpagoonaa; prt eshpagoonaad
ishpayi'ii pc above it, over it
ishpaa vii be high up; pn eshpaag; aug
ishpaamagad; pn aug eshpaamagak
ishpaagonagaa vii be deep snow; prt
eshpaagonagaag; aug ishpaagonagaamagad;
prt aug eshpaagonagaamagak
ishpaatoon j'»2 make s.t. high; Isg indishpaatoon;
prt eshpaatood
ishpenim vta think highly of s.o.; Isg
indishpenimaa; pn eshpenimaad
ishpenimo vai be proud, have high aspirations; Isg
indishpenim; prt eshpenimod
ishpi- pv4 high, advanced into a time
ishpi-dibikpc late at night
ishpi-dibikad vii be late at night; prt eshpi-dibikak
ishpi-giizhigad vii be late morning or early
afternoon; pn eshpi-giizhigak
ishpimingpc in the sky, above, in heaven
ishpimisag ni the floor above; pi ishpimisagoon;
loc ishpimisagong
ishpimisagokaade vii have an upper story; prt
eshpimisagokaadeg; aug
ishpimisagokaademagad; pn aug
eshpimisagokaademagak
ishpishin vai lie high up; Isg indishpishin; pn
eshpishing
ishpisin vii lie high up; prt eshpising
ishwaachingpc eight times; also nishwaaching*
ishwaachinoon /ishwaachin-/ vii they are eight; prt
eshwaachingin; also nishwaachinoon*
ishwaachiwag /ishwaachi-/ vai they are eight; Ipl
indishwaachimin: prt eshwaachijig; also
nishwaachiwag*
ishwaasimidana nm eighty; also
nishwaasimidana*
ishwaaso- pv4 eight; also nishwaaso-*
ishwaaso-anama'e-giizhigad vii be eight weeks;
also nishwaaso-anama'e-giizhigad*
ishwaaso-anama'e-giizhikpc eight weeks; also
nishwaaso-anama'e-giizhik*
ishwaaso-biboon pc eight years; also nishwaaso-
biboon*
ishwaaso-biboonagad vii be eight years; pn
eshwaaso-biboonagak; also nishwaaso-
biboonagad*
ishwaaso-biboonagizi vai be eight years old; Isg
indishwaaso-biboonagiz; pn eshwaaso-
biboonagizid; also nishwaaso-biboonagizi*
ishwaaso-diba'igan pc eight miles, eight hours; also
nishwaaso-diba'igan*
ishwaaso-diba'iganed vii be eight o'clock; pn
eshwaaso-diba'iganek; also nishwaaso-
diba'iganed*
ishwaaso-diba'igaans pc eight minutes, eight
acres; also nishwaaso-diba'igaans*
ishwaaso-dibik/>i eight nights; also nishwaaso-
dibik*
ishwaaso-giizhik pc eight days; also nishwaaso-
giizhik*
ishwaaso-giizis pc eight months; also nishwaaso-
giizis*
ishwaasogon pc eight days; also nishwaasogon*
ishwaasogonagad vii be eight days; prt
eshwaasogonagak; also nishwaasogonagad*
ishwaasogonagizi vai be the eighth day of the
month, be eight days old; pn
eshwaasogonagizid; also nishwaasogonagizi*
ishwaasoninj pc eight inches; also nishwaasoninj*
ishwaasosagoons nm eight thousand; also
nishwaasosagoons*
ishwaasozid pc eight feet; also nishwaasozid*

71
i s hwaasoob ii' igan—i zh i naagwad
ishwaasoobii'igan na eight (card);/)/
ishwaasoobii'iganag; also
nishwaasoobii'igan*
ishwaasooshkin pc eight bags; also
nishwaasooshkin*
ishwaaswaabik pt eight dollars; also
nishwaaswaabik*
ishwaaswaak urn eight hundred; also
nishwaaswaak*
ishwaaswewaan pc eight sets, eight pairs; also
n i sh waas we waari*
ishwaaswi nm eight; also nishwaaswi*
iska'ibii vaibail; Isg iindiska'ibii; prt eska'ibiid
iskandan vti drain s.t, dry; Isg indiskandaan; prt
eskandang
iskate vii go down (of a body of water), dry up (of
a body of water); prt eskateg; aug
iskatemagad; prt aug eskatemagak
iskaakizige vai run out of fuel; Isg indiskaakizige;
prt eskaakiziged
iskigamide vii boil down; prt eskigamideg;
aug iskigamideimagad; prt aug
eskigamidemagak
iskigamizan vn boil s.t. down; Isg
indiskigamizaan; prt eskigamizang
iskigamizigan ni sugar camp, sugar bush; pi
iskigamiziganan: loc iskigamizigan ing; dim
iskigamizigaans
iskigamiziganaak ni frame for holding sap-boiling
kettles; pi iskigamiziganaakoon; loc
iskigamiziganaakong; dim
iskigamiziganaakoons
iskigamiziganaatig ni sap-boiling pole; pi
iskigamiziganaaitigoon; loc
iskigamiziganaaltigong; dim
iskigam izi gan aalti goo ns
iskigamizige vaiboil things down (e.g., maple
sap); Isg indiskigamizige; pn eskigamiziged
iskigamizige-giizis na April
iskigamizigewigami;? ni sap-boiling lodge; pi
iskigam izi gewig^migoon; loc
iskigamizigewigamigong; dim
iskigam izigewigamigoons
iskigamizo vai boil down; prt eskigamizod
iw pr that inanimate singular demonstrative:, also i*iw,
i'i, 'i
iw apii pr at that time; also i'iw apii
iwedi pr that over there inanimate singular
demonstrative:, also i'iwedi
iwidi pc over there
izhaa vai go to a certain place; Isg indizhaa; pn
ezhaad
izhaamagad vii go to a certain place; prt
ezhaamagak
Izhi /iN-/ vta say to s,o., speak so to s.o.; Isg
indinaa; pn enaa.d
izhi- pv3 in a certain way, to a certain place, thus,
so, there
izhi-ayaa vai be a certain way; Isg indizhi-ayaa; prt
ezhi-ayaad
izhibii'an vti write s.t. a certain way; Isg
indizhibii'aan; prt ezhibii'ang
izhibii'igaade vii be written a certain way; prt
ezhibii'igaadeg; aug izhibii'igaademagad; prt
aug ezhibii'igaademagak
izhibii'ige vai write things a certain way; Isg
indizhibii'ige; pn ezhibii'iged
izhichigaade vii be made a certain way; pn
ezhichigaadeg; aug izhichigaademagad; prt
aug ezhichigaademagak
izhichigaazo vai be made a certain way; pn
ezhichigaazod
izhichige vai do things a certain way; Isg
indizhichige; pn ezhichiged
izhichigewin ni way of doing, deed; pi
izhichigewinan; dim izhichigewinens
izhidaabaadan vti drag s.t. to a certain place; Isg
indizhidaabaadaan; pn ezhidaabaadang
izhidaabaazh /izhidaabaaN-/ vta drag s.o. to a
certain place; Isg indizhidaabaanaa; pn
ezhidaabaanaad
izhidaabii'iwe vai drive to a certain place; Isg
indizhidaabii'iwe; pn ezhidaabii'iwed
izhidoonem vta point s.o. out with lips; Isg
indizhidoonemaa; pn ezhidoonemaad
izhidooneni vai point a certain way with lips; Isg
indizhidoonen; prt ezhidoonenid
izhidoonetaw vta point (s.t.) out to s.o. with lips;
Isg indizhidoonetawaa; prt ezhidoonetawaad
izhi-giizhigad vii be a certain day of the week; pn
ezhi-giizhigak
izhigiizhwe vai talk a certain way; Isg
indizhigiizhwe; prt ezhigiizhwed
izhi' vta cause s.o. to do something, make s.o. do
something; Isg indizhi'aa; prt ezhi'aad
izhi'o vai dress a certain way; Isg indizhi*; prt
ezhi'od
izhijiwan vii flow a certain way, flow to a certain
place; pn ezhijiwang
izhikawe vai leave tracks going to a certain place;
Isg indizhikawe; prt ezhikawed
izhimaagozi vai smell a certain way; Isg
indizhimaagoz; prt ezhimaagozid
izhimaagwad vii smell a certain way; pn
ezhimaagwak
izhimaam vta have s.o. smell a certain way to one;
Isg indizhimaamaa; prt ezhimaamaad
izhimaandan vti have s.t. smell a certain way to
one; Isg indizhimaandaan; pn ezhimaandang
izhimaaso vai smell a certain way cooking or
burning; pn ezhimaasod
izhimaate vii smell a certain way cooking or
burning; prt ezhimaateg; aug
izhimaatemagad; pn aug ezhimaatemagak
izhinan vti see s.t. a certain way, perceive s.t. a
certain way; Isg indizhinaan; prt ezhinang
izhinaw vta see s.o. a certain way, perceive s.o. a
certain way; Isg indizhinawaa; prt ezhinawaad
izhinaago* vta make s.o. look a certain way; Isg
indizhinaago'aa; prt ezhinaago'aad
izhinaago'idizo vai transform oneself in
appearance; Isg indizhinaago'idiz; prt
ezhinaago'idizod
izhinaagotoon vti2 make s.t. look a certain way;
Isg indizhinaagotoon; pn ezhinaagotood
izhinaagozi vai have a certain appearance, have a
certain look; Isg indizhinaagoz; prt
ezhinaagozid
izhi naagwad vii have a certain appearance, have a
certain look; prt ezhinaagwak

izhinaazhikaw—jaagaakide 
72
izhinaazhikaw via send s.o. to a certain place,
chase s.o. to a certain place; hg
indizhinaazhikawaa; prt ezhinaazhikawaad
izhinikaadan m'name s.t. a certain way; Isg
indizihinikaadaan; pn ezhinikaadang
izhinikaade vii be named a certain way; pn
ezhinikaadeg; aug izhinikaademagad; prt aug
ezhinikaademagak
izhinikaazh /izhinikaaN-/ vta name s.o. a certain
way; Isg indizhinikaanaa; prt ezhinikaanaad
izhinikaazo vai be named a certain way; hg
indizhinikaaz; prt ezhinikaazod
izhinikeni vai move one's arm a certain way; Isg
indizhiniken; prt ezhinikenid
izhininjiini vai move one's hand a certain way; Isg
indizhininjiin; pn ezhininjiinid
izhinizha' /izhinizha'w-/ vta send s.o. to a certain
place; Isg indizhinizha'waa; prt
ezhinizha'waad
izhinizha'amaw vta send (s.t.) to s.o. to a certain
place; Isg indizhinizha'amawaa; prt
ezhinizha'amawaad
izhinizha'an vti send s.t. to a certain place; Isg
indizhinizha'aan; prt ezhinizha'ang
izhinizha'igaade vii be sent to a certain place; prt
ezhinizha'igaadeg; aug
izhinizha'igaademagad; prt aug
ezhinizha'igaademagak
izhinizha'igaazo vai be sent to a certain place; pn
ezhinizha'igaazod
izhinizhikaw vta chase s.o. to a certain place; hg
indizhinizhikawaa; pn ezhinizhikawaad
izhinizhimo vai run to a certain place in flight; Isg
indizhinizhim; prt ezhinizhimod
izhinoo' vta point to s.o. a certain way; hg
indizhinoo'aa; pn ezhinoo'aad
izhinoo'amaw vta point to (s.t.) for s.o.; hg
indizhinoo'amawaa; pn ezhinoo'amawaad
izhinoo'an vti point to s.t. a certain way; hg
indizhinoo'aan; prt ezhinoo'ang
izhinoo'iganinj ni index finger; pi
izhinoo'iganinjiin
izhise vai fly to a certain place; hg indizhise; pn
ezhised
izhise vii fly to a certain place, pass (as time); pn
ezhiseg; aug izhisemagad; prt aug
ezhisemagak
izhishim vta lay s.o. a certain way, put s.o. a cer-
tain way; Isg indizhishimaa; pn ezhishimaad
izhishin vai lie a certain way; hg indizhishin; pn
ezhishing
izhisidoon vti2 lay s.t. a certain way, set s.t. a
certain way; Isg indizhisidoon; pn ezhisidood
izhisin vii lie a certain way, be written a certain
way, be printed a certain way; prt ezhising
izhitigweyaa vii flow to a certain place (as a river);
pn ezhitigweyaag; aug izhitigweyaamagad;
prt aug ezhitigweyaamagak
izhitoon vti2 cause s.t. to, make s.t. a certain way;
hg indizhitoon; pn ezhitood
izhitwaa vat have a certain custom, practice a cer-
tain religion; Isg indizhitwaa; pn ezhitwaad
izhiwebad vii happen a certain way, be a certain
event, be a certain weather condition; pn
ezhiwebak
izhiwebizi vai behave a certain way, have certain
things happen to one, fare a certain way; hg
indizhiwebiz; prt ezhiwebizid
izhiwidaw vta take (s.t.) to s.o. at a certain place;
Isg indizhiwidawaa; pn ezhiwidawaad
izhiwidoon vti2 take s.t. to a certain place, carry
s.t. to a certain place; hg indizhiwidoon; pn
ezhiwidood
izhiwijigaade vii be carried to a certain place, be
taken to a certain place; prt ezhiwijigaadeg;
aug izhiwijigaademagad; pn aug
ezhiwijigaademagak
izhiwijigaazo vai be carried to a certain place, be
taken to a certain place; prt ezhiwijigaazod
izhiwizh /izhiwiN-/ vta take s.o. to a certain place,
carry s.o. to a certain place; hg indizhiwinaa;
pn ezhiwinaad
izhi-wiindan vti call s.t. a certain way, name s.t. a
certain way; hg indizhi-wiindaan; pn ezhi-
wiindang
izhi-wiinde vii be called a certain way, be named a
certain way; prt ezhi-wiindeg; aug izhi-
wiindemagad; pn aug ezhi-wiindemagak
izhi-wiinzh /izhi-wiinN-/ vta call s.o. a certain way,
name s.o. a certain way; hg indizhi-wiinaa; pn
ezhi-wiinaad
izhi-wiinzo vai be called a certain way, be named a
certain way; hg indizhi-wiinz; prt ezhi-
wiinzod
izhizideni vai move one's foot a certain way; hg
indizhiziden; prt ezhizidenid
izhiigad vii be a certain way (as something sheet-
like); pn ezhiigak
izhiigizi vai be a certain way (as something sheet-
like); pn ezhiigizid
iidog pc maybe, must be
J
jachakan= < jakan=
jakanaamo vai have chest pains while breathing;
hg injakanaam; prt jekanaamod
jakiiwii vai strain self in lifting; hg injakiiwii; pn
jekiiwiid
jaachaag= < jaag=
jaachaamo vai sneeze; hg injaachaam; pn
jayaachaamod
jaagadaawaage vai+o sell out (of s.t.); Isg
injaagadaawaage, injaagadaawaagen; pn
jayaagadaawaaged
jaaga'e vai use up all of the ammunition; hg
injaaga'e; pn jayaaga'ed
jaagaabaji' vta use s.o. up; hg injaagaabaji'aa; pn
jayaagaabaji'aad
jaagaabajitoon vti2 use s.t. up; hg
injaagaabajitoon; prt jayaagaabajitood
jaagaakide vii burn up; pn jayaagaakideg; aug
jaagaakidemagad; pn aug
jayaagaakidemagak

73
jaagaakiz—jiichiishkinzhe'igan
jaagaakiz /jaagaakizw-/ via burn s.o. up; Isg
injaagaakizwaa; prt jayaagaakizwaad
jaagaakizan oriburn s.t. up; Isg injaagaakizaan;
fri jayaagaakizang
jaagaakizo vai burn up; prt jayaagaakizod
jaagide vii burn up; prt jayaagideg; aug
jaagidemagad; prt aug jayaagidemagak
jaagin via be out of s.o.; Isg injaaginaa; prt
jayaaginaad
jaaginan vti be out of s.t.; Isg injaaginaan; prt
jayaaginang
jaaginazh /jaaginaN-/ vta kill s.o. off; Isg
injaaginanaa; prt jayaaginanaad
jaaginigaade vii be used up; prt jayaaginigaadeg;
aug jaaginigaademagad; prt aug
jayaaginigaademagak
jaaginige vai use things up, take everything, spend
everything; Isg injaaginige; prt jayaaginiged
jaagise vai+o run out, become exhausted; Isg
injaagise, injaagisen; prt jayaagised
jaagise vii run out; prt jayaagiseg; aug
jaagisemagad; prt aug jayaagisemagak
jaagiz /jaagizw-/ vta burn s.o. up; Isg injaagizwaa;
prt jayaagizwaad
jaagizan vti burn s.t. up; Isg injaagizaan; prt
jayaagizang
jaagizhooniyaaweshiin vai use up all of the money;
Isg injaagizhooniyaaweshin; pn
jayaagizhooniyaaweshing
jaagizige vai use up all of the ammunition; Isg
injaagizige; pn jayaagiziged
jaagizo vai burn up; Isg injaagiz; prt jayaagizod
jaagizodizo vai burn oneself; Isg injaagizodiz; prt
jayaagizodizod
jaangate vii be a corner of a room; pn
jayaangateg; aug jaangatemagad; prt aug
jayaangatemagak
jaangidiyeshin vai lie with one's rear end sticking
out; Isg injaangidiyeshin; prt
jayaangidiyeshing
jejiibajikii na elephant; pi jejiibajikiig; dim
jejiibajikiins
jekaagaminan vti dip s.t. in; Isg
injekaagaminaan; prt jayekaagaminang
jekaakwa'am vai2 go into the woods; Isg
injekaakwa'am; prt jayekaakwa'ang
jeko-mazina'igan ni check; pi jeko-
mazina'iganan; loc jeko-mazina'iganing; dim
jeko-mazina'igaans
ji- pvl that, so that, in order to; future and modal
prefix in unchanged conjunct
jibwaa-p»7 before; also ji-bwaa-
jiibadabi vai sit stiffly; Isg injiibadab; prt
jaabadabid
jlibadaakogaabawi vai stand stiffly; Isg
injiibadaakogaabaw; pn
jaabadaakogaabawid
jiibadaakogaade vai have a stiff leg; Isg
injiibadaakogaade; prt jaabadaakogaaded
jiibadaakonike vai have a stiff arm; Isg
injiibadaakonike; pn jaabadaakoniked
jiibajigaade vai have a stiff leg; Isg injiibajigaade;
pn jaabajigaaded
jiibajigwayawe vai have a stiff neck; Isg
injiibajigwayawe; pn jaabajigwayawed
jiibajinike vai have a stiff arm; Isg injiibajinike; pn
jaabajiniked
jiibay na ghost, spirit; pi jiibayag
jiibayag niiini'idiwag /niimi'idi-/ vai they are the
northern lights; pn jiibayag naami'idijig
jiibayaki ni graveyard, cemetery; pi jiibayakiin; loc
jiibayakiing; dim jiibayakiins
jiibayaatig na grave marker; pi jiibayaatigoog; loc
jiibayaatigong; dim jiibayaatigoons
jiibaakwaadan vti cook s.t.; Isg injiibaakwaadaan;
prt jaabaakwaadang
jiibaakwaazh /jiibaakwaaN-/ vta cook s.o.; Isg
injiibaakwaanaa; pn jaabaakwaanaad
jiibaakwe vai cook; Isg injiibaakwe; prt
jaabaakwed
jiibaakwe-gizhaabikizigan ni cook stove; pi
jiibaakwe-gizhaabikiziganan; loc jiibaakwe-
gizhaabikiziganing; dim jiibaakwe-
gizhaabikizigaans
jiibaakwewakik na cooking pot, pan; pi
jiibaakwewakikoog; loc jiibaakwewakikong;
dim jiibaakwewakikoons
jiibaakwewigamig ni kitchen, cook shack; pi
jiibaakwewigamigoon; loc
jiibaakwewigamigong; dim
jiibaakwewigamigoons
jiibaakwewikwe na cook (female); pi
jiibaakwewikweg
jiibaakwewinini na cook (male); pi
jiibaakwewininiwag
jiibegamig ni grave house, casket; pi
jiibegamigoon; loc jiibegamigong; dim
jiibegamigoons
jiibenaake vai have a feast honoring the dead; Isg
injiibenaake; prt jaabenaaked
jiibtingweni vai wink; Isg injiibiingwen; pn
jaabiingwenid
jiibiingwetaw vta wink at s.o.; Isg
injiibiingwetawaa; prt jaabiingwetawaad
jiichiibishkaa vai quiver; Isg injiichiibishkaa; pn
jaachiibishkaad
jiichiibizideni vai tap one's foot; Isg
injiichiibiziden; pn jaachiibizidenid
jiichiibiingwetaw vta wink at s.o.; Isg
injiichiibiingwetawaa; prt
jaachiibiingwetawaad
jiichiigaawiganebizh /jiichiigaawiganebiN-/ vta
scratch s.o.'s back; /seinjiichiigaawiganebinaa;
prt jaachiigaawiganebinaad
jiichiigibidoon vti2 scratch s.t. (leaving a visible
mark); Isg injiichiigibidoon; pn
jaachiigibidood
jiichiigibizh /jiichiigibiN-/ vta scratch s.o. (leaving
a visible mark); Isg injiichiigibinaa; prt
jaachiigibinaad
jiichiigii vai scratch (leaving a visible mark); Isg
injiichiigii;p,rjaachiigiid
jiichiigom na wart; pi jiichiigomag
jiichiigwam vta chew on s.o.; Isg injiichiigwamaa;
pn jaachiigwamaad
jiichiigwandan vti chew on s.t.; Isg
injiichiigwandaan; prt jaachiigwandang
jiichiigwanjige vai chew on things; Isg
injiichiigwanjige; pn jaachiigwanjiged
jiichiishkinzhe'igan ni fire poker; pi
jiichiishkinzhe'iganan; loc

jiichiishkinzhe'ige—madwenjige 
74
jiichiishkinzhe'iganing; dim
jiichiishkinzhe'igaans
jiichiishkinzhe'ige vai stir the fire; Isg
injiichiishkinzhe'ige: pn jaachiishkinzhe'iged
jiigada'igan ni broom; pi jiigada'iganan; loc
jiigada'iganing; dim jiigada'igaans
jiiga'azh /jiiga'aN-/ vta scale s.o.; Isg injiiga'anaa;
pn jaaga'anaad
jiiga'e vai scale fish; Isg injiiga'e; pn jaaga'ed
jiigashkosiw pc by a meadow
jiigayi'ii pc by it, along it
jiigaakwaa pc near the woods
jiigaatig pc by a tree, by a wall
jiigewpc along the shore
jiigewe vai go along the shore, go along the edge;
Isg injiigewe; pn jaagewed
jiigewebatoo vai run along the shore; Isg
injiigewebatoo; pn jaagewebatood
jiigewebizo vai drive along the shore, speed along
the shore; Isg injiigewebiz; pn jaagewebizod
jiigewedaabii'iwe vai drive along the shore; Isg
injiigewedaabii'iwe; pn jaagewedaabii'iwed
jiigewe'am vai2 paddle along the shore; Isg
injiigewe'am; pn jaagewe'ang
jiigewe'o vai paddle along the shore; Isg
injiigewe'; pn jaagewe'od
jiigewekwazhiwe vai paddle along the shore; Isg
injiigewekwazhiwe; pn jaagewekwazhiwed
jiigeweyaazhagaame vai walk along the shore; Isg
injiigeweyaazhagaame; pn
jaageweyaazhagaamed
jiigeweyaazhagaamebatoo vai run along the
shore; Isg injiigeweyaazhagaamebatoo; pn
jaageweyaazhagaamebatood
jiigi- pn near, by
jiigibiig pc along the shore, by the water
jiigigamigpc by a house
jiigikana pc by a road or trail
jiigishkode pc by a fire
jiigishkwaand pc by a door
jiimaan ni canoe, boat; pi jiimaanan; loc
jiimaaning; dim jiimaanens
jiimaanike vai make a canoe, make a boat; Isg
injiimaanike; pn jaamaaniked
jiime vai go by canoe, paddle; Isg injiime; pn
jaamed
jiingwe vii rumble; pn jaangweg; aug
jiingwemagad; pn aug jaangwemagak
jiis ni rutabaga; pi jiisan; he jiising; dim jiisens
jiisakaan ni shaking tent; pi jiisakaanan; loc
jiisakaaning; dim jiisakaanens
jiisakii vai practice divination in a shaking tent; Isg
injiisakii;pttjaasakiid
jiisakiiwinini na seer who uses a shaking tent; pi
jiisakiiwininiwag
jiishada'igan ni broom; pi jiishada'iganan; loc
jiishada'iganing; dim jiishada'igaans
jiishada'ige vai sweep; Isg injiishada'ige; pn
jaashada'iged
jiishakamiga'igan in rake; pi jiishakamiga'iganan;
loc jiishakamiga'iganing; dim
jiishakamiga'igaans
jiishaakwa* /jiishaakwa'w-/ vta scrape s.o. to
remove hair (e.g., a hide); Isg
injiishaakwa'waa; pn jaashaakwa'aad
jiishaakwa'igan ni hide scraper; pi
jiishaakwa'iganan
jiishaakwa'ige vai scrape hides; Isg
injiishaakwa'ige; pn jaashaakwa'iged
jiisibizh /jiisibiN-/ vta pinch s.o.; Isg injiisibinaa;
pn jaasibinaad
jiiskinikebizo vai wear a bracelet, wear arm
garters; Isg injiiskinikebiz; pn jaaskinikebizod
jiiskinikebizon ni arm garter, bracelet; pi
jiiskinikebizonan; loc jiiskinikebizoning; dim
jiiskinikebizonens
M
madaabii vai go to the shore; Isg nimadaabii; pn
medaabiid
madaabiibatoo vai run to the shore; Isg
nimadaabiibatoo; pn medaabiibatood
madaabiiwidoon vti2 take s.t. to the shore, carry
s.t. to the shore; Isg nimadaabiiwidoon; pn
medaabiiwidood
madaabiiwizh /madaabiiwiN-/ vta take s.o. to the
shore, carry s.o. to the shore; Isg
nimadaabiiwinaa; pn medaabiiwinaad
madaagamin /madaagami-/ vii be turbulent
water; pn medaagamig
madoodiswan ni sweat lodge; pi madoodiswanan;
loc madoodiswaning
madoodoo vai take a sweat bath; Isg
nimadoodoo; pn medoodood
madoodoowasin na rock for sweat lodge; pi
madoodoowasiniig; loc madoodoowasiniing
madoodoowinini na Finn;/'/
madoodoowininiwag
madwe- pv4 being heard, making noise
madwebiisaa vii rain is heard; pn medwebiisaag;
aug madwebiisaamagad; pn aug
medwebiisaamagak
madwegamide vii make noise boiling; pn
medwegamideg; aug madwegamidemagad;
pn aug medwegamidemagak
madwegamijii vai one's stomach growls; Isg
nimadwegamijii; pn medwegamijiid
madwegamizo vai make noise boiling; pn
medwegamizod
madwe' /madwe'w-/ vta drum on s.o.; Isg
nimadwe'; pn medwe'waad
madwe'an vti drum on s.t.; Isg nimadwe'aan; pn
medwe'ang
madwejiwan vii be heard flowing (e.g., a rapids);
pn medwejiwang
madwekwadin vii be heard cracking (as ice); prt
medwekwading
madwengwaam vai make noise in one's sleep,
snore; Isg nimadwengwaam; pn
medwengwaang
madwenjige vai be heard eating; Isg
nimadwenjige; pn medwenjiged

75 
madwesagishin—makak
madwesagishin vai be heard falling on the floor,
be heard walking on the floor; Isg
nimadwesagishin; prt rnedwesagishing
madweshin vai ring, make noise hitting; Isg
nimadweshin; prt medweshing
madwesidoon vtt2 nag s.t., make noise hitting s.t.;
hg nimadwesidoion; prt medwesidood
madwesijige vai ring things, make noise hitting
things; Isg nimadlwesijige; prt medwesijiged
madwesin vii ring, make noise hitting; prt
medwesing
madwetaa vai be heard in an activity; Isg
nimadwetaa; prt medwetaad
madwewe vii make noise; prt medweweg; aug
madwewemagad; prt aug medwewemagak
madweweehigan ni musical instrument, piano,
organ; pi madwewechiganan; loc
madwewechigariing; dim madwewechigaans
madwewechige vai make sounds on things, play
music; Isg nimadwewechige; prt
medwewechiged
madwewetaw vta play music for s.o.; Isg
nimadwewetawaa; prt medwewetawaad; also
madwewetamaw
madwewetoon vti2 make sounds on s.t., make
noise on s.t.; Isg nimadwewetoon; prt
medwewetood
madweyaabiigibijigain ni guitar; pi
madweyaabiigibijiganan; loc
madweyaabiigibijiganing; dim
madweyaabiigibijigaans
madweyaabiigibijige vai play a guitar; hg
nimadweyaabiigibijige; prt
medweyaabiigibijiged
madwezige vai be heard shooting; hg
nimadwezige; pn medweziged
ma'iingan na wolf; pi ma'iinganag; dim
ma'iingaans
ma'iinganasim na German shepherd; pi
ma'iinganasimoog; dim ma'iinganasimoons
ma'iinganiwayaan na wolf hide; pi
ma'iinganiwayaanag; loc
ma'iinganiwayaaning; dim
ma'iinganiwayaanens
maji- pv4 bad
majigiizhwe vai swear; hg nimajigiizhwe; pn
mejigiizhwed
majigoode ni dress; pi majigoodeyan
maji-izhiwebizi vai misbehave, lead an evil life; hg
nimaji-izhiwebiz; prt meji-izhiwebizid
maji-manidoo na evil manitou, devil; pi maji-
manidoog; dim nnaji-manidoons
maji-manidoowaadizi vai be evil, be possessed by
an evil spirit; hg nimaji-manidoowaadiz; prt
meji-manidoowaadizid
maji-mashkiki ni poison; pi maji-mashkikiwan;
loc maji-mashkikiing; dim maji-mashkikiins
makade ni black gunpowder; loc makadeng
makade- pv4 black
makade-aniibiish ni black tea; loc makade-
aniibiishing
makade-bigiw na tar, asphalt
makadeke vai undergo puberty fast; hg
nimakadeke; prt mekadeked
makade-mashkikiwaaboo ni coffee; loc makade-
mashkikiwaaboong
makadeshib na black duck; pi makadeshibag; dim
makadeshibens
makadewaa vii be black, be dark; prt
mekadewaag; aug makadewaamagad; pn aug
mekadewaamagak
makadewaabikad vii be black (as something
mineral); prt mekadewaabikak
makadewaabikizi vai be black (as something
mineral), be in eclipse; prt mekadewaabikizid
makadewaabiigad vii be black (as something
string-like); pn mekadewaabiigak
makadewaabiigizi vai be black (as something
string-like); pn mekadewaabiigizid
makadewaagamin /makadewaagami-/ vii be
black (as a liquid), be dark (as a liquid); prt
mekadewaagamig
makade-waagosh na fox (in black phase); pi
makade-waagoshag; dim makade-
waagoshens
makadewaakozi vai be black (as something stick-
or wood-like); prt mekadewaakozid
makadewaakwad vii be black (as something stick-
or wood-like); prt mekadewaakwak
makadewaande vii be colored black; prt
mekadewaandeg; aug
makadewaandemagad; pn aug
mekadewaandemagak
makadewaanzo vai be colored black; prt
mekadewaanzod
makadewegad vii be black (as something sheet-
like); pn mekadewegak
makadewegizi vai be black (as something sheet-
like); prt mekadewegizid
makadewi'o vai wear black; hg nimakadewi'; prt
mekadewi'od
makadewindibe vai have black hair; hg
nimakadewindibe; prt mekadewindibed
makadewizi vai be black, be dark; prt
mekadewizid
makade-wiiyaas na Black person, person of
African descent; pi makade-wiiyaasag
makade-wiiyaasikwe na Black woman, woman of
African descent; pi makade-wiiyaasikweg
makadeyaanakwad vii there are dark clouds; pn
mekadeyaanakwak
makak ni box, birch bark basket; pi makakoon; loc
makakong; dim makakoons
makak (birch bark basket)

makakoke—mamiiziwe= 
76
makakoke vai make a box, make a birch bark
basket; Isg nimakakoke; prt mekakoked
makakosag ni tub, barrel; pi makakosagoon: he
makakosagong; dim makakosagoons
makam via take (s.t.) from s.o. forcibly, rob s.o. of
(s.t.); Isg nimakamaa; />rr mekamaad
rnakandwe vai rob people, take captives; Isg
nimakandwe; prt mekandwed
makizin ni moccasin, shoe;p/makizinan; loc
makizining; dim makizinens
makizinan (moccasins); see also
bashkweginwakizinan, bashkwegino-makizinan
makizinataadiwag /makizinataadi-/ vai they play
the moccasin game with each other; Ipl
nimakizinataadimin; prt mekizinataadijig
makizinataage vai play the moccasin game; Isg
nimakizinataage; prt mekizinataaged
makizinataage-nagamon ni moccasin game song;
pi makizinataage-nagamonan
makizinataagewin ni moccasin game
makizineyaab ni shoelace; pi makizineyaabiin; loc
makizineyaabiing; dim makizineyaabiins
makizinike vai make moccasins, make shoes; Isg
nimakizinike; prt mekiziniked
makominagaawanzh na mountain ash; pi
makominagaawanzhiig; loc
makominagaawanzhiing; dim
makominagaawanzhiins
makoons na bear cub; pi makoonsag
makwa na bear; pi makwag; dim makoons
makwasaagim na bear paw snowshoe; pi
makwasaagimag; loc makwasaagiming; dim
makwasaagimens
mamadweyaashkaa vu roar (as waves); prt
memadweyaashkaag; aug
mamadweyaashkaamagad; prt aug
memadweyaashkaamagak
mamagoniishkwe vaihave the mumps; Isg
nimamagoniishkwe; prt memagoniishkwed
mamakiziwin ni smallpox
mamakii* vta allot s.o. land; Isg nimamakii'aa; prt
memakii'aad
mamakii'idim /mamakii'idi-/ vai there is an
allotment of land; prt memakii'iding
mamaw vta take (s.t.) from s.o., pick (s.t.) up
from s.o.; Isg nimamawaa; prt memawaad
mamaach= < mich=
mamaachaawan /mamaachaa-/ vii they are big;
prt memaachaagin; aug
mamaachaamagadoon; prt aug
memaachaamagakin
mamaadwe vai groan; Isg nimamaadwe; prt
memaadwed
mamaajide'eshkaa vai have a heart attack; Isg
nimamaajide'eshkaa; prt
memaajide'eshkaad
mamaajise vai move; Isg nimamaajise; pn
memaajised
mamaajise vii move; prl memaajiseg; aug
mamaajisemagad; prt aug memaajisemagak
mamaajii vai move, be in motion; Isg nimamaajii;
prt memaajiid
mamaakadew= < makadew=
mamaandaagochige vai perform tricks; Isg
nimamaandaagochige; prt
memaandaagochiged
mamaandaagochigewin ni circus, carnival; pi
mamaandaagochigewinan
mamaandid= < mindid=
mamaandidowag /mamaandido-/ vai they are
big; prt memaandidojig
mamaang= < mang=
mamaangade= < mangade=
mamaangadepon /mamaangadepo-/ vii snow in
large flakes; prt memaangadepog
mamaangaashkaa vii be big waves; prt
memaangaashkaag: aug
mamaangaashkaamagad; prt aug
memaangaashkaamagak
mamaashkaw= < mashkaw=
mamaayag= < mayag=
mamaazhi' vta prevail over s.o., conquer s.o.; Isg
nimamaazhi'aa; prt memaazhi'aad
mamaazhitoon vti2 prevail over s.t., conquer s.t.;
Isg nimamaazhitoon; prt memaazhitood
mamaazhii vai make things badly, do a poor job;
Isg nimamaazhii; prt memaazhiid
mamaazikaa vai move, agitate; Isg
nimamaazikaa; pn memaazikaad
mami /mam-/ vta take s.o., pick s.o. up; Isg
nimamaa; prt memaad
mamigaade vii be taken, be picked up; pn
memigaadeg; aug mamigaademagad; prt aug
memigaademagak
mamigaazo vai be taken, be picked up; pn
memigaazod
mamige vai take things, pick up things; Isg
nimamige; prt memiged
maminaadendam vai2 have proud thoughts, have
an arrogant attitude; Isg nimaminaadendam;
prt meminaadendang
maminaadizi vai be arrogant; Isg nimaminaadiz;
prt meminaadizid
mamizh /mamizhw-/ vta cut s.o. out; Isg
nimamizhwaa; pn memizhwaad
mamizhan vti cut s.t. out; Isg nimamizhaan; pn
memizhang
mamiidaawendam vai2 be disturbed in one's
mind, be troubled in one's mind; Isg
nimamiidaawendam; prt memiidaawendang
mamiikw= < mikw=
mamiisaw= < misaw=
mamiiziwe= < miziwe=

77 
mamoon—manoominaaboo
mamoon vti2 take s.t.3 pick s.t. up; hg
nimamoon; pn memood
manashkikiiwe vai gather medicine; Isg
nimanashkikiiwe; prt menashkikiiwed
manaaji' ma spare s.o., go easy on s.o.; hg
nimanaaji'aa; prt menaaji'aad
manaajitoon vti2 spare s.t., go easy on s.t.; hg
nimanaajitoon; prt menaajitood
mandaamin na corn, kernel of corn; pi
mandaaminag; loc mandaamining; dim
mandaaminens
mandaaminashk ni cornstalk; ft
mandaaminashlkoon; loc
mandaaminash kong; dim
mandaaminash koons
mandaaminaaboo ni corn soup; loc
mandaaminaaboong
mandaaminaak ni ear of corn; pi
mandaaminaakoon; loc mandaaminaakong;
dim mandaaminaakoons
mandaamini-gitigaan in cornfield; pi
mandaamini-gitigaanan; he mandaamini-
gitigaaning; dim mandaamini-gitigaanens
mandaaminiwazh ni gunnysack; pi
mandaaminiwazhan; loc
mandaaminiwazhing; dim
mandaaminiwazhens
manepwaa vai be short of tobacco, need to smoke;
hg nimanepwaa; prt menepwaad
manezi vai-o be in need of (s.t.), be short of (s.t.);
7s£nimanez, nimanezin; prt menezid
mangade' vta make s.o. wide, widen s.o.; hg
nimangade'aa; prt mengade'aad
mangademon /mangademo-/ mi be wide (as a
road or trail); prt mengademog; also
mangadademon
mangadengwe vai have a broad face; hg
nimangadengwe; prt mengadengwed
mangadetoon vti2 make s.t. wide, widen s.t.; hg
nimangadetoon; prt mengadetood
mangadeyaa vii be 'wide; prt mengadeyaag; aug
mangadeyaamagad; prt aug
mengadeyaamagak
mangadeyoonagad ra'be wide (as a boat); prt
mengadeyoonagak
mangadezi vai be wide; prt mengadezid
mangadinaa vii there is a big hill; prt
mengadinaag; aug mangadinaamagad: prt
aug mengadinaamagak
mangate vii be roomy; prt mengateg; aug
mangatemagad; prt aug mengatemagak
mangaanibaadan vti shovel s.t.; hg
nimangaanibaadaan; prt mengaanibaadang
mangaanibaajigan ni shovel; pi
mangaanibaajiganan; loc
mangaanibaajiganing; dim
mangaanibaajigaans
mangaanibaajige vai shovel things (e.g., snow);
hg nimangaanibaajige; prt
mengaanibaajiged
mangaanibaazh /mangaanibaaN-/ vta shovel s.o.
(e.g., snow); hg nimangaanibaanaa; prt
mengaanibaanaad
mangaanibii vai shovel; hg nimangaanibii; prt
mengaanibiid
mangide'e vai be courageous; hg nimangide'e:
prt mengide'ed
mangi' vta make s.o. big; hg nimangi'aa; prt
mengi'aad
mangindibe vai have a big head; hg
nimangindibe; prt mengindibed
mangininjii vai have a big hand; hg nimangininjii;
prt mengininjiid
mangishkiinzhigwe ^ai have a big eye; hg
nimangishkiinzhigwe; prt
mengishkiinzhigwed
mangitigweyaa viibe wide (as a river);prt
mengitigweyaag; aug mangitigweyaamagad;
prt aug mengitigweyaamagak
mangiwane vai carry a big pack; hg
nimangiwane; pn mengiwaned
mangizide vai have a big foot; hg nimangizide;
pn mengizided
manidoo na god, spirit, manitou; pi manidoog;
dim manidoons
manidoo-biiwaabik ni steel, magnet; loc manidoo-
biiwaabikong; dim manidoo-biiwaabikoons
manidoo-giizis na January; also gichi-manidoo-
giiizis
manidoo-giizisoons na December
manidookaazo vai take on spiritual power by
one's own authority; hg nimanidookaaz; prt
menidookaazod
manidooke vai have spiritual power, conduct a
ceremony; Isg nimanidooke; prt menidooked
manidoominens na bead; pi manidoominensag;
loc manidoominensing
manidoorninensikaan na item of bead work; pi
manidoominensikaanag; loc
manidoominensikaaning; dim
manidoominensikaanens
manidoo-nagamon ni spiritual song; pi manidoo-
nagamonan; loc manidoo-nagamoning; dim
manidoo-nagamonens
manidoons na bug, insect; pi manidoonsag
manidoonsikaa vii there are many bugs; prt
menidoonsikaag; aug manidoonsikaamagad;
prt aug menidoonsikaamagak
manidoo-waabooz na cottontail rabbit; pi
manidoo-waaboozoog; dim manidoo-
waaboozoons
manidoowaadizi vai have a spiritual nature; hg
nimanidoowaadiz; pn menidoowaadizid
manidoowi vai be a spirit, be a manitou; hg
nimanidoow; pn menidoowid
manisaw vta cut (s.t.) as firewood for s.o.; hg
nimanisawaa; pn menisawaad
manisaadan vti cut s.t. as firewood; hg
nimanisaadaan; prt menisaadang
rnanise vai cut firewood; hg nimanise; prt
menised
maniwiigwaase vai gather birch bark; hg
nimaniwiigwaase; prt meniwiigwaased
manoomin ni wild rice; loc manoomining; dim
manoominens; also anishinaabe-manoomin
manoominaganzh ni wild rice stalk; pi
manoominaganzhiin
manoominaaboo ni wild rice broth; loc
manoominaaboong

manoominikaa—mawadishiwe 
78
manoominikaa vii there is much wild rice; prt
menoominikaag; aug manoominikaamagad;
prt aug menoominikaamagak
manoominike vai harvest wild rice, make rice; Isg
nimanoominike; prt menoominiked
manoominike-giizis na the month of ricing:
September, August
manoominike-mazina'igaans ni ricing license; pi
manoominike-mazina'igaansan
manoominikeshiinh na rice bird; pi
manoominikeshiinyag
manoomini-mashkimod ni rice bag; pi
manoomini-mashkimodan; loc manoomini-
mashkimodaang
manoominiwazh ni rice bag; pi
manoominiwazhan; loc manoominiwazhing
mashkawadin vii freeze, be frozen; prt
meshkawading
mashkawaji vai freeze, be frozen, be frostbitten;
Isg nimashkawaj; prt meshkawajid
mashkawaji-bimide ni tallow; loc mashkawaji-
bimideng
mashkawajininjiiwaji vaihave a hand stiff from
cold; Isg nimashkawajininjiiwaj; prt
meshkawajininjiiwajid
mashkawapide vii be tied tight; prt
meshkawapideg; aug mashkawapidemagad;
prt aug meshkawapidemagak
mashkawapidoon vti2 tie s.t. tight; Isg
nimashkawapidoon; prt meshkawapidood
mashkawapizh /mashkawapiN-/ vta tie s.o. tight;
Isg nimashkawapinaa; prt meshkawapinaad
mashkawapizo vai be tied tight; Isg
nimashkawapiz; prt meshkawapizod
mashkawaa vii be strong, be hard, be dense; prt
meshkawaag; aug mashkawaamagad; prt aug
meshkawaamagak
mashkawaagamin /mashkawaagami-/ :•/; be
strong (as a liquid); prt meshkawaagamig
mashkawaakwadin vii be frozen stiff; prt
meshkawaakwading
mashkawaakwaji vai be frozen stiff, be frostbitten;
Isg nimashkawaakwaj; prt meshkawaakwajid
mashkawaakwajidoon vti2 freeze s.t. stiff; Isg
nimashkawaakwajidoon; prt
meshkawaakwajidood
mashkawaakwajim vta freeze s.o. stiff; Isg
nimashkawaakwajimaa; prt
meshkawaakwajimaad
mashkawaakwajininjiiwaji vai have a frozen hand;
Isg nimashkawaakwajininjiiwaj; prt
meshkawaakwajininjiiwajid
mashkawimaaso vai smell strong burning or
cooking; prt meshkawimaasod
mashkawimaate vii smell strong burning or
cooking; prt meshkawimaateg; aug
mashkawimaatemagad; prt aug
meshkawimaatemagak
mashkawizi vai be strong, be dense, be hard; prt
meshkawizid
mashkawizii vai be strong (of a person), have
inner strength; i5^nimashkawizii;prt
meshkawiziid
mashkawiziiwin ni power; muscle; pi
mashkawiziiwinan; loc mashkawiziiwining;
dim mashkawiziiwinens
mashkiki ni medicine; pi mashkikiwan; loc
mashkikiing; dim mashkikiins
mashkikiwaaboo ni liquid medicine; pi
mashkikiwaaboon; loc mashkikiwaaboong
mashkikii-adaawewigamig ni pharmacy,
drugstore; pi mashkikii-adaawewigamigoon;
loc mashkikii-adaawewigamigong; dim
mashkikii-adaawewigamigoons; also
mashkikiiwi-adaawewigamig
mashkikii-adaawewinini na pharmacist, druggist;
pi mashkikii-adaawewininiwag; also
mashkikiiwi-adaawewinini
mashkikiikaazh /mashkikiikaaN-/ vta doctor s.o.;
Isg nimashkikiikaanaa; prt meshkikiikaanaad
mashkikiike vai make medicine; Isg
nimashkikiike; prt meshkikiiked
mashkikiins ni pill; pi mashkikiinsan
mashkikiiwikwe na nurse (female); pi
mashkikiiwikweg; dim mashkikiiwikwens
mashkikiiwinini na doctor; pi
mashkikiiwininiwag; dim mashkikiiwininiins
mashkikiiwininiikwe na doctor (female); pi
mashkikiiwininiikweg
mashkimod ni bag, sack; pi mashkimodan; loc
mashkimodaang; dim mashkimodens,
mashkimodaans
mashkimodegwaajigan ni pocket; pi
mashkimodegwaajiganan; loc
mashkimodegwaajiganing; dim
mashkimodegwaajigaans
mashkimodens ni envelope; pi mashkimodensan;
loc mashkimodensing
mashkiigimin na lowbush cranberry; pi
mashkiigiminag; loc mashkiigimining; dim
mashkiigiminens
mashkiigiminagaawanzh ni lowbush cranberry
bush; pi mashkiigiminagaawanzhiin; loc
mashkiigiminagaawanzhiing; dim
mashkiigiminagaawanzhiins
mashkiigwaatig na tamarack; pi
mashkiigwaatigoog; loc mashkiigwaatigong;
dim mashkiigwaatigoons
mashkode ni prairie, plain; pi mashkoden; loc
mashkodeng; dim mashkodens
mashkode-bizhiki na bison, buffalo; pi
mashkode-bizhikiwag; dim mashkode-
bizhikiins
mashkodesimin na bean; pi mashkodesiminag;
loc mashkodesimining; dim
mashkodesiminens; also mashkodiisimin
mashkodesiminaaboo ni bean soup; loc
mashkodesiminaaboong
mashkosiw ni grass, hay; pi mashkosiwan; loc
mashkosiing; dim mashkosiins
mashkosiigaan ni lodge of grass; pi
mashkosiigaanan; loc mashkosiigaaning; dim
mashkosiigaanens
mawadish /rnawadiS-/ vta visit s.o.; Isg
nimawadisaa; prt mewadisaad
mawadishiwe vai visit people; Isg
nimawadishiwe; prt mewadishiwed

79 
mawadisidiwag—mazinaatesewigamig
mawadisidiwag /mawadisidi-/ vai they visit each
other; Ipl nimawadisidimin; pn mewadisidijig
mawi vai cry, weep; hg nimaw; pn mewid
mawim vta cry for s.o.; hg nimawimaa; pn
mewimaad
mawinazh /mawinaN-/ via run at s.o., attack s.o.;
Isg nimawinanaa; pn mewinanaad
mawindan vti cry for s.t.; hg nimawindaan; pn
mewindang
mawinzo vai pick berries; hg nimawinz; pn
mewinzod
mawishki vai be a crybaby; Isg nimawishk; pn
mewishkid
mawiikaazo vai pretend to cry; Isg nimawiikaaz;
pn mewiikaazod
mawiinsiwi vai cry a little; hg nimawiinsiw; pn
mewiinsiwid
mayagendam vai2 feel strange; hg
nimayagendam; pn meyagendang
mayagendaagwad vii be considered strange; pn
meyagendaagwak
mayagenim vta consider s.o. strange; Isg
nimayagenimaa; pn meyagenimaad
mayagi- pv4 strange, foreign, exotic
mayagi-anishinaabe na non-local Indian; pi
mayagi-anishiriaabeg; dim mayagi-
anishinaabens
mayagi-bine na pheasant; pi mayagi-binewag; dim
mayagi-binens
mayaginaagozi vai look strange, look foreign; hg
nimayaginaagoz; pn meyaginaagozid
mayaginaagwad vii look strange, look foreign; pn
meyaginaagwaik
mayagitaagozi vai sound strange, sound foreign;
pn meyagitaagozid
mayagitaagwad vii sound strange, sound foreign;
pn meyagitaagwak
mayagizi vai be strange, be foreign; hg
nimayagiz; pn meyagizid
mayagwe vai speak a strange language; hg
nimayagwe; pn meyagwed
mayagwewinini na foreigner, speaker of a strange
language; pi mayagwewininiwag
mayaajiibizod na-pt engine; pi maayaajiibizojig
mazaanag /mazaan-/ na chaff from wild rice
plural', he maza.aning; dim mazaanens
mazaanaatig na thistle; pi mazaanaatigoog; he
mazaanaatigong; dim mazaanaatigoons
mazhi /maN-/ vta have sexual intercourse with
s.o.; hg nimanaa; pn menaad
mazhiwe vai have sexual intercourse; hg
nimazhiwe; pn mezhiwed
mazhii'igan ni cut-over clearing; pi mazhii'iganan;
he mazhii'iganing; dim mazhii'igaans
mazhii'ige vai clear land; Isg nimazhii'ige; pn
mezhii'iged
mazina'amaw vta owe (s.t.) to s.o., get credit
froms.o.; hg n imazina'amawaa; pn
mezina'amawaad
mazina'igan ni book, paper, letter, document; pi
mazina'iganan; loc mazina'iganing; dim
mazina'igaans
mazina'igani-makak ni cardboard box; pi
mazina'igani-makakoon; loc mazina'igani-
makakong; dim mazina'igani-makakoons
mazina'igani-mashkimodens ni paper bag; pi
mazina'igani-mashkimodensan; loc
mazina'igani-mashkimodensing
mazina'iganiiwidaabaan na mail truck; pi
mazina'iganiiwidaabaanag; loc
mazina'iganiiwidaabaaning; dim
mazina'iganiiwidaabaanens
mazina'iganiiwigamig ni post office; pi
mazina'iganiiwigamigoon; he
mazina'iganiiwigamigong; dim
mazina'iganiiwigamigoons
mazina'iganiiwinini na postman; pi
mazina'iganiiwininiwag
mazina'igaans ni ticket, license; pi
mazina'igaansan; loc mazina'igaansing
mazina'ige vai owe, go into debt, get credit; hg
nimazina'ige; pn mezina'iged
mazinashkibijigan na doll of hay or grass; pi
mazinashkibijiganag; loc
mazinashkibijiganing; dim
mazinashkibijigaans
mazinaabidoo'an vti bead s.t. on a loom; hg
nimazinaabidoo'aan; pn mezinaabidoo'ang
mazinaabidoo'iganaatig ni bead loom; pi
mazinaabidoo'iganaatigoon; loc
mazinaabidoo'iganaatigong; dim
mazinaabidoo'iganaatigoons
mazinaabidoo'ige vai bead things on a loom; Isg
nimazinaabidoo'ige; pn mezinaabidoo'iged
mazinaabikiwebinigan ni typewriter, computer; pi
mazinaabikiwebiniganan; loc
mazinaabikiwebiniganing; dim
mazinaabikiwebinigaans
mazinaabikiwebinige vai type; hg
nimazinaabikiwebinige; pn
mezinaabikiwebiniged
mazinaadin vta make an image of s.o.; hg
nimazinaadinaa; pn mezinaadinaad
mazinaakide vii be pictured, be photographed; pn
mezinaakideg; aug mazinaakidemagad; pn
aug mezinaakidemagak
mazinaakiz /mazinaakizw-/ vta take pictures of
s.o., photograph s.o.; 7^nimazinaakizwaa;
pn mezinaakizwaad
mazinaakizan wra take pictures of s.t., photograph
s.t.; hg nimazinaakizaan; pn mezinaakizang
mazinaakizigan ni camera; pi mazinaakiziganan;
he mazinaakiziganing; dim mazinaakizigaans
mazinaakizige vai take pictures, photograph
things; hg nimazinaakizige; pn
mezinaakiziged
mazinaakizo vai be pictured, be photographed;
hg nimazinaakiz; pn mezinaakizod
mazinaakizon ni picture, photograph;^
mazinaakizonan; he mazinaakizoning; dim
mazinaakizonens
mazinaatese vii be a movie; pn mezinaateseg;
aug mazinaatesemagad; pn aug
mezinaatesemagak
mazinaatesewigamig ni movie theater; pi
mazinaatesewigamigoon; he
mazinaatesewigamigong; dim
mazinaatesewigamigoons; also
mazinaatesijigewigamig

mazinaatesijigan_maaji'
mazinaatesijigan ni television set; pi
mazinaatesijiganan; loc mazinaatesijiganing;
dim mazinaatesijigaans
mazinaatewebinigan ni movie projector; pi
mazinaatewebiniganan; lac
mazinaatewebiniganing; dim
mazinaatewebinigaans
mazinibaganjigan ni dental pictograph on birch
bark; pi mazinibaganjiganan; loc
mazinibaganjiganing; dim
mazinibaganjigaans
mazinibaganjige vai make a dental pictograph on
birch bark; Isg nimazinibaganijge; prt
mezinibaganjiged
mazinibii" /mazinibii'w-/ vta draw s.o.; Isg
nimazinibii'waa; prt mezinibii'waad
mazinibii'an vti draw s.t.; Isg nimazinibii'aan; prt
mezinibii'ang
mazinibii'igan ni drawing, design; pi
mazinibii'iganan; loc mazinibii'iganing; dim
mazinibii'igaans
mazinibii'ige vai draw things; Isg nimazinibii'ige;
prt mezinibii'iged
mazinibii'igewinini na artist; pi
mazinibii'igewininiwag
mazinichigan na doll, image, statue;^?/
mazinichiganag; loc mazinichiganing; dim
mazinichigaans
mazinigwaadan vti embroider s.t., bead s.t.; Isg
nimazinigwaadaan; prt mezinigwaadang
mazinigwaaso vai embroider, bead; Isg
nimazinigwaas: prt mezinigwaasod
mazinigwaazh /mazinigwaaN-/ vta embroider
s.o., bead on s.o.; 7jy nimazinigwaanaa;/w
mezinigwaanaad
mazinishin vai be imprinted, have a design; prt
mezinishing
mazinisin vii be imprinted, have a design; prt
mezinising
maadaginzo vai start a month, be the first day (of
a month); prt mayaadaginzod
maada'adoo vai go off following a trail; Isg
nimaada'adoo; prt mayaada'adood
maada'azh /maada'aN-/ vta go off following s.o.'s
trail; Isg nimaada'anaa; pn mayaada'anaad
maada'ookii vai share, distribute; Isg
nimaada'ookii; prt mayaada'ookiid
maada'oonidiwag /maada'oonidi-/ vai they dis-
tribute (s.t.) to each other, they share (s.t.); Ipl
nimaada'oonidimin; prt mayaada'oonidijig
maada'oozh /maada'ooN-/ vta distribute (s.t.) to
s.o., share (s.t.) out to s.o.; Isg
nimaada'oonaa; prt mayaada'oonaad
maadakamigad vii start (as an event); pn
mayaadakamigak
maadakamigizi vai start (in some event); Isg
nimaadakamigiz; prt mayaadakamigizid
maadanjige vai start eating; Isg nimaadanjige; prt
mayaadanjiged
maadanokaadan vti start to work on s.t.; Isg
nimaadanokaadaan; pn mayaadanokaadang
maadanokaazh /maadanokaaN-/ vta start to
work on s.o.; Isg nimaadanokaanaa; pn
mayaadanokaanaad
maadanoki vai start to work; Isg nimaadanokii;
prt mayaadanokiid
maadaaboode vii drift off on the current; pn
mayaadaaboodeg; aug maadaaboodemagad;
prt aug mayaadaaboodemagak
maadaaboono vai drift off on the current; pn
mayaadaaboonod
maadaadizi vai start a journey; Isg nimaadaadiz;
prt mayaadaadizid
maadaa'an vii drift off on the waves; pn
mayaadaa'ang
maadaa'ogo vai drift off on the waves; pn
mayaadaa'ogod
maadaajim vta start to tell of s.o.; Isg
nimaadaajimaa; prt mayaadaajimaad
maadaajimo vai start to tell; Isg nimaadaajim; prt
mayaadaajimod
maadaajimotaw vta start to tell (s.t.) to s.o.; Isg
nimaadaajimotawaa; pn
mayaadaajimotawaad
maadaanimad vii wind picks up; prt
mayaadaanimak
maadaawanidiwag /maadaawanidi-/ vai they start
off in a group; Ipl nimaadaawanidimin; prt
mayaadaawanidijig
maadodan vti start to tell of s.t.; Isg
nimaadodaan; prt mayaadodang
maadoode vai crawl off; Isg nimaadoode; pn
mayaadooded
maadoorn vta carry s.o. off on one's back; Isg
nimaadoomaa; pn mayaadoomaad
maadoondan vti carry s.t. off on one's back; Isg
nimaadoondaan; pn mayaadoondang
maadwewebizoni' vta start s.o. (e.g., a car); Isg
nimaadwewebizoni'aa; pn
mayaadwewebizoni'aad
maagizhaa pc maybe, perhaps; also maazhaa
maagobidoon vti2 squeeze s.t.; Isg
nimaagobidoon; prt mayaagobidood
maagobizh /maagobiN-/ vta squeeze s.o.; Isg
nimaagobinaa; prt mayaagobinaad
maagon vta press on s.o.; Isg nimaaagonaa; prt
mayaagonaad
maagonan vti press on s.t.; Isg nimaagonaan; pn
mayaagonang
maa'ishkam vai2 shop; Isg nimaa'ishkam; prt
mayaa'ishkang
maajaa vai leave, depart, start off; Isg nimaajaa;
prt mayaajaad; also ani-maajaa
maajaa' vta hold a funeral for s.o.; Isg
nimaajaa'aa; prt mayaajaa'aad
maajaa'iwe vai hold a funeral, speak at a funeral;
Isg nimaajaa'iwe; pn mayaajaa'iwed
maajibiisaa vii start to rain; pn mayaajibiisaag;
aug maajibiisaamagad; prt aug
mayaajibiisaamagak
maajidaabiiba'igo vai drive off in a wagon; Isg
nimaajidaabiiba'ig; prt mayaajidaabiiba'igod
maajidaabii'iwe vai drive off; Isg
nimaajidaabii'iwe; prt mayaajidaabii'iwed
maajigaa vii start to leak, start to drip, start to run
with sap; pn mayaajigaag; aug
maajigaamagad; pn aug mayaajigaamagak
maaji' vta start to make s.o.; Isg nimaaji'aa; prt
mayaaji'aad

81 
maajijiwan—maaminonenim
maajijiwan vii start to flow, be a whirlpool; prt
mayaajijiwang
maajinaazha' /maajinaazha'w-/ vta send s.o. off;
Isg nimaajinaazha'waa; prt
mayaajinaazha'waad
maajinizha' /maajinizha'w-/ vta send s.o. off; Isg
nimaajinizha'waa; prt mayaajinizha'waad
maajinizha'amaw vta send (s.t.) off to s.o.; Isg
nimaajinizha'amawaa; prt
mayaajinizha'amawaad
maajinizha'an vti send s.t. off; Isg
nimaajinizha'aan; prt mayaajinizha'ang
maajinizhikaw vta chase s.o. off; Isg
nimaajinizhikawaa; prt maayaajinizhikawaad
maajipon /maajipo-/ vii start to snow; prt
mayaajipog
maajise vai begin, start, move off; Isg nimaajise;
prt mayaajised
maajise vii begin, start, move off; pn mayaajiseg;
aug maajisemagad; prt aug mayaajisemagak
maajitaa vai start an activity; Isg nimaajitaa; prt
mayaajitaad
maajitoon vti2 start to make s.t.; Isg nimaajitoon;
prt mayaajitoocl
maajii- pv4 start, begin, start off
maajiiba'idiwag /maajiibaMdi-/ vai they run off
together; Ipl nirnaajiiba'idimin; pn
mayaajiiba'idijig
maajiiba'igo vai drive off drawn by horses; Isg
nimaajiiba'ig; prt mayaajiiba'igod
maajiiba'iwe vai start to flee; Isg nimaajiiba'iwe;
prt mayaajiiba'iwed
maajiibatoo vai start to run, run off; Isg
nimaajiibatoo; prt mayaajiibatood
maajiibide vii drive off, speed off, start to run (as a
machine); prt mayaajiibideg; aug
maajiibidemagad; prt aug
mayaajiibidemagak
maajiibizo vai drive off, speed off, start to run (as
a machine); Isg nimaajiibiz; prt mayaajiibizod
maajiibii'amaw vta write a letter to s.o.; Isg
nimaajiibii'amawaa; pn
mayaajiibii'amawaad
maajiibii'igan ni letter; pi maajiibii'iganan; loc
maajiibii'iganing; dim maajiibii'igaans
maajiibii'ige vai write a letter; Isg nimaajiibii'ige;
prt mayaajiibii'iged
maajiibii'ige-mashkimodens in envelope; pi
maajiibii'ige-mashkimodensan; loc
maajiibii'ige-mashkimodensing
maajiidaw vta take (s.t.) along for s.o.; Isg
nimaajiidawaa; prt mayaajiidawaad
maajiidoon vti2 take s.t. away, take s.t. along; Isg
nimaajiidoon; prt mayaajiidood
maajiigi vai grow up, start to grow; Isg nimaajiig:
pn mayaajiigid
maajiigidaazo vai go off mad; Isg nimaajiigidaaz;
pn mayaajiigidaazod
maajiigin vii grow up, start to grow; pn
mayaajiiging
maajii'am vai2 start to sing; Isg nimaajii'am; pn
mayaajii'ang
maajiijigaade vii be taken along; pn
mayaajiijigaadeg; aug maajiijigaademagad;
pn aug mayaajiijigaademagak
maajiijigaazo vai be taken along; pn
mayaajiijigaazod
maajiikan vti start to work on s.t.; Isg
nimaajiikaan; pn mayaajiikang
maajiikaw vta start to work on s.o.; Isg
nimaajiikawaa; prt mayaajiikawaad
maajiikwazhiwe vai paddle off, swim off (as a
fish); Isg nimaajiikwazhiwe; prt
mayaajiikwazhiwed
maajiishkaa vii start to move; prt mayaajiishkaag;
aug maajiishkaamagad; prt aug
mayaajiishkaamagak
maajiishkaa' vta start s.o. (e.g., a car, a clock); Isg
nimaajiishkaa'aa; prt mayaajiishkaa'aad
maajiiyaadagaako vai start off on the ice; Isg
nimaajiiyaadagaak; pn mayaajiiyaadagaakod
maajiizh /maajiiN-/ vta take s.o. away, take s.o.
along; Isg nimaajiinaa; prt mayaajiinaad
maajiizhiwe vai take people away; Isg
nimaajiizhiwe; prt mayaajiizhiwed
maakigaade vai have a lame leg; Isg
nimaakigaade; prt mayaakigaaded
maakinaw vta shoot and wound s.o.; hg
nimaakinawaa; prt mayaakinawaad
maakizi vai be lame; Isg nimaakiz; pn
mayaakizid
maamakaadakamig pc amazing!, astonishing!
maamakaadendam vai2 be amazed, be
astonished; Isg nimaamakaadendam; pn
mayaamakaadendang
maatnakaadendan vti be amazed at s.t., be
astonished at s.t., wonder at s.t.; Isg
nimaamakaadendaan; pn
mayaamakaadendang
maamakaadendaagwad vii be considered
amazing, be considered astonishing; pn
mayaamakaadendaagwak
maamakaadenim vta be amazed at s.o., be
astonished at s.o., wonder at s.o.; Isg
nimaamakaadenimaa; prt
mayaamakaadenimaad
maamakaadizi vai be amazing, astonish; Isg
nimaamakaadiz; pn mayaamakaadizid
maamakaaj pc amazing, astonishing
maamakaajichige vai do amazing things; Isg
nimaamakaajichige; pn
mayaamakaajichiged
maamakaazitaw vta be amazed at what s.o. says;
Isg nimaamakaazitawaa; pn
mayaamakaazitawaad
maamawi pc together
maamawoo- pv4 together
maamigin vta pick s.o. up, gather s.o.; Isg
nimaamiginaa; prt mayaamiginaad
maamiginan vti pick s.t. up, gather s.t.; Isg
nimaamiginaan; prt mayaamiginang
maaminonendam vai2 think, consider, ponder;
Isg nimaaminonendam; prt
mayaaminonendang
maaminonendan vti think on s.t., consider s.t.,
realize of s.t. that; Isg nimaaminonendaan; pn
mayaaminonendang
maaminonenim vta think on s.o., consider s.o.,
realize of s.o. that; Isg nimaaminonenimaa;
pn mayaaminonenimaad

maanabi—maazhimaagwanaamo 
82
maanabi vai sit uncomfortably; hg nimaanab; prt
mayaanabid
maanadamon /maanadamo-/ vii be bad (as a
road or trail); prt mayaanadamog
maanadikoshens na goat; pi maanadikoshensag
maana'e vai take a bad shot; Isg nimaana'e; prt
mayaana'ed
maanamanji'o vai feel bad, be in poor health; Isg
nimaanamanji'; prt mayaanamanji'od
maanameg na catfish; pi maanamegwag; dim
maanamegoons
maananoons na hop hornbeam, ironwood; pi
maananoonsag; loc maananoonsing
maanashigan na sheepshead (fish); pi
maanashiganag; dim rnaanashigaans
maanazaadi na balsam poplar, Balm of Gilead
tree; pi maanazaadi wag; loc maanazaadi ing;
dim maanazaadiins
maanaadad vii be ugly; prt mayaanaadak
maanaadizi vai be ugly, be homely; Isg
nimaanaadiz; prt mayaanaadizid
maanaagamin /maanaagami-/ vii taste bad (as a
liquid); prt mayaanaagamig
maanaaji' vta make s.o. wrong, make s.o. odd; Isg
nimaanaaji'aa; prt mayaanaaji'aad
maanaaji to on vti2 make s.t. wrong, make s.t. odd;
hg ni maanaaji toon; prt mayaanaajitood
maanendam vai2 feel bad, feel depressed; Isg
nimaanendam; prt mayaanendang; also
maazhendam
maanendan vti feel bad about s.t., consider s.t.
disagreeable; Isg nimaanendaan; prt
mayaanendang
maanendaagozi vai be considered bad-off, be
considered disagreeable; Isg
nimaanendaagoz; prt mayaanendaagozid
maanendaagwad vii be considered bad, be
considered disagreeable; prt
mayaanendaagwak
maanenim vta consider s.o. bad-off, consider s.o.
disagreeable; Isg nimaanenimaa; prt
m ayaan en i m aad
maang na loon; pi maangwag; dim maangoons
maanikaw- vta disagree with s.o. (of something
consumed) in inverse forms: Isg
nimaanikaagon; prt mayaanikaagod
maanishtaanish na sheep; pi maanishtaanishag;
dim maanishtaanishens; also maanitaanish
maanishtaanishiwayaan HI sheepskin
maanitan vti hear s.t. sounding bad; hg
nimaanitaan; prt mayaanitang
maanitaw vta hear s.o. sounding bad; hg
nimaanitawaa; prt mayaanitawaad
maanose vai walk with discomfort; hg
nimaanose; prt mayaanosed
maanowe vai be hoarse, have a bad voice; Isg
nimaanowe; prt m ayaan owed
maanoo pc never mind, let it be, don't bother,
don't care
maashkinoozhe na muskellunge; pi
maashkinoozheg; dim maashkinoozhens
maawandoobiwag /maawandoobi-/ vai they sit
together; Ipl nimaawandoobimin; prt
mayaawandoobijig
maawandoogindan vti total up s.t. (as an
account); hg nimaawandoogindaan; pn
mayaawandoogindang
maawandoogindaaso wax total up (as an account);
hg nimaawandoogindaas; prt
mayaawandoogindaasod
maawandoogwaadan vti sew s.t. together (e.g.,
pieces for a quilt); hg
nimaawandoogwaadaan; prt
mayaawandoogwaadang
maawandoogwaaso vai sew together; hg
nimaawandoogwaas; prt
mayaawandoogwaasod
maawandoogwaason ni quilt; pi
maawandoogwaasonan; loc
maawandoogwaason ing; dim
maawandoogwaasonens
maawandoogwaazh /maawandoogwaaN-/ vta
sew s.o. together; hg nimaawandoogwaanaa;
prt mayaawandoogwaanaad
maawandoonan vti bring s.t. together; hg
nimaawandoonaan; prt mayaawandoonang
maawanji' vta collect s.o.; hg nimaawanji'aa; prt
mayaawanji'aad
maawanji'idiwag /maawanji'idi-/ vai they come
together, they meet with each other, they have
a meeting; lp/nimaawanji*idimin;/>?t
mayaawanji'idijig
maawanjitoon vti2 collect s.t.; Isg
nimaawanjitoon; prt mayaawanjitood
maazhaapc maybe, perhaps; also maagizhaa
maazhendam vai2 feel out of sorts; hg
ni maazhendam; prt mayaazhendang
maazhi- pv4 bad, ill-formed
maazhi-ayaa vaibe bad-off, be in poor health; hg
nimaazhi-ayaa; prt mayaazhi-ayaad
maazhi bide vii run poorly (e.g., a machine),
operate poorly; prt mayaazhibideg; aug
maazhibidemagad; prt aug
mayaazhibidemagak
maazhi-bimaadizi vai behave badly, lead a bad
life; hg nimaazhi-bimaadiz; prt mayaazhi-
bimaadizid
maazhibizo vai run poorly (e.g., a car), operate
poorly; prt mayaazhibizod
maazhide'e vai have heartburn; hg
nimaazhide'e; prt mayaazhide'ed
maazhi-giizhigad vii be a bad day; prt mayaazhi-
giizhigak
maazhigiizhwe vai have difficulty speaking, have
abnormal speech; hg ni maazhigiizhwe; prt
mayaazhigiizhwed
maazhigondaagan vai have difficulty with one's
voice; 7s^ nimaazhigondaagan; prt
mayaaz h i gon d aagang
maazhi-izhiwebizi vai behave badly; Isg
nimaazhi-izhiwebiz; prt mayaazhi-
izhiwebizid
maazhimaagozi vai smell bad; hg
nimaazhimaagoz; prt mayaazhimaagozid
maazhimaagwad vii smell bad; prt
m ayaazh i maagwak
maazhimaagwanaamo vai have bad breath; hg
nimaazhimaagwanaam; prt
mayaazhimaagwanaamod

83 
maazhimaaso—midaasosagoons
maazhimaaso vai smell bad burning or cooking;
prt mayaazhimaasod
maazhimaate vii smell bad burning or cooking;
prt mayaazhimaateg
maazhingwaam vai sleep uncomfortably; Isg
nimaazhingwaam; pn mayaazhingwaang
maazhinikaade vii have an ugly name; pn
mayaazhinikaadeg; aug
maazhinikaademagad; prt aug
mayaazhinikaademagak
maazhinikaazo vai have an ugly name; Isg
nimaazhinikaax; pn mayaazhinikaazod
maazhipogozi vai taste bad; prt
mayaazhipogozid
maazhipogwad vii taste bad; prt
mayaazhipogwak
maazhise vai have tilings go wrong, have bad luck;
Isg nimaazhise: prt mayaazhised
maazhishin vai lie uncomfortably; Isg
nimaazhishin; prt mayaazhishing
megade vai burp; Isg nimegade; pn mayegaded
megwaa^c while, during
megwe- pn among, in the midst of
megwe-aya'ii pc in among it; also megweya'ii
megwejiishkiwag pc in the mud
megwekob pc in the brush
megwaayaakpc in the woods
mekadewikonayed na-pt priest; pi
mekadewikonayejig
mekadewikonayewikwe na nun; pi
mekadewikonayewikweg; dim
mekadewikonayewikwens; also
mekadewikonayekwe
mekadewikonayewinini na priest; pi
mekadewikonayewininiwag
memaangishens na mule; pi memaangishensag
meme na red-headed woodpecker; pi memeg; dim
memens
memegwesi na haiiy-faced bank-dwelling dwarf
spirit; pi memegwesiwag; dim memegwesiins
memengwaa na butterfly; pi memengwaag; dim
memengwaans
memeshkwad pc in turns, alternately
memidaaswi nm ten each
memindage pc of course, especially, above all
memookiwidoo na pocket gopher; pi
memookiwidoog; dim memookiwidoons
memwech pc just that, exactly, it is so
menwaagamig ni-pt soft drink; pi
menwaagamigin
meshkwad pc in turn, in exchange
meshkwadoon vta trade s.o., exchange s.o.; Isg
nimeshkwadoonaa; pn mayeshkwadoonaad
meshkwadoonamaw vta trade (s.t.) with s.o.; Isg
nimeshkwadoonamawaa; pn
mayeshkwadoanamawaad
meshkwadoonamaage vai trade things with
people; Isg nimeshkwadoonamaage; prt
mayeshkwadoonamaaged
meshkwadoonan vti trade s.t., exchange s.t.; Isg
nimeshkwadoonaan; prt
mayeshkwadoonang
meshkwadoonige vai trade for things, exchange
things; Isg nimeshkwadoonige; prt
mayeshkwadoomiged
meskwanagekozid na~pt cinnamon; pi
meskwanagekozijig
meskwaazhigwaneshi na redhorse (fish);p;
meskwaazhigwaneshiwag; dim
meskwaazhigwaneshiins
meta pc it is only that; also mii eta
mewinzha pc a long time ago, long ago
michayi'ii pc on a bare surface
michaa vii be big; pn mechaag; aug
michaamagad; pn aug mechaamagak
michaabaminaagwad vii appear big; prt
mechaabaminaagwak
michaabikad vii be big (as something mineral); prt
mechaabikak
michaabikizi vai be big (as something mineral), be
full (as something mineral, e.g., the moon); prt
mechaabikizid
michaakozi vai be big (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn mechaakozid
michaakwad vii be big (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn mechaakwak
michaatoon vti2 make s.t. big; Isg nimichaatoon;
pn mechaatood
michi- pv4 by hand, without anything special,
barely
michininjiikanjige vai eat with one's fingers; Isg
nimichininjiikanjige; prt mechininjiikanjiged
michisag ni floor; pi michisagoon; loc
michisagong
michishin vai lie uncovered; pn mechishing
michisin vii lie uncovered; prt mechising
michiigad zmbe big (as something sheet-like);pn
mechiigak
michiigizi vai be big (as something sheet-like); pn
mechiigizid
midaaching/it ten times
midaachinoon /midaachin-/ vii they are ten; pn
medaaching
midaachiwag /midaachi-/ vai they are ten; Ipl
nimidaachimin; prt medaachijig
midaaso- pv4 ten
midaaso-anama'e-giizhigad pc ten weeks
midaaso-anama'e-giizhik pc ten weeks
midaaso-biboon pc ten years
midaaso-biboonagad vii be ten years; pn
medaaso-biboonagak
midaaso-biboonagizi vai be ten years old; Isg
nimidaaso-biboonagiz; pn medaaso-
biboonagizid
midaaso-diba'igan pc ten miles, ten hours
midaaso-diba'iganed vii be ten o'clock; prt
medaaso-diba'iganek
midaaso-diba'igaans pc ten minutes
midaaso-dibik fit ten nights
midaaso-giizhik pc ten days
midaaso-giizis/>c ten months
midaasogon pc ten days
midaasogonagad vii be ten days; prt
medaasogonagak
midaasogonagizi vai be the tenth day of the
month, be ten days old; prt medaasogonagizid
midaasoninj pc ten inches
midaasozid pc ten feet
midaasosagoons nm ten thousand

midaasoobii'igan—mimigosaga'igan 
84
midaasoobii'igan na ten (card);/)/
rnidaasoobii'iganag
midaasooshkin pc ten bags
midaaswaabik/w ten dollars
midaaswaak nm thousand
midaaswewaan pc ten sets, ten pairs
midaaswi nm ten
midaaswi ashi-bezhig nm eleven
midaaswi ashi-ingodwaaswi nm sixteen; also
midaaswi ashi-ningodwaaswi*
midaaswi ashi-ishwaaswi nm eighteen; also
midaaswi ashi-nishwaaswi*
midaaswi ashi-naanan nm fifteen
midaaswi ashi-ningodwaaswi* nm sixteen; also
midaaswi ashi-ingodwaaswi
midaaswi ashi-nishwaaswi* nn eighteen; also
midaaswi ashi-ishwaaswi
midaaswi ashi-niswi nm thirteen
midaaswi ashi-niiwin nm fourteen
midaaswi ashi-niizh nm twelve
midaaswi ashi-niizhwaaswi nm seventeen
midaaswi ashi-zhaangaswi nm nineteen
midechininj ni thumb; pi midechininjiin
midechizid ni big toe; pi midechizidan
midewayaan na Mide medicine bag; pi
midewayaanag; loc midewayaaning; dim
midewayaanens
midewi vai join the Midewiwin, participate in the
Midewiwin; 7s^nimidew;p«medewid
midewigaan ni Mide lodge; pi midewigaanan; loc
midewigaaning; dim midewigaanens
midewigaanaak ni Mide lodge frame; pi
midewigaanaakoon; loc midewigaamaakong
midewiwin ni Midewiwin, Medicine Dance,
Grand Medicine Society
migi vai bark; hg nimig; prt megid
migidan vti bark at s.t; Isg nimigidaan; prt
megidang
migiskan ni fish hook; pi migiskanan; loc
migiskaning; dim migiskaans
migiskanaak ni fishing pole; pi migiskanaakoon;
Joe migiskanaakong; dim migiskanaakoons;
also migiskanaatig
migiskaneyaab m'hook and line; pi
migiskaneyaabiin; loc migiskaneyaabiing; dim
migiskaneyaabiins
migizh /migiN-/ vta bark at s.o.; Isg nimiginaa; pn
meginaad
migizi na bald eagle; pi migiziwag; dim migiziins
migoshkaadendam vai2 be annoyed; Isg
nimigoshkaadendam; pn
megoshkaadendang
migoshkaaji* vta annoy s.o., bother s.o.; Isg
nimigoshkaaji'aa; pn megoshkaaji'aad
migoos ni awl; pi migoosan; loc migoosing; dim
migoosens
migoos (awl)
mikamaw vta find (s.t.) for s.o., find (s.t.) of
s.o.'s; Isg nimikamawaa; pn mekamawaad
mikan mi find s.t.; Isg nimikaan: pn mekang
mikaw vta find s.o.; Isg nimikawaa; prt
mekawaad
mikawi vai come to, regain consciousness; Isg
nimikaw; prt mekawid
mikaage vai find people; hg nimikaage; prt
mekaaged
mikigaade vii be found; pn mekigaadeg; aug
mikigaademagad; pn aug mekigaademagak
mikigaazo vai be found; pn mekigaazod
mikige vai find things; Isg nimikige; pn mekiged
mikinaak na snapping turtle; pi mikinaakwag; dim
mikinaakoons
mikobidaw vta find (s.t.) for s.o. with hands; Isg
nimikobidawaa; pn mekobidawaad
mikobidoon vti2 find s.t. with hands; Isg
nimikobidoon; pn mekobidood
mikobijige vai find things with hands; Isg
nimikobijige; prt mekobijiged
mikobizh /mikobiN-/ vta find s.o. with hands; Isg
nimikobinaa; prt mekobinaad
mikom vta mention s.o. come to one's mind; Isg
nimikomaa; prt mekomaad
mikond na binding stick; pi mikondiig; loc
mikondiing; dim mikondiins; also mikwand
mikondan vti mention s.t. come to one's mind; hg
nimikondaan; prt mekondang
mikoojiin vta feel s.o., feel for s.o.; Isg
nimikoojiinaa; prt mekoojiinaad
mikoojiinan vti feel s.t., feel for s.t.; hg
nimikoojiinaan; pn mekoojiinang
mikwam na ice; pi mikwamiig: loc mikwamiing;
dim mikwamiins
mikwamiikaa vii there is much ice; pn
mekwamiikaag; aug mikwamiikaamagad; pn
aug mekwamiikaamagak
mikwamii-makak ni ice box, refrigerator; pi
mikwamii-makakoon; lac mikwamii-
makakong; dim mikwamii-makakoons
mikwamiiwadamon /mikwamiiwadamo-/ vii be
icy (as a road or trail); pn
mekwamiiwadamog
mikwamiiwinaagaans ni drinking glass; pi
mikwamiiwinaagaansan; loc
mikwamiiwinaagaansing
mikwendam vai2 recollect, remember, have things
come to one's mind; /sj'nimikwendan^prt
mekwendang
mikwendan vti recollect s.t., remember s.t., come
to think of s.t.; Isg nimikwendaan; pn
mekwendang
mikwendaagozi vai be remembered, be recol-
lected, come to mind; Isg nimikwendaagoz;
pn mekwendaagozid
mikwendaagwad vii be remembered, be recol-
lected, come to mind; pn mekwendaagwak
mikwenim vta recollect s.o., remember s.o., come
to think of s.o.; Isg nimikwenimaa; prt
mekwenimaad
mimigosaga'igan ni scrub brush; pi
mimigosaga'iganan; he mimigosaga'iganing;
dim mimigosaga'igaans

85 
mimigoshkam—mino-giizhigad
mimigoshkam vai2 thresh something, jig some-
thing (e.g., wild rice); Isg nimimigoshkam; prt
memigoshkang
mimigoshkamwaagan ni barrel or tub used in
threshing wild rice; pi
mimigoshkamwaaganan; loc
mimigoshkamwaaganing
mimigoshkan vti thresh s.t. (e.g., wild rice), jig s.t.
(e.g., wild rice); Isg nimimigoshkaan; prt
memigoshkang
mimigwaabika'igan ni pot scrubber; pi
mimigwaabika'iganan; loc
mimigwaabika'iganing; dim
mimigwaabika'igaans
mimigwaakosijigaLn ni washboard; pi
mimigwaakosijiganan; loc
mimigwaakosijiganing; dim
mimigwaakosijigaans
mina" via give s.o. a drink, give s.o. (s.t.) to drink;
Isg nimina'aa; prt mena'aad
minawaanigozi vai be happy, be joyous, have a
good time; Isg niminawaanigoz; prt
menawaanigozid
minawaanigwad vii be happy, be exciting; prt
menawaanigwak
mindawe vai be dissatisfied (with what has been
given), pout; Isg nimindawe; prt mendawed
mindaweganzhii vai have white spots on finger-
nails; Isg nimindaweganzhii; prt
mendaweganxhiid
mindido vai be big; Isg nimindid; prt mendidod
mindido' vta make s.o. big; Isg nimindido'aa; prt
mendido'aad
mindimooyenh na old woman, old lady; pi
mindimooyenyag; dim mindimooyens
mindimooyenyiwi vai be an old woman, be an old
lady; Isg nimindimooyenyiw; prt
mendimooyenyiwid
mindookad vii there is dew; prt mendookak
mini /miny-/ ni pus
minik pc a certain .amount, a certain number, so
much, so many
minikwaajigan ni drinking vessel; pi
minikwaajiganan; loc minikwaajiganing; dim
minikwaajigaans
minikwe vai+o drink (s.t.); /^niminikwe,
niminikwen: pn menikwed
minikwewigamig ni tavern, bar; pi
minikwewigamigoon; loc
minikwewigamigong; dim
minikwewigarnigoons
minis ni island; pi iminisan; he minising; dim
minisens
minisaabik ni rocky island; pi minisaabikoon; loc
minisaabikong; dim minisaabikoons
miniiwaabide vai have an abscessed tooth; Isg
niminiiwaabide; prt meniiwaabided
miniiwitawage vai have an infected ear; Isg
niminiiwitawaige; prt meniiwitawaged
minjikanaakobijigan m'fence; pi
minjikanaakobijiganan; loc
minjikanaakobijiganing; dim
minjikanaakobijigaans
minjikaawan na mitten; pi minjikaawanag; loc
minjikaawaning
minjimaakwii vai cling (as to something stick- or
wood-like), hold on (as to something stick- or
wood-like); Isg niminjimaakwii; pn
menjimaakwiid
minjimendan vti keep s.t. in one's mind,
remember s.t.; Isg niminjimendaan; pn
menjimendang
minjimenim vta keep s.o. in one's mind, remem-
ber s.o.; Isg niminjimenimaa; prt
menjimenimaad
minjimin vta hold s.o. in place, steady s.o.; Isg
niminjiminaa; prt menjiminaad
minjiminamaw vta hold (s.t.). in place for s.o.,
steady (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg niminjiminamawaa;
prt menjiminamawaad
minjiminan vti hold s.t. in place, steady s.t.; Isg
niminjiminaan; pn menjiminang
minjiminigan ni handle; pi minjiminiganan; loc
minjiminiganing; dim minjiminigaans
minjimishkan vti hold s.t. in place with foot or
body, steady s.t. with foot or body; Isg
niminjimishkaan; prt menjimishkang
minjimishkaw vta hold s.o. in place with foot or
body, steady s.o. with foot or body; Isg
niminjimishkawaa; prt menjimishkawaad
minjimishkoode vii be held in place with weight;
pn menjimishkoodeg; aug
minjimishkoodemagad: pn aug
menjimishkoodemagak
minjimishkoodoon vti2 hold s.t. in place with
weight; Isg niminjimishkoodoon; pn
menjimishkoodood
minjimishkoozh /minjimishkooN-/ vta hold s.o.
in place with weight; Isg niminjimishkoonaa;
prt menjimishkoonaad
minjimishkoozo vai be held in place with weight;
Isg niminjimishkooz; pn menjimishkoozod
minjimii vai cling, hold on; Isg niminjimii; pn
menjimiid
minjinawezi vai have regrets, be disappointed; Isg
niminjinawez; prt menjinawezid
mino- pv4 good, nice, well
mino-ayaa vai be good, be fine, be well; Isg
nimino-ayaa; prt meno-ayaad
minobide vii run well (e.g., a machine); pn
menobideg; aug minobidemagad; prt aug
menobidemagak
mino-bimaadizi vai live well, have good health,
lead a good life; Isg nimino-bimaadiz; pn
meno-bimaadizid
minobizo vai run well (e.g., a car); prt menobizod
minobii vai drink and be merry; Isg niminobii; prt
menobiid
minochige vai do things well, do good things; Isg
niminochige; pn menochiged
minode vii be well cooked; pn menodeg; aug
minodemagad; pn aug menodemagak
minode'e vai be kind; Isg niminode'e; pn
menode'ed
mino-doodaw vta treat s.o. well; Isg nimino-
doodawaa; pn meno-doodawaad
minogi vai grow well; Isg niminog; pn menogid
minogin vii grow well; pn menoging
mino-giizhigad vii be a nice day; pn meno-
giizhigak

mino-giizhiganishi—minwaanimad 
86
mino-giizhiganishi vai have good travelling
weather; Isg nimino-giizhiganish: pn meno-
giizhiganishid
minogondaagan vai have a good voice; Isg
niminogondaagan; prt menogondaagang
mino'o vai dress well; Isg nimino'; prt meno'od
mino-izhiwebizi vai behave well;, lead a good life;
Isg nimino-izhiwebiz; prt meno-izhiwebizid
minokan vti fit s.t. well; Isg niminokaan; pn
menokang
minokaw vta fit s.o. well (e.g., pants), agree with
s.o. (especially of something consumed); in
inverse forms: Isg niminokaagon; prt
menokaagod
minomaagochigan niperfume; pi
minomaagochiganan; loc
minomaagochiganing; dim
minomaagochigaans
minomaagochige vai use perfume; Isg
niminomaagochige; prt menomaagochiged
minomaagozi vai have a good smell; Isg
niminomaagoz; prt menomaagozid
minomaagwad vii have a good smell; prt
menomaagwak
minomaam vta like the smell of s.o.; Isg
niminomaamaa; prt menomaamaad
minomaandan vti like the smell of s.t.; Isg
niminomaandaan; prt menomaandang
minomaaso vai smell good burning or cooking; pn
menomaasod
minomaate vii smell good burning or cooking; pn
menomaateg; aug minomaatemagad; pn aug
menomaatemagak
minopidan vti find a good taste in s.t.; Isg
niminopidaan; prt menopidang
rninopijige vai like the taste of things; Isg
niminopijige; prt menopijiged
minopogozi vai taste good; pn menopogozid
minopogwad vii taste good; prt menopogwak
minopozh /minopw-/ vta find a good taste in s.o.;
Isg niminopwaa; prt menopwaad
minose vai have things go well for one, get along
well, have good luck; Isg niminose; prt
me nosed
minose vii go well; pn menoseg; aug
minosemagad; prt aug menosemagak
minoshim vta put s.o. in the right position; Isg
niminoshimaa; prt menoshimaad
minoshin vai lie comfortably, lie in a good
position; Isg niminoshin; prt menoshing
minosidoon vti2 put s.t. in the right position; Isg
niminosidoon; pn menosidood
minosin vii lie in a good position, lie well in place;
pn menosing
minotam vai2 like hearing something, like the
sound; Isg ni minotam; prt menotang
minotan vti like hearing s.t., hear s.t. sounding
good; Isg niminotaan; pn menotang
minotaw vta like hearing s.o., hear s.o. sounding
good; hg niminotawaa; prt menotawaad
minotaagozi vai sound good; Isg niminotaagoz;
pn menotaagozid
minotaagwad vii sound good; prt menotaagwak
minowe vai have a good voice, speak well; Isg
nimino we; pn menowed
minoz /minozw-/ vta cook s.o. well; Isg
niminozwaa; prt menozwaad
minozan vti cook s.t. well; Isg niminozaan; pn
menozang
minozekwe vai cook well; Isg niminozekwe; prt
menozekwed
minozo vai be well cooked; pn menozod
minwabi vai sit comfortably; Isg niminwab; prt
menwabid
minwamanji'o vai feel good, be in good health;
Isg niminwamanji'; pn menwamanji'od
minwanjige vai eat well; Isg niminwanjige; pn
menwanjiged
minwashkine vai fit well, be well filled; prt
menwashkined
minwashkine vii fit well, be well filled; pn
menwashkineg; aug minwashkinemagad; pn
aug men wash kinemagak
minwaabadad vii be very useful, be of good use;
pn menwaabadak
minwaabadizi vai be very useful, be of good use;
hg niminwaabadiz; pn menwaabadizid
minwaabaji' vta get good use of s.o.; Isg
niminwaabaji'aa; pn menwaabaji'aad
minwaabajitoon vti2 get good use of s.t.; Isg
niminwaabajitoon; prt menwaabajitood
minwaabam vta like the look of s.o.; Isg
niminwaabamaa; pn menwaabamaad
minwaabamewizi vai be admired, be respected;
Isg niminwaabamewiz; pn
m e nwaabam ewiz i d
minwaabaminaagozi vai look good; Isg
niminwaabaminaagoz; pn
menwaabaminaagozid
minwaabaminaagwad vii look good; pn
menwaabaminaagwak
minwaabandan vo like the look of s.t.; Isg
niminwaabandaan; pn menwaabandang
minwaabewizi vai have a good body; Isg
niminwaabewiz; pn menwaabewizid
minwaabi vai have good eyesight, see well; Isg
niminwaab; pn menwaabid
minwaabikad vii be good (as something mineral);
prt menwaabikak
minwaabikizi vai be good (as something mineral);
prt menwaabikizid
minwaadizi vai lead a good life; Isg niminwaadiz;
prt menwaadizid
minwaadodan vti tell good news of s.t.; Isg
niminwaadodaan; prt menwaadodang
minwaagamin /minwaagami-/ vii taste good (as a
liquid); pn menwaagamig
minwaajim vta tell good news of s.o.; Isg
niminwaajimaa; pn menwaajimaad
minwaajimo vai tell good news, tell a good story;
Isg niminwaajim; pn menwaajimod
minwaakozi vai be good (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt menwaakozid
minwaakwad vii be good (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt menwaakwak
minwaande vii be a good color; pn menwaandeg;
aug minwaandemagad; pn aug
menwaandemagak
minwaanimad vii there is a good breeze, there is a
favorable wind; pn menwaanimak

87
minwaanzo—miskwaanzigan
minwaanzo vai be a good color; hg niminwaanz;
pn menwaanzo d
minwaatese vii be a good movie; pn
menwaateseg; aug minwaatesemagad; pn
aug menwaatesemagak
minwegad vii be good (as something sheet-like);
pn menwegak
minwegizi waz'be good (as something sheet-like);
pn menwegizid
minwendarn vai2 be happy, be glad; Isg
niminwendam; pn menwendang
minwendan vti like s.t.; Isg niminwendaan; pn
menwendang
minwendaagozi vai be likeable, be agreeable, be
fun; pn menwendaagozid
minwendaagwad vii be likeable, be fun; pn
menwendaagwak
minwenim vta like s.o.; hg niminwenimaa; pn
menwenimaad
misajidamoo na grey squirrel; pi misajidamoog;
dim misajidamoons
misakakojiish na badger; pi misakakojiishag; dim
misakakojiishens
misan /miS-/ ni firewood plural of: mishi; loc
mising
misawendam vai2 desire, want; hg
nimisawendam; pn mesawendang
misawendan vti desire s.t., want s.t.; hg
nimisawendaan; pn mesawendang
misawenim vta desire s.o., want s.o.; Isg
nimisawenimaa; pn mesawenimaad
misawenjige vai desire things, want things; hg
nimisawenjige; pn mesawenjiged
misaabe na giant; pi misaabeg; dim misaabens
misaabooz na jack rabbit; pi misaaboozoog; dim
misaaboozoons
mishi /miS-/ ni piece of firewood; pi misan; loc
mising
mishibizhii na lion, panther, underwater panther;
pi mishibizhiig; dim mishibizhiins
mishiikenh na snapping turtle; pi mishiikenyag
mishiimin na apple;/>/mishiiminag; loc
mishiimining; dim mishiiminens
mishiiminaaboo ni apple juice; loc
mishiiminaaboong
mishiiminaatig na apple tree; pi
mishiiminaatigoog; loc mishiiminaatigong;
dim mishiiminaatigoons
mishiiwaatig ni dry wood; pi mishiiwaatigoon; loc
mishiiwaatigong; dim mishiiwaatigoons
Misi-zaaga'iganiing place Mille Lacs Reservation
misko- pv4 red
miskobagaa vii there are red leaves on the trees;
pn meskobagaag; aug miskobagaamagad; pn
aug meskobagaamagak
miskobagizi vai have red leaves; pn meskobagizid
misko-bineshiinh na cardinal; pi misko-
bineshiinyag; dim misko-bineshiins
miskodoonechigan ni lipstick; pi
miskodoonechiganan; loc
miskodoonechiganing; dim
miskodoonechigaans
miskogaadeyaab ni yarn; pi miskogaadeyaabiin
misko'o vai wear red; hg nimisko'; pn mesko'od
miskojaane vai have a red nose; hg
nimiskojaane; pn meskojaaned
misko-jiis ni beet; pi misko-jiisan; loc misko-
jiising; dim misko-jiisens
miskomin na raspberry; pi miskominag; loc
miskomining; dim miskominens
miskondibe vai be red-headed; hg nimiskondibe:
pn meskondibed
miskozi vai be red; pn meskozid
miskwakone vii blaze up; pn meskwakoneg; aug
miskwakonemagad; pn aug
meskwakonemagak
miskwanowe vai have a red cheek; hg
nimiskwanowe; pn meskwanowed
miskwanowechigan ni rouge; pi
miskwanowechiganan; loc
miskwanowechiganing; dim
miskwanowechigaans
miskwanowechige vai use rouge; hg
nimiskwanowechige; pn
meskwanowechiged
miskwazhe vai have measles; hg nimiskwazhe;
pn meskwazhed
miskwaa vii be red; pn meskwaag; aug
miskwaamagad; pn aug meskwaamagak
miskwaabik ni (piece of) copper; loc
miskwaabikong; dim miskwaabikoons
miskwaabikad vii be red (as something mineral);
pit meskwaabikak
miskwaabikide vii be red-hot (as something
mineral); pn meskwaabikideg; aug
miskwaabikidemagad; pn aug
meskwaabikidemagak
miskwaabikizi vai be red (as something mineral);
pn meskwaabikizid
miskwaabikizo vai be red-hot (as something
mineral); pn meskwaabikizod
miskwaabikoons na cent, penny; pi
miskwaabikoonsag; loc miskwaabikoonsing
miskwaabiigad vii be red (as something string-
like); pn meskwaabiigak
miskwaabiigizi vai be red (as something string-
like); pn meskwaabiigizid
miskwaabiimizh na red osier (locally known as
dogwood); pi miskwaabiimizhiig; loc
miskwaabiimizhiing; dim
miskwaabiimizhiins
miskwaadesi na painted turtle; pi
miskwaadesiwag; dim miskwaadesiins
Miskwaagamiiwi-zaaga'iganiingplace Red Lake
Reservation
miskwaakonaye vai dress in red; hg
nimiskwaakonaye; pn meskwaakonayed
miskwaakozi vai be red (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn meskwaakozid
miskwaakwad vii be red (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn meskwaakwak
miskwaanakwad vii be red clouds; pn
meskwaanakwak
miskwaande vii be colored red; pn
meskwaandeg; aug miskwaandemagad; pn
aug meskwaandemagak
miskwaanzigan ni roach headdress; pi
miskwaanziganan; loc miskwaanziganing;
dim miskwaanzigaans

miskwaanzo—mizizaak
88
miskwaanzo vat be colored red; prt
meskwaanzod
miskwaawaak na red cedar; pi miskwaawaakoog;
loc miskwaawaakong; dim miskwaawaakoons
miskwegad vii be red (as something sheet-like); prt
meskwegak
miskwegizi vai be red (as something sheet-like);
prt meskwegizid
miskwi ni blood; loc miskwiing
miskwiingwese vai blush; 7s£ nimiskwiingwese;
prt rneskwiingwesed
miskwiiwi vai bleed, be bloody; Isg nimiskwiiw;
pn meskwiiwid
miskwiiwijaane vai have a bloody nose; Isg
nimiskwiiwijaane; pn meskwiiwijaaned
mitabi vai sit on the bare ground; Isg nimitab; prt
in e tab id
mitagwazhe vai be naked; Isg nimitagwazhe; pn
metagwazhed
mitakamigpc on bare ground
mitaakondibe vai be bare-headed; Isg
nimitaakondibe; prt rnetaakondibed
mitaawangaa mi be a sandy beach; pn
metaawangaag; aug mitaawangaamagad; prt
aug metaawangaamagak
mi tig na tree; pi mitigoog; loc mitigong; dim
mitigoons
mitig ni stick, piece of wood; pi mitigoon; loc
mitigong; dim mitigoons
mitigo-jiimaan ni wooden boat, wooden canoe; pi
mitigo-jHmaanan; loc mitigo-jiimaaning; dim
mitigo-jiimaanens
mitigokaa vii there are many trees; prt
metigokaag; aug mitigokaamagad; pn aug
metigokaamagak
mitigo-makak ni wooden box, crate; pi mitigo-
makakoon; loc mitigo-makakong; dim
mitigo-makakoons
mitigomin ni acorn; pi mitigominan; loc
mitigomining; dim mitigominens
mitigomizh na oak; pi mitigomizhiig; loc
mitigomizhiing; dim mitigomizhiins
mitigonaagan ni wooden dish; pi
mitigonaaganan; loc mitigonaaganing; dim
mitigonaagaans
mitigo-waakaa'igan ni log cabin; pi mitigo-
waakaa'iganan; loc mitigo-waakaa'iganing;
dim mitigo-waakaa'igaans
mitigoons ni stick; pi mitigoonsan; loc
mitigoonsing
mitigwakik na Mide drum; pi mitigwakikoog; loc
mitigwakikong; dim mitigwakikoons
mitigwaab na bow; pi mitigwaabiig; loc
mitigwaabiing; dim mitigwaabiins
mitigwaabaak na hickory; pi mitigwaabaakoog;
loc mitigwaabaakong; dim
m i tl gwaabaakoon s
mitigwemikwaan ni wooden spoon, wooden ladle;
pi mitigwemikwaan an; dim
mitigwemikwaan ens
mitose vai go on foot; Isg nimitose; pn metosed
mizay na ling, eelpout, burbot, mariah, lawyer
(fish);/>/mizayag
mizhagaa vai come ashore in canoe; Isg
nimizhagaa; pn mezhagaad
mizhakiise vai hit the bottom; Isg nimizhakiise;
prt mezhakiised
mizhakiise vii hit the bottom; pn mezhakiiseg;
aug mizhakiisemagad; pn aug
mezhaki i semagak
mizhakwad vii be clear sky, be good weather; prt
mezhakwak
mizhaakigwe vai get a cold; Isg nimizhaakigwe;
prt mezhaakigwed
mizhishapc in plain view
mizho /mizhw-/ via hit s.o. (in shooting); Isg
nimizhwaa; prt mezhwaad
mizhodam vai2 win3 hit the target; Isg
nimizhodam; prt mezhodang
mizhodan vti hit s.t. (in shooting); Isg
nimizhodaan; pn mezhodang
mizise na turkey; pi miziseg; dim mizisens
miziwe pc all over, everywhere
miziwebii'an vti write s.t. all over; Isg
nimiziwebii'aan; pn meziwebii'ang
miziwebii'igaade zjwbe written on all over;/>r£
meziwebii'igaadeg; aug
miziwebii'igaademagad; pn aug
meziwebii'igaademagak
miziwebii'ige vai write all over; Isg
nimiziwebii'ige; pn meziwebii'iged
miziwe* vta make s.o. of a whole piece; Isg
nimiziwe'aa; pn meziwe'aad
miziwekamigpc all over the world
miziweshkaa vii be everywhere, go everywhere,
spread all over; prt meziweshkaag; aug
miziweshkaamagad; pn aug
mezi wesh kaam agak
miziwe toon vti2 make s.t. of a whole piece; Isg
nimiziwetoon; pn meziwetood
miziweyaa vii be whole, be intact; prt
meziweyaag; aug miziweyaamagad; prt aug
meziweyaamagak
miziweyaabikizi vai be full (as something mineral,
e.g., the moon); pn meziweyaabikizid
miziwezi vai be whole, be intact; Isg nimiziwez;
pn meziwezid
mizizaak na horsefly; pi mizizaakwag; dim
mizizaakoons
m i t igwem i kwaan
(wooden spoon, wooden ladle)

89 
mizizi—mookojigan
mizizi vai start to get sick, catch a disease; Isg
nimiziz; prt mezizid
mil pc it is thus that, it is that existential panicle
mii dash pc and then; also miish
miigaadiwag /miigaadi-/ vai they fight each other;
Ipl nimiigaadimin; prt maagaadijig
miigaadiwin ni battle, war; pi miigaadiwinan
miigaazh /miigaaN-/ vta fight s.o.; Isg
nimiigaanaa; prt maagaanaad
miigaazo vai fight; Isg nimiigaaz; prt maagaazod
miigis na Mide shell, pearl; pi miigisag; loc
miigising; dim nniigisens
miigiwe vai+o give away (s.t.); Isg nimiigiwe,
nimiigiwen; prt maagiwed
miigwan na feather; pi miigwanag; loc
miigwaning; dim miigwaans
miigwani-wiiwakwaan ni feather headdress,
feather bonnet; pi miigwani-wiiwakwaanan;
loc miigwani-wiiwakwaaning; dim miigwani-
wiiwakwaanens
miigwech pc thanks!
miigwechiwendam vai2 be thankful; Isg
nimiigwechiwendam; prt
maagwechiweridang
miigwechiwendan vtibt thankful for s.t.; Isg
nimiigwechiwendaan; prt
maagwechiweridang
miigwechiwenim vta be thankful for s.o.; Isg
nimiigwechiwenimaa; prt
maagwechiweriimaad
miigwechiwi-giizhigad vii be Thanksgiving Day;
prt maagwechiwi-giizhigak
miigwechiwi' vta thank s.o.; Isg
nimiigwechiwi'aa; prt maagwechiwi'aad
miijim ni food; pi miijirnan
miijimadaawe vaibuy food; Isg nimiijimadaawe;
pn maajimadaa wed
miijimikanjigan ni bait; pi miijimikanjiganan; loc
miijimikanjigaming; dim miijimikanjigaans
miijimikanjige DO; bait things; Isg
nimiijimikanjige; prt maajimikanjiged
miijin vti3 eat s.t.; Isg nimiijin; prt maajid
miikana ni road, trail; pi miikanan; loc
miikanaang; dim miikanens, miikaans
miikanaake vai make a road or trail; Isg
nimiikanaake; prt maakanaaked
miikanaakewinini na road worker; pi
miikanaakewininiwag
miikanaawan vii be a road, be a trail; prt
maakanaawang
miikawaadad vii be handsome, be beautiful; prt
maakawaadak
miikawaadizi vai be handsome, be beautiful; Isg
nimiikawaadiz; prt mekawaadizid
miikindizi vair tease; Isg nimiikindiz; prt
maakindizid
miikinji* vta tease s.o., harass s.o.; Isg
nimiikinji'aa; pit maakinji'aad
miikonan vti shoot and hit s.t.; Isg nimiikonaan;
prt maakonang
miikonaw vta shoot and hit s.o.; Isg
nimiikonawaa; prt maakonawaad
miikwa' /miikwa'w-/ vta hit s.o. dead center with
something; Isg riimiikwa'waa;/»t
maakwa'waad
miikwa'an vti hit s.t. dead center with something;
Isg nimiikwa'aan; prt maakwa'ang
miinagaawanzh na blueberry plant; pi
miinagaawanzhiig; loc miinagaawanzhiing;
dim miinagaawanzhiins
miinan /miin-/ ni blueberries plural; loc miining;
dim miinensan
mii nange pc yes, for sure, certainly
miinawaa pc and, also, again
miinens na hawthorn fruit; pi miinensag
miinensagaawanzh na hawthorn tree; pi
miinensagaawanzhiig; loc
miinensagaawanzhiing; dim
miinensagaawanzhiins
miini-baashkiminasigan ni blueberry sauce
miinidiwag /miinidi-/ vai they give (s.t.) to each
other, they have a give-away; Ipl nimiinidimin;
prt maanidijig
miini-giizis na August, July; also miinike-giizis
miinikaan m seed; pi miinikaanan; loc
miinikaaning; dim miinikaanens
miish pc it is thus that, and then
miishaabiwinaan ni eyelash; pi
miishaabiwinaanan
miishidaamikan vai have a beard; Isg
nimiishidaamikan; prt maashidaamikang
miishidoon vai have a moustache; Isg
nimiishidoon; prt maashidoong
miishiigin ni'velvet; pi miishiiginoon; loc
miishiiginong; dim miishiiginoons
miishiijiimin na peach; p/miishiijiiminag; loc
miishiijiimining; dim miishiijiiminens
miizh /miiN-/ vta give (s.t.) to s.o.; /s^nimiinaa;
prt maanaad
miizii vai defecate; Isg nimiizii; prt maaziid
miiziiwigamig ni toilet, bathroom; pi
miiziiwigamigoon; loc miiziiwigamigong; dim
miiziiwigamigoons
moshwe na shawl; pi moshweg; loc moshweng;
dim moshwens
moshwens ni handkerchief; pi moshwensan; loc
moshwensing
moo ni feces, excrement; pi moowan
moo' vta make s.o. cry; Isg nimoo'aa; pn
mwaa'aad
mooka'am vai2 be sunrise, rise (as the sun); Isg
nimooka'am; pn mwaaka'ang
mookawaakii vai cry to go along; Isg
nimookawaakii; prt mwaakawaakiid
mookibii vai emerge from the water; prt
mwaakibiid
mookijiwanibiig ni spring (water source); loc
mookijiwanibiigong; dim
mookijiwanibiigoons
mookii vai emerge from surface; Isg nimookii; prt
mwaakiid
mookiitaw vta attack s.o. from hiding; Isg
nimookiitawaa; prt mwaakiitawaad
mookodaaso vai carve, whittle; Isg nimookodaas;
prt mwaakodaasod
mookodaasowinini na carpenter, carver; pi
mookodaasowininiwag
mookojigan ni drawknife, plane (tool); pi
mookojiganan; loc mookojiganing; dim
mookojigaans

mookomaan—nagaashkaa 
90
mookomaan ni knife; pi mookomaanan; he
mookomaaning; dim mookomaanens
moona* /moona*w-/ vta dig up s.o.; Isg
nimoona'waa; prt mwaana'waad
moona'an vti dig up s.t.; hg nimoona'aan; prt
mwaana'ang
moona'ige vai dig up things; Isg nimoona'ige; prt
mwaana'iged
moonenim vta suspect s.o.; /^nimoonenimaa;
prt mwaanenimaad
moonikaan ni cellar; pi moonikaanan; lac
moonikaaning; dim moonikaanens
mooningwane na yellow-shafted flicker; pi
mooningwaneg; dim mooningwanens
moose na worm; pi mooseg; dim moosens
moosewiingwe vai have acne on one's face; Isg
nimoosewiingwe; pn mwaasewiingwed
mooshka'an vii be flooded, there is a flood; pn
mwaashka'ang
mooshka'osi na American bittern (locally called
shypoke); pi mooshka'osiwag; dim
mooshka'osiins
mooshkamo vai come up to the surface of the
water; Isg nimooshkam; prt mwaashkamod
mooshkinadoon vti2 fill s.t. (with solids); Isg
nimooshkinadoon; pn mwaashkinadood
mooshkina' vta fill s.o. (with solids); Isg
nimooshkina'aa; pn mwaashkina'aad
mooshkine vaibe full (of solids); Isg
nimooshkine; prt mwaashkined
mooshkine vii be full (of solids); pn
mwaashkineg; aug mooshkinemagad; pn aug
mwaashkinemagak
mooshkinebadoon vti2 fill s.t. (with a liquid); Isg
nimooshkinebadoon; prt
mwaashkinebadood
mooshkinebazh /mooshkinebaN-/ vta fill s.o.
(with a liquid); Isg nimooshkinebanaa; prt
mwaashkinebanaad
mooshkinebii vii be full (of a liquid); prt
mwaashkinebiig; aug mooshkinebiimagad;
prt aug mwaashkinebiimagak
mooshkinebii'ige vai fill out a form; Isg
nimooshkinebii'ige; prt mwaashkinebii'iged
mooshkineyaabate vii be filled with smoke; prt
mwaashkineyaabateg; aug
mooshkineyaabatemagad; prt aug
mwaashkineyaabatemagak
mooz na moose; pi moozoog; dim moozoons
moozhag pc always, often, all the time
moozhaabe na unmarried man; pi moozhaabeg
moozhi* vta feel s.o. in or on one's body; Isg
nimoozhi'aa; prt mwaazhi'aad
moozhikwe na unmarried woman; pi
moozhikweg
moozhitoon vti2 feel s.t. in or on one's body; Isg
nimoozhitoon; prt mwaazhitood
moozhwaagan ni scissors; pi moozhwaaganan;
he moozhwaagan ing; dim moozhwaagaans
N
n= pre first person prefix before long vowels in
dependent noun stems
na pc yes-no question word
nabagaa vii be flat; prt nebagaag; aug
nabagaamagad; prt aug nebagaamagak
nabagidaabaan na toboggan; pi
nabagidaabaanag; loc nabagidaabaaning; dim
nabagidaabaanens
nabagijaane vai have a flat nose; Isg
ninabagijaane; pn nebagijaaned
nabagijiishin vai have a flat tire; prt nebagijiishing
nabagisag na board; pi nabagisagoog; loc
nabagisagong; dim nabagisagoons
nabagizi vai be flat; pn nebagizid
nabon ma fold s.o. over; hg ninabonaa; prt
nebonaad
nabonan vti fold s.t. over; Isg ninabonaan; prt
nebonang
naboob in soup; pi naboobiin; loc naboobiing; dim
naboobiins
naboobiike vai make soup; Isg ninaboobiike; prt
neboobiiked
nagadamaw vta leave (s.t.) behind for s.o.; Isg
ninagadamawaa; pn negadamawaad
nagadan vti abandon s.t., leave s.t. behind; hg
ninagadaan; pn negadang
nagadendan vti be used to s.t., be familiar with
s.t.; Isg ninagadendaan; pn negadendang
nagadenim vta be used to s.o., be familiar with
s.o., be acquainted with s.o.; Isg
ninagadenimaa; pn negadenimaad
nagadenindiwag /nagadenindi-/ vai they are ac-
quainted with each other, they are friends with
each other; Ipl ninagadenindimin; pn
negadenindijig
nagaji' vta be used to making s.o., know how to
handle s.o.; hg ninagaji'aa; prt negaji'aad
nagajitoon vti2 be used to making s.t., know how
to handle s.t.; Isg ninagajitoon; pn negajitood
nagamo vai sing; hg ninagam; pn negamod
nagamon ni song; pi nagamonan; dim
nagamonens
nagamotaw vta sing for s.o.; hg ninagamotawaa;
pn negamotawaad
nagamowin ni singing, song
nagamoo-makak ni phonograph, record player; pi
nagamoo-makakoon; loc nagamoo-
makakong; dim nagamoo-makakoons
nagazh /nagaN-/ vta abandon s.o., leave s.o. be-
hind; hg ninaganaa; pn neganaad
nagazhiwe vai abandon people; hg ninagazhiwe;
pn negazhiwed
Nagaajiwanaang^>/<2ft? Fond du Lac Reservation
nagaashkaa vai halt, stop moving; hg
ninagaashkaa; prt negaashkaad
nagaashkaa vii halt, stop moving; prt
negaashkaag; aug nagaashkaamagad; prt aug
negaashkaamagak

91 
nagaashkaa'—nanda-gikenim
nagaashkaa' vta make s.o. stop (e.g., a car); Isg
ninagaashkaa'aa; pn negaashkaa'aad
nagaashkaatoon vd2 make s.t. stop; Isg
ninagaashkaatoon; pn negaashkaatood
nagaawebishkigan ni brakes; pi
nagaawebishkiganan; loc
nagaawebishkiganing
nagaawebishkige vai apply the brakes; Isg
ninagaawebishkige; prt negaawebishkiged
nagishkan unmeet s.t. (while going somewhere);
Isg ninagishkaan; prt negishkang
nagishkaw vta meet s.o. (while going somewhere);
Isg ninagishkawaa; pn negishkawaad
nagishkodaadiwag /nagishkodaadi-/ vai they meet
each other; Ipl ninagishkodaadimin; prt
negishkodaadijig
nagwaagan ni snare; pi nagwaaganan; loc
nagwaaganing; dim nagwaagaans
nagwaaganeyaab ni snare wire; pi
nagwaaganeyaabiin; loc
nagwaaganeyaabiing; dim
nagwaaganeyaabiins
nagwaazh /nagwaaN-/ via snare s.o.; Isg
ninagwaanaa; prt negwaanaad
nagweyaab ni rainbow; pi nagweyaabiin; loc
nagweyaabiing; dim nagweyaabiins
na'aanganikwe na daughter-in-law; pi
na'aanganikweg
na'aangish na son-in-law; pi na'aangishiig
na'egaaj pc not too hard!, go easy!
na'enimo vai store things away; Isg nina'enim; pn
ne'enimod
na'idaa pc right at the time, just then
na'isijige vai put things in order; Isg nina'isijige;
prt ne'isijiged
nakodan vti answer s.t.; Isg ninakodaan; prt
nekodang
nakom vta answer s.o., reply to s.o.; Isg
ninakomaa; prt nekomaad
nakondiwag /nakondi-/ vai they answer each
other, they reply to each other; Ipl
ninakondimin; prt nekondijig
nakwebidoon vti2 catch s.t. with hands; Isg
ninakwebidoon; prt nekwebidood
nakwebijige vai catch things with hands; Isg
ninakwebijige; prt nekwebijiged
nakwebijigewinini na catcher (in baseball); pi
nakwebijigewininiwag; dim
nakwebijigewininiins
nakwebizh /nakwebiN-/ vta catch s.o. with hands;
Isg ninakwebinaa: prt nekwebinaad
nakwebii'amaw vta write (s.t.) back to s.o.; Isg
ninakwebii'amawaa; prt nekwebii'amawaad
nakwebii'amaadiwag /nakwebii'amaadi-/ vai
they write back to each other; Ipl
ninakwebii'amaadimin; pn
nekwebii'amaadijig
nakweshkaw vta meet s.o.; Isg ninakweshkawaa;
prt nekweshkawaad
nakweshkodaadiwag /nakweshkodaadi-/ vai they
meet each other; /p/ninakweshkodaadimin;
prt nekweshkodaadijig
nakwetam vai2 answer; Isg ninakwetam; prt
nekwetang
nakwetan vti answer s.t.; Isg ninakwetaan; prt
nekwetang
nakwetaw vta answer s.o.; Isg ninakwetawaa; prt
nekwetawaad
namadabi vai sit, sit down; Isg ninamadab; prt
nemadabid
namanjinik ni left hand usually possessed; pi
namanjinikan; loc namanjinikaang
namanjii vai be left-handed; Isg ninamanjii; prt
nemanjiid
name na sturgeon; pi namewag; dim namens
namebin na sucker (fish); pi namebinag; dim
namebinens
namebini-giizis na February
name* vta find signs of s.o.'s presence; Isg
niname'aa; prt neme'aad
nameshin vai leave signs of one's presence; Isg
ninameshin; prt nemeshing
namesin mi leave signs of its presence; pn
nemesing
nametoo vai leave signs of one's presence; Isg
ninametoo; prt nemetood
nanagin vtahold s.o. back, prevent s.o. (from
doing something); Isg ninanaginaa; prt
nenaginaad
nanaabag= < nabag=
nanaa'ichige vai fix things, repair things; Isg
ninanaa'ichige; prt nenaa'ichiged
nanaa'idaabaane vai repair a car; Isg
ninanaa'idaabaane; prt nenaa'idaabaaned
nanaa'idaabaanewinini na automobile mechanic;
pi nanaa'idaabaanewininiwag
nanaa'idaabaanikewinini na automobile mechan-
ic; pi nanaa'idaabaanikewininiwag
nanaa'in vta put s.o. in order, put s.o. away, fix
s.o.; Isg ninanaa'inaa; prt nenaa'inaad
nanaa'inan vti put s.t. in order, put s.t. away, fix
s.t.; Isg ninanaa'inaan; prt nenaa'inang
nanaa'itaw vta fix (s.t.) for s.o., repair (s.t.) for
s.o.; Isg ninanaa'itawaa; prt nenaa'itawaad;
also nanaa'itamaw
nanaa'itoon vti2 fix s.t., repair s.t.; Isg
ninanaa'itoon; prt nenaa'itood
nanaa'ii vai be dressed up; Isg ninanaa'ii; prt
nenaa'iid
nanaamad= < namad—
nanaandaw= < nandaw=
nanaandawi* vta heal s.o., doctor s.o.; Isg
ninanaandawi'aa; prt nenaandawi'aad
nanaandawi'iwe vai heal people, doctor people;
Isg ninanaandawi'iwe; prt nenaandawi'iwed
nanaando=< nando=
nanaawad= < nawad=
nanda- pv4 seek, look for
nanda-anokii vai look for work; Isg ninanda-
anokii; prt nenda-anokiid
nanda-gikendan vti seek to know s.t., seek to learn
s.t.; Isg ninanda-gikendaan; prt nenda-
gikendang
nanda-gikenim vta seek to know s.o.; Isg ninanda-
gikenimaa; pn nenda-gikenimaad

nanda-mikwendan—nase'ige 
92
nanda-mikwendan vti try to think of s.t., try to
remember s.t.; hg ninanda-mikwendaan; pn
nenda-mikwendang
nanda-mikwenim vta try to think of s.o., try to re-
member s.o.; hg ninanda-mikwenimaa; prt
nenda-mikwenimaad
nandawaabam vta look for s.o., search for s.o.; hg
ninandawaabamaa; pn nendawaabamaad
nandawaabandan vti look for s.t., search for s.t.;
hg ninandawaabandaan; prt
nendawaabandang
nandawaabanjige vai look for things, search for
things; hg nlnandawaabanjige; pn
nendawaabanjiged
nandawaaboozwe vai hunt for rabbits; hg
ninandawaaboozwe; prt nendawaaboozwed
nandawaatoo vai scout; hg ninandawaatoo; pn
nendawaatood
nandawendam vai2 want, desire; hg
ninandawendam; pn nendawendang
nandawendan tin'want s.t., desire s.t.; hg
ninandawendaan; prt nendawendang
nandawendaagozi vai be suitable, be desirable; prt
nendawendaagozid
nandawendaagwad mi be suitable, be desirable;
pn nendawendaagwak
nandawenim vta want s.o. (to do...), desire s.o.;
hg ninandawenimaa; prt nendawenimaad
nandawenjige vai get food by hunting or fishing;
hg ninandawenjige; prt nendawenjiged
nandawishibe vai hunt ducks; hg
ninandawishibe; pn nendawishibed
nandawisimwe vai look for horses; hg
ninandawisimwe; prt nendawisimwed
nandobani vai go to war archaic; hg ninandoban;
prt nendobanid
nandodamaw vta ask s.o. for (s.t.), beg s.o. for
(s.t.); hg ninandodamawaa; pn
nendodamawaad
nandodamaage vai ask people for (s.t.), beg
people for (s.t.); hg ninandodamaage; prt
nendodamaaged
nandodan vti ask for s.t.; hg ninandodaan; pn
nendodang
nandokawechige vai look for tracks; hg
ninandokawechige; pn nendokawechiged
nandokawe' vta look for s.o.'s tracks, be on s.o.'s
trail; hg ninandokawe'aa; prt nendokawe'aad
nandom vta call s.o., summon s.o.; hg
ninandomaa; pn nendomaad
nandomaam vta smell for s.o., sniff s.o.; hg
ninandomaamaa; pn nendomaamaad
nandomaandan vti smell for s.t., sniff s.t.; hg
ninandomaandaan; pn nendomaandang
nandone' /nandone'w-/ vta look for s.o.; hg
ninandone'waa; pn nendone'waad
nandone'an vti look for s.t.; hg ninandone'aan;
pn nendone'ang
nandone'igaade vii be looked for; pn
nendone'igaadeg; aug
nandone'igaademagad; pn aug
nendone'igaademagak
nandone'igaazo vai be looked for; prt
nendone'igaazod
nandone'ige vai look for things; hg
ninandone'ige; pn nendone'iged
nandotam vai2 listen for something; hg
ninandotam; pn nendotang
nandotan vti listen for s.t.; hg ninandotaan: pn
nendotang
nandotaw vta listen for s.o.; hg ninandotawaa;
prt nendotawaad
nandoobii vai look for a drink; hg ninandoobii;
pn nendoobiid
nandoojiin vta feel for s.o., grope for s.o.; hg
ninandoojiinaa; pn nendoojiinaad
nandoojiinan vti feel for s.t., grope for s.t.; hg
ninandoojiinaan; pn nendoojiinang
nandoojiinige vai feel for things, grope for things;
hg ninandoojiinige; prt nendoojiiniged
nandookome vai look for lice; hg
ninandookome; pn nendookomed
nandookomeshiinh na monkey; pi
nandookomeshiinyag
nandwaanikaadan vti dig for s.t.; hg
ninandwaanikaadaan; prt nendwaanikaadang
nandwaanikaazh /nandwaanikaaN-/ vta dig for
s.o.; Isg ninandwaanikaanaa; pn
nendwaanikaanaad
nandwewem vta go and ask for s.o.; hg
ninandwewemaa; prt nendwewemaad
nandwewendamaw vta go and ask s.o. (for s.t.);
hg ninandwewendamawaa: pn
nendwewendamawaad
nandwewendan vti go and ask for s.t.; hg
ninandwewendaan; pn nendwewendang
nandwewezige vai signal by shooting; hg
ninandwewezige; pn nendweweziged
nangwanapc it turns out that, it happens to be;
also ngwana, ingwana
naniibikim vta scold s.o.; hg ninaniibikimaa; prt
neniibikimaad
naniisido= < nisido=
naniizaanad vii be dangerous; prt neniizaanak
naniizaanendan vti consider s.t. dangerous; hg
ninaniizaanendaan; pn neniizaanendang
naniizaanendaagwad vii be considered dangerous;
prt neniizaanendaagwak
naniizaanenim vta consider s.o. dangerous, think
s.o. to be in danger; hg ninaniizaanenimaa;
prt neniizaanenimaad
naniizaanizi vai be dangerous; hg ninaniizaaniz;
pn neniizaanizid
napaazikan vti wear s.t. the wrong way; hg
ninapaazikaan; prt nepaazikang
napaazikaw vta wear s.o. the wrong way; Isg
ninapaazikawaa; prt nepaazikawaad
napodin na dumpling; pi napodinag; loc
napodining; dim napodinens
napodinike vai make dumplings; hg
ninapodinike; pn nepodiniked
nasanaamo vai exhale, recover one's breath; hg
ninasanaam; pn nesanaamod
nase'an vti stir s.t. to form sugar; Isg ninase'aan;
pn nese'ang
nase'igan ni granulated maple sugar
nase'ige vai stir to form sugar; hg ninase'ige; pn
nese'iged

93 
naseyaawangwaan—naadamaadiwag
naseyaawangwaan ni sugaring trough;
naseyaawangwaanan; loc
naseyaawangwaaning; dim
naseyaawangwaanens
naseyaawangwaan (sugaring trough)
naseyaawangwe vai granulate sugar; Isg
ninaseyaawangwe; prt neseyaawangwed
nashke fc look!, behold!; also inashke
nawadam vta take hold of s.o. in mouth, take a
bite of s.o.; Isg ninawadamaa; prt
newadamaad
nawadandan vti take hold of s.t. in mouth, take a
bite of s.t.; Isg ninawadandaan; prt
newadandang
nawadanjige vat take hold of things in mouth, take
a bite of things; Isg ninawadanjige; prt
newadanjiged
nawadide vii catch fire; pn newadideg; aug
nawadidemagad; prt aug newadidemagak
nawadin vta grab s.o., seize s.o.; Isg ninawadinaa;
prt newadinaad
nawadinamaw via grab (s.t.) of s.o.'s, seize (s.t.)
ofs.o.'s; Isg ninawadinamawaa; prt
newadinamawaad
nawadinan vti grab s.t., seize s.t.; Isg
ninawadinaan; prt newadinang
nawadiniwe vai grab people, seize people, take
captives; Isg ninawadiniwe; prt newadiniwed
nawadizo vai catch fire; prt newadizod
nawaj pc more
nawajii vai take a lunch break; Isg ninawajii; prt
newajiid
nawapo ziaitake a lunch along; /sj'ninawapjprt
newapod
nawapwaan ni lunch taken along; pi
nawapwaanan; dim nawapwaanens
nawapwaanike vai make a lunch to take along; Isg
ninawapwaanike; prt newapwaaniked
nayaag pc ahead of time
nayenzh pc both
nazhikewaakwadabi vai sit alone; Isg
ninazhikewaakwadab; prt
nezhikewaakwadabid
nazhikewige vailive alone; Isg ninazhikewige; prt
nezhikewiged
nazhikewizi vai be alone; Isg ninazhikewiz; prt
nezhikewizid
nazikwe' /nazikwe'w-/ vta comb s.o.'s hair; Isg
ninazikwe'waa; prt nezikwe'waad
nazikwe'o vai comb one's hair; Isg ninazikwe'; pn
nezikwe'od
naa pc emphatic particle
naaba'anidizo vai step in the same tracks; Isg
ninaaba'anidizo; pn nayaaba'anidizod
naabe- pv4 male
naabese na male bird, rooster; pi naabeseg; dim
naabesens
naabesim na male dog, stallion; pi naabesimoog;
dim naabesimoons
naabidoo' /naabidoo'w-/ vta thread s.o., string s.o.
(e.g., beads); Isg ninaabidoo'waa; prt
nayaabidoo'waad
naabidoo'an vti thread s.t., string s.t.; Isg
ninaabidoo'aan; pn nayaabidoo'ang
naabidoo'igan ni beading needle; pi
naabidoo'iganan; loc naabidoo'iganing; dim
naabidoo'igaans
naabidoo'ige vai thread things, string things; Isg
ninaabidoo'ige; prt nayaabidoo'iged
naabikan vti wear s.t. around one's neck; Isg
ninaabikaan; prt nayaabikang
naabikaw vta wear s.o. around one's neck; Isg
ninaabikawaa; prt nayaabikawaad
naabikawaagan na necktie, necklace; pi
naabikawaaganag; he naabikawaaganing;
dim naabikawaagaans
naabikwaan ni ship, vessel; pi naabikwaanan; loc
naabikwaaning; dim naabikwaanens
naabinootaw vta repeat what s.o. says, mock s.o.;
Isg ninaabinootawaa; prt nayaabinootawaad
naabinootaage vai repeat what people say, mock
people; Isg ninaabinootaage; prt
nayaabinootaaged
naabinootaage-makak ni tape recorder; pi
naabinootaage-makakoon; loc
naabinootaage-makakong; dim
naabinootaage-makakoons
naabishebizon ni earring; pi naabishebizonan; loc
naabishebizoning; dim naabishebizonens
naabishkaw vta take s.o.'s place; Isg
ninaabishkawaa; prt nayaabishkawaad
naabishkaage vai take someone's place; Isg
ninaabishkaage; prt nayaabishkaaged
naabizhigan ni pattern (in sewing); pi
naabizhiganan; loc naabizhiganing; dim
naabizhigaans
naadagoodoo vai check one's snares; Isg
ninaadagoodoo; pn nayaadagoodood
naada* /naada'w-/ vta go get s.o. by boat; Isg
ninaada'waa; prt nayaada'waad
naada'an vti go get s.t. by boat; Isg ninaada'aan;
prt nayaada'ang
naada'oodoon vti2 go to get s.t. by boat; Isg
ninaada'oodoon; prt nayaada'oodood
naada'oozh /naada'ooN-/ vta go to get s.o. by
boat; Isg ninaada'oonaa; prt nayaada'oonaad
naadamaw vta help s.o.; Isg ninaadamawaa; prt
nayaadamawaad
naadamaadiwag /naadamaadi-/ vai they help
each other; 7p/ninaadamaadimin;prr
nayaadamaadijig

naadamaage—naanogonagad 
94
naadamaage vai help people; hg ninaadamaage;
pn nayaadamaaged
naadasabii vai go get a net, pick up a net; hg
ninaadasabii; pn nayaadasabiid
naadashkosiwe vat go after hay; Isg
ninaadashkosiwe; pn nayaadashkosiwed
naadasoonaagane vai check one's traps, go get
one's traps; Isg ninaadasoonaagane; pn
nayaadasoonaaganed
naadaw vta go get (s.t.) for s.o., fetch (s.t.) for s.o.;
Isg ninaadawaa; pn nayaadawaad
naadazina'igane vai go get mail; Isg
ninaadazina'igane; pn nayaadazina'iganed
naadazina'ige vai go collect a debt; Isg
ninaadazina'ige; pn nayaadazina'iged
naadin vti3 go get s.t., fetch s.t., go after s.t.; Isg
ninaadin; pn nayaadid
naadinise vai go get firewood; Isg ninaadinise; prt
nayaadinised; also naajinise
naadoobii vai go get water or other liquid, gather
sap; Isg ninaadoobii; pn nayaadoobiid
naagadawaabam vta observe s.o.; Isg
ninaagadawaabamaa; prt
nayaagadawaabamaad
naagadawaabandan vti observe s.t.; Isg
ninaagadawaabandaan; pn
nayaagadawaabandang
naagadawendam vai2 think; Isg
ninaagadawendam; pn nayaagadawendang
naagadawendan vti think about s.t.; Isg
ninaagadawendaan; prt nayaagadawendang
naagadawenim vta think about s.o.; Isg
ninaagadawenimaa; prt nayaagadawenimaad
naagaj pc later, after a while
naago' vta make s.o. show, reveal s.o.; Isg
ninaago'aa; pn nayaago'aad
naagotoon vti2 make s.t. show, reveal s.t.; Isg
ninaagotoon; prt nayaagotood
naagozi vai be visible; Isg ninaagoz; prt
nayaagozid
naagwad vii be visible; prt nayaagwak
naajibatwaadan vti run to get s.t.; Isg
ninaajibatwaadaan; prt nayaajibatwaadang
naajibatwaazh /naajibatwaaN-/ vta run to get
s.o.; Isg ninaajibatwaanaa; pn
nayaajibatwaanaad
naajigaade vii be fetched, be picked up; pn
nayaajigaadeg; aug naajigaademagad; pn aug
nayaajigaademagak
naajigaazo vai be fetched, be picked up; prt
nayaajigaazod
naajimiijime vai go get food; Isg ninaajimiijime;
pn nayaajimiijimed
naajinizha'an vti go after s.t., send for s.t.; Isg
ninaajinizha'aan; prt nayaajinizha'ang
naajinizha' /naajinizha'w-/ vta go after s.o., send
for s.o.; Isg ninaajinizha'waa; pn
nayaajinizha'waad
naajinizha'amaw vta order (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
ninaajinizha'amawaa; pn
nayaajinizha'amawaad
naajinizha'ige vai order things; Isg
ninaajinizha'ige; pn nayaajinizha'iged
naajiwanii'ige vai go after traps; Isg
ninaajiwanii'ige; pn nayaajiwanii'iged
naan nad grandma (vocative of nimaamaanaan
grandmother)
naanabem pc too late, it should have been done
naanan nm five
naananinoon /naananin-/ vii they are five; pn
nayaananingin
naananiwag /naanani-/ vai they are five; Ipl
ninaananimin; prt nayaananijig
naanaabishebizo vai wear earrings; Isg
ninaanaabishebiz; pn nayaanaabishebizod
naanaagadawaabam vta watch s.o. carefully, ob-
serve s.o.; Isg ninaanaagadawaabamaa; pn
nayaanaagadawaabamaad
naanaagadawaabandan vti watch s.t. carefully,
observe s.t.; Isg ninaanaagadawaabandaan;
pn nayaanaagadawaabandang
naanaagadawendam vai2 consider, think; Isg
ninaanaagadawendam; pn
nayaanaagadawendang
naanaagadawendan vti consider s.t., think about
s.t.; Isg ninaanaagadawendaan; pn
nayaanaagadawendang
naanaagadawenim vta consider s.o., think about
s.o.; Isg ninaanaagadawenimaa; pn
nayaanaagadawenimaad
naangan vii be light in weight; pn nayaangang
naangendan vti consider s.t. light in weight; Isg
ninaangendaan; prt nayaangendang
naangenim vta consider s.o. light in weight; Isg
ninaangenimaa; pn nayaangenimaad
naangide'e vai be carefree; Isg ninaangide'e; pn
nayaangide'ed
naangiwane vai carry a light pack; Isg
ninaangiwane; pn nayaangiwaned
naangizi vai be light in weight; Isg ninaangiz; pn
nayaangizid
naanibaayawe vai yawn; hg ninaanibaayawe; pn
nayaanibaayawed
naanimidana nm fifty
naaning pc five times
naaningim pc often
naaningodinong* pt now and then, every once in a
while, sometimes; also naangodinong*
naano- pv4 five
naano-anama'e-giizhigad vii be five weeks; pn
nayaano-anama'e-giizhigak
naano-anama'e-giizhik pi five weeks
naano-biboon pc five years
naano-biboonagad vii be five years; pn nayaano-
biboonagak
naano-biboonagizi vai be five years old; hg
ninaano-biboonagiz; prt nayaano-
biboonagizid
naano-diba'igan pc five miles, five hours
naano-diba'iganed vii be five o'clock; pn
nayaano-diba'iganek
naano-diba'igaans pc five minutes, five acres
naano-dibikpc five nights
naano-giizhigad vii be Friday; pn nayaano-
giizhigak
naano-giizhik pc five days
naano-giizis pc five months
naanogon pc five days
naanogonagad vii be five days; pn
nayaanogonagak

95 
naanogonagizi—nibendaage
naanogonagizi vai be the fifth day of the month,
be five days old; prt na/aanogonagizid
naanoninj pc five inches
naanosagoons nm five thousand
naanozid pc five feet
naanoobii'igan na five (card); pi naanoobii'iganag
naanoomaya pc a little while ago
naanooshkin pc five bags
naanwaabik pc five dollars
naanwaak nm five hundred
naanwewaan pc five sets, five pairs
naasanaa pc look out!, come on!
naasaab pc like, the same
naasaabibii'an mi copy s.t. in writing; Isg
ninaasaabibii'aan; pn nayaasaabibii'ang
naasaabibii'ige vai copy things in writing; Isg
m'naasaabibii'ige; pn nayaasaabibii'iged
naawagaam pc in the middle of the lake
naawakwe vii be noon; pn nayaawakweg; aug
naawakwemagad; prt aug
nayaawakwernagak
naawakwe-miijin vti3 eat s.t. for dinner (noon
meal), eat s.t. for lunch (noon meal); Isg
ninaawakwe-miijin; prt nayaawakwe-miijid
naawakwe-wiisini vai eat dinner (noon meal), eat
lunch (noon meal); Isg ninaawakwe-wiisin; pn
nayaawakwe-wiisinid
naawashkosiw pc in the middle of a meadow
naawayi'ii pc in the middle of it
naawaakigan pc in the middle of the chest
naawaakwaa pc in the middle of the woods
naawaawigan pc in the middle of the back
naawi- pn in the middle of
naawigatig pc in the middle of the forehead
naawij pc out in trie lake
naawikanapt in tile middle of the road or trail
naawinaagozi vai be barely visible, be a distant
sight; Isg ninaawinaagoz; pn
nayaawinaagozid
naawinaagwad vii be barely visible, be a distant
sight; pn nayaawinaagwak
naawininj m middle finger; pi naawininjiin
naawisag pc in the middle of the floor
naawoonagpc in the middle of a boat
naayanh pc correct?, right?
naazh /naaN-/ via go get s.o., fetch s.o., go after
s.o.; Isg ninaanaa; prt nayaanaad
naazhaabii'igan ni violin, fiddle; pi
naazhaabii'iganan; loc naazhaabii'iganing;
dim naazhaabii'igaans
naazhiiga'igan ni hide stretcher; pi
naazhiiga'iganan; loc naazhiiga'iganing; dim
naazhiiga'igaans
naazhiiga'ige vai stretch a hide; Isg
ninaazhiiga'ige; prt nayaazhiiga'iged
naazikan vtigo to s.t., approach s.t.; Isg
ninaazikaan; pn nayaazikang
naazikaw vta go to s.o., approach s.o.; Isg
ninaazikawaa; pn nayaazikawaad
naazikaage vai go to people, approach people; Isg
ninaazikaage; pn nayaazikaaged
negwaabam vta look malevolently out of corner of
one's eye at s.o.; Isg ninegwaabamaa; pn
nayegwaabainaad
negwaakwaan ni tap, spile (for sugaring); pi
negwaakwaanan; loc negwaakwaaning; dim
negwaakwaanens
nemaab ni marble, pool ball; pi nemaabiin
nemaabii vai play pool; Isg ninemaabii; prt
nayemaabiid
nemaabiiwigamig ni pool hall; pi
nemaabiiwigamigoon; loc
nemaabiiwigamigong; dim
nemaabiiwigamigoons
nenaandawi'iwed na-pt traditional healer; pi
nenaandawi'iwejig
nenaapaajinikesi na mole; pi
nenaapaajinikesiwag; dim
nenaapaajinikesiins
nendodamaageshkid na-pt beggar; pi
nendodamaageshkijig
neningo= < ingo=
neningodwaaso= < ingodwaaso=
neningodwaaswi nm six each
neniswi nm three each
neniibowa pc a whole lot
neniiwin nm four each
neniizh nm two each .
neniizhwaaswi nm seven each
nenookaasi na hummingbird; pi nenookaasiwag;
dim nenookaasiins
nesezo vai pant; Isg ninesez; prt nayesezod
neshangaa vii be limber, be slack; pn
nayeshangaag; aug neshangaamagad; pn aug
nayeshangaamagak
neshangaabiigad vii be slack (as something string-
like); pn nayeshangaabiigak
neshangaabiigizi vai be slack (as something string-
like); pn nayeshangaabiigizid
neshangishin vai be relaxed, lie limp; Isg
nineshangishin; pn nayeshangishing
neshangisin vii lie limp, lie slack; prt
nayeshangising
neshangizi vai be limber, be slack; Isg
nineshangiz; pn nayeshangizid
newe na bull snake; pi neweg; dim newens
neyaab pc back to previous place or condition, as
before
neyaashi ni point of land, peninsula; pi
neyaashiwan; loc neyaashiing; dim
neyaashiins
neyaashiiwan vii there is a peninsula, there is a
point of land; pn nayeyaashiiwang
ni=pre first person prefix; also ni=, in=, im=, n=,
nin=*, nim=*
ni- pv2 going away, coming up to in time; also ani-
nibaa vai sleep; Isg ninibaa; pn nebaad
nibaagan ni bed; pi nibaaganan: loc nibaaganing;
dim nibaagaans
nibaaganaatig ni bed frame; pi nibaaganaatigoon;
loc nibaaganaatigong; dim nibaaganaatigoons
nibe* vta make s.o. sleep, put s.o. to bed; Isg
ninibe*aa; prt nebe'aad
nibekaazo vai pretend to sleep; Isg ninibekaaz; prt
nebekaazod
nibendaw vta stay overnight with s.o.; Isg
ninibendawaa; pn nebendawaad
nibendaage vai stay overnight with people; Isg
ninibendaage; pn nebendaaged

nibeshkaw- - 
imgizo 
96
nibeshkaw- via make s.o. sleep in inverse forms: Isg
ninibeshkaagon; pn nebeshkaagod
nibewigamig ni bedroom; pi nibewigamigoon; loc
nibewigamigong; dim nibewigamigoons
nibi ni water; loc nibiing
nibinaadi vai get water; Isg ninibinaad; pn
nebinaadid
nibiikaa vii be much water; pn nebiikaag; aug
nibiikaamagad; pn aug aebiikaamagak
nibiiwadamon /nibiiwadamo-/ vii be wet (as a
road or trail); pn nebiiwadamog
nibiiwakamigaa mi be wet ground; pn
nebiiwakamigaag; aug
nibiiwakamigaamagad; pn aug
ne bi i wakam igaamagak
nibiiwakik na water pail; pi nibiiwakikoog; loc
nibiiwakikong; dim nibiiwakikoons
nibiiwan vii be wet, be watery; pn nebiiwang
nibiiwi vai be wet; Isg ninibiiw; pn nebiiwid
nibo vai die, be dead; Isg ninib; pn nebod
nibooke vai have a death in one's family; Isg
ninibooke; pn nebooked
niboowi vai be paralyzed; Isg niniboow; pn
neboowid
niboowidaabaan na hearse; pi
niboowidaabaanag; loc niboowidaabaaning:
dim niboowidaabaanens
niboowigamig ni mortuary; pi niboowigamigoon;
loc niboowigamigong
niboowigaade vai have a numb leg; Isg
niniboowigaade; pn neboowigaaded
niboowinike vai have a numb arm; Isg
niniboowinike; pn neboowiniked
niboowininjii vai have a numb hand; Isg
niniboowininjii; pn neboowininjiid
niboowise vai have a stroke, become paralyzed,
fall ill from bad medicine; Isg niniboowise; prt
neboowised
niboowizide vai have a numb foot; Isg
niniboowizide; prt neboowizided
nibwaakaa vai be wise, be intelligent; Isg
ninibwaakaa; prt nebwaakaad
nichiiwad vii there is a severe storm, there is a cat-
astrophe; pn nechiiwak
nigig na otter; pi nigigwag; dim nigigoons
nigigwayaan na otter hide; pi nigigwayaanag
nika na Canada goose; pi nikag; dim nikens
nikakwan /-kakwan-/ nidmy shin; pi nikakwanan;
he nikakwanaang
nikan /-kan-/ nid my bone; pi nikanan; loc nikaning
nikanendi waz'be gone overnight; 75£ ninikanend;
prt nekanendid
nikatig /-katigw-/ nid my forehead; pi nikatigoon;
loc nikatigwaang
nikaad /-kaad-/ nid my leg; pi nikaadan; loc
nikaading
nikaakigan /-kaakigan-/ nid my chest; pi
nikaakiganan; loc nikaakiganaang
nikibii vai be flooded; prt nekibiid
nikibii vii be flooded; prt nekibiig; aug
nikibiimagad; prt aug nekibiimagak
nikidin /-kidin-/ nad my vulva
nikon /-kon-/ nid my liver; pi nikonan; loc nikoning
nikonaas /-konaas-/ nid my blanket; pi nikonaasan
nikoonzh /-koonzh-/ nid my bill, my beak; loc
nikoonzhing
nikwegan /-kwegan-/ nid the back of my neck; pi
nikweganan; loc nikweganaang
nimaamaa /-maamaay-/ nad my mother; pi
nimaamaayag
nimaamaa /-maamaay-/ nad my eyebrow hair; pi
nimaamaayag
niminaawe'o vai paddle out from shore; Isg
niniminaawe'; pn neminaawe'od
niminaaweyaadagaako vai go out from shore on
the ice; Isg niniminaaweyaadagaak; prt
neminaaweyaadagaakod
niminaaweyaandawaagan ni dock; pi
niminaaweyaandawaaganan; loc
niminaaweyaandawaaganing; dim
n \ m i naaweyaan dawaagaan s
nimisad /-misad-/ nid my stomach; pi nimisadan;
loc nimisadaang
nimisenh /-miseny-/ nad my older sister, my older
female parallel cousin; pi nimisenyag
nimishoo nad grandpa vocative o/nimishoomis
nimishoome /-mishoomey-/ nad my parallel uncle
(father's brother); pi nimishoomeyag
nimishoomis /-mishoomis-/ nad my grandfather;
pi nimishoomisag
nimiishigwaan /-miishigwaan-/ nid my pubic hair;
pi nimiishigwaanan
ninaga'ayag /-naga'ay-/ nad my scales plural
ninagaskway /-nagaskway-/ nid my palate; loc
ninagaskwaang
ninagaakininj /-nagaakininjy-/ nid my palm; pi
ninagaakininjiin; loc ninagaaklninjiing
ninagaakizid /-nagaakizid-/ nidmy sole; pi
ninagaakizidan; loc ninagaakizidaang
ninagizh /-nagizhy-/ nid my intestine; pi
ninagizhiin; loc ninagizhiing
ninagway /-nagway-/ nidmy sleeve; pi
ninagwayan; loc ninagwaang; dim ninagwens
ninashkid /-nashkidy-/ nidmy tail (of a bird);pi
ninashkidiin; loc ninashkidiing
ninasid /-nasid-/ nid my hoof; loc ninasidaang
ninaabem /-naabem-/ nad my husband; pi
ninaabemag
ninaan /-naarW nad my calf; pi ninaanag; loc
ninaaning
nindigo pc as if, just like; also indigo
ningaabii'art ni west; loc ningaabii'anong
ningaasimoo-jiimaan ni sailboat; pi ningaasimoo-
jiimaanan; loc ningaasimoo-jiimaan ing; dim
ningaasimoo-jiimaanens
ningaasimoono vai sail (in a boat); Isg
niningaasimoon; prt nengaasimoonod
ningaasimoonowin ni sail; loc
ningaasimoonowining; dim
ningaasimoonowinens
ningaasimoowinini na sailor; pi
ningaasimoowininiwag
ningide vii melt, thaw; prt nengideg; aug
ningidemagad; prt aug nengidemagak
ningiz /ningizw-/ vta melt s.o.; Isg niningizwaa;
pn nengizwaad
ningizan vti:melt s.t.; 7^niningizaan;prr
nengizang
ningizo vai melt, thaw; pn nengizod

97 
ningiigwadin—nishkaadizi
ningiigwadin vii be frosted; pn nengiigwading
ningiigwaji vai be frosted; pn nengiigwajid
ningo-* pv4 one; also ingo-
ningo-anama'e-giixhik* pc one week; also ingo-
anama'e-giizhik
ningo-biboon* pc one year; also ingo-biboon
ningo-biboonagad" vii be one year; pn nengo-
biboonagak; aho ingo-biboonagad
ningo-diba'igan* pc one hour, one mile; also ingo-
diba'igan
ningo-diba'iganed* vii be one o'clock; pn nengo-
diba'iganek; also ingo-diba'iganed
ningo-diba'igaans* pc one minute, one acre; also
ingo-diba'igaans
ningo-dibik* pc one night; aho ingo-dibik
ningoding* pc sometime, at one time; also
ingoding
ningodoninj* pc one inch; also ingodoninj
ningodozid* pc one foot; aho ingodozid
ningodooshkin* pc one bag; also ingodooshkin
ningodwaaching* pc six times; also
ingodwaaching
ningodwaachinoori* /ningodwaachin-/ vii they are
six; pn nengodwaachingin; also
ingodwaachinoon
ningodwaachiwag* /ningodwaachi-/ vai they are
six; Ipl niningodwaachimin; pn
nengodwaachijig; also ingodwaachiwag
ningodwaak* nm one hundred; also ingodwaak
ningodwaasimidaria* nm sixty; also
ingodwaasimidana
ningodwaaso-* pv4 six; aho ingodwaaso-
ningodwaaso-anama'e-giizhik* pc six weeks; also
ingodwaaso-amama'e-giizhik
ningodwaasosagoons* nm six thousand; aho
ingodwaasosagoons
ningodwaasoobii'igan* na six (card); pi
ningodwaasoobii'iganag
ningodwaasooshkin* pc six bags; aho
ingodwaasooshkin
ningodwaaswaabik* pc six dollars; also
ingodwaaswaabik
ningodwaaswaak* nm six hundred; aho
ingodwaaswaak
ningodwaaswewaan* pc six sets, six pairs; aho
ingodwaaswewaan
ningodwaaswi* nm, six; also ingodwaaswi
ningodwewaan* pc. one pair, one set; also
ingodwewaan
ningo-giizhik* pc one day; also ingo-giizhik
ningo-giizis* pc one month; also ingo-giizis
ningoji*pc somewhere; also ingoji
ningwa" /ningwa'w-/ vta bury s.o.; Isg
niningwa'waa; pn nengwa'waad
ningwa'abwaan na bread baked under the ashes;
pi ningwa'abwaanag
ningwa'abwe vai+o cook (s.t.) under the ashes; Isg
niningwa'abwe, niningwa'abwen; pn
nengwa'abwed
ningwa'an wj bury s.t.; Isg niningwa'aan; pn
nengwa'ang
ningwa'igaazo vai be buried; pn nengwa'igaazod
ningwaja* /ningwajja'w-/ vta hoe s.o.; Isg
niningwaja'waa; pn nengwaja'waad
ningwaja'an vti hoe s.t.; Isg niningwaja'aan; pn
nengwaja'ang
ningwaja'ige vai hoe; Isg niningwaja'ige; pn
nengwaja'iged
ningwakamigin vta put s.o. under the ground; Isg
niningwakamiginaa; pn nengwakamiginaad
ningwaanakwad vii be cloudy; pn
nengwaanakwak
ninik /-nik-/ nid my arm; pi ninikan; loc ninikaang
nining /-ningwy-/ nid my armpit; pi niningwiin; loc
niningwiing
niningwan nod my son-in-law; pi niningwanag
niningwanis /-ningwanis-/ nod my cross-nephew
(male's sister's son or female's brother's son);
pi niningwanisag
niningwiigan /-ningwiigan-/ nid my wing; pi
niningwiiganan; he niningwiiganaang
nininj /-ninjy-/ nid my hand, my finger; pi nininjiin;
loc nininjiing; dim nininjiins
nininjiins /-ninjiins-/ nid my finger; pi nininjiinsan;
loc nininjiinsing
ninishiwag /-nishiw-/ nod my testicles plural; loc
ninishiwaang
niniigi'igoog /-niigi'igw-/ nad my parents plural
niniijaanis /-niijaanis-/ nad my child; pi
niniijaanisag; dim niniijaanisens
niniishk /-niishkw-/ nad my gland (lymph node); pi
niniishkwag
ninoshenh /-nosheny-/ nad my parallel aunt
(mother's sister); pi ninoshenyag
ninow /-now-/ nid my cheek; pi ninowan; loc
ninowaang
ninoogan /-noogan-/ nid my hip; pi ninooganan;
loc ninooganaang
nipan /-pan-/ nid my lung; pi nipanan; loc nipaning
nipigemag /-pigemagw-/ nid my rib; pi
nipigemagoon; loc nipigemagong
nipikwan /-pikwan-/ nid my back; pi nipikwanan;
loc nipikwanaang
nisawa'ogaan ni lodge with peaked roof; pi
nisawa'ogaanan; loc nisawa'ogaaning; dim
nisawa'ogaanens
nisawayi'ii pc in between it
nisayenh /-sayeny-/ nad my older brother, my
older male parallel cousin; pi nisayenyag
nisaabaawe vai get wet; Isg ninisaabaawe; pn
nesaabaawed
nisaabaawe vii get wet; pn nesaabaaweg; aug
nisaabaawemagad; pn aug
nesaabaawemagak
nishi /niS-/ vta kill s.o.; Isg ninisaa; pn nesaad
nishimis /-shimis-/ nad my cross-niece (female's
brother's daughter or male's sister's daughter);
pi nishimisag
nishiwe vai kill people; Isg ninishiwe; pn
neshiwed
nishiime /-shiimey-/ nad my younger sibling, my
younger brother, my younger sister, my
younger parallel cousin; pi nishiimeyag
nishkanzh /-shkanzhy-/ nad my nail (fingernail,
toenail), my claw; pi nishkanzhiig; loc
nishkanzhiing
nishkatay /-shkatay-/ nid my skin
nishkaadizi vai be angry, be mad; Isg
ninishkaadiz; pn neshkaadizid

nishkaajitaa—niso-diba'iganed 
98
nishkaajitaa vai behave angrily, act up in anger;
hg ninishkaajitaa; prt neshkaajitaad
nishkendam vai2 feel angry, feel mad; Isg
ninishkendam;/>?t neshkendang
nishkenim vta be angry at s.o., be mad at s.o.; Isg
ninishkenimaa; prt neshkenimaad
nishki' vta anger s.o., make s.o. mad; Isg
ninishki'aa; prt neshki'aad
nishki'idiwag /nishki'idi-/ vai they anger each
other, they make each other mad; Ipl
ninishki'idimin; prt neshki'idijig
nishkim vta anger s.o. by speech, speak and make
s.o. mad; Isg ninishkimaa; prt neshkimaad
nishkitaa vai anger people, make people mad; Isg
ninishkitaa; prt neshkitaad
nishkiinzhig /-shkiinzhigw-/ nid my eye; pi
nishkiinzhigoon; loc nishkiinzhigong
nishkoonzh nid my snout
nishtigwaan /-shtigwaan-/ nid my head; pi
nishtigwaanan; loc nishtigwaaning
nishtigwaanigegan /-shtigwaanigegan-/ nid my
skull; pi nishtigwaanigeganan
nishwanaajichige vai waste things, spoil things,
destroy things; Isg ninishwanaajichige;/>r;
neshwanaajichiged
nishwanaaji* vta waste s.o., spoil s.o., destroy s.o.;
Isg ninishwanaaji'aa; prt neshwanaaji'aad
nishwanaajitoon vti2 waste s.t., spoil s.t., destroy
s.t.; Isg ninishwanaajitoon; prt
neshwanaajitood
nishwaaching* pc eight times; also ishwaaching
nishwaachinoon* /nishwaachin-/ vii they are
eight; prt neshwaachingin; also
ishwaachinoon
nishwaachiwag* /nishwaachi-/ vai they are eight;
Ipl ninishwaachimin; prt neshwaachijig; also
ishwaachiwag
nishwaasimidana* urn eighty; also
ishwaasimidana
nishwaaso-* pv4 eight; also ishwaaso-
nishwaaso-anama'e-giizhik*/>c eight weeks; also
ishwaaso-anama'e-giizhik
nishwaaso-biboon* pc eight years; also ishwaaso-
biboon
nishwaaso-biboonagad* vii be eight years; prt
neshwaaso-biboonagak; also ishwaaso-
biboonagad
nishwaaso-biboonagizi* vaibe eight years old; Isg
ninishwaaso-biboonagiz; prt neshwaaso-
biboonagizid; also ishwaaso-biboonagizi
nishwaaso-diba'igan* pc eight miles, eight hours;
also ishwaaso-diba'igan
nishwaaso-diba'iganed* vii be eight o'clock; prt
neshwaaso-diba'iganek; also ishwaaso-
diba'iganed
nishwaaso-diba'igaans* pc eight minutes, eight
acres; also ishwaaso-diba'igaans
nishwaaso-dibik* pc eight nights; also ishwaaso-
dibik
nishwaaso-giizhik* pc eight days; also ishwaaso-
giizhik
nishwaaso-giizis* pc eight months; also ishwaaso-
giizis
nishwaasogon*£c eight days; also ishwaasogon
nishwaasogonagad* vii be eight days; prt
neshwaasogonagak; also ishwaasogonagad
nishwaasogonagizi* vai be the eighth day of the
month, be eight days old; prt
neshwaasogonagizid; also ishwaasogonagizi
nishwaasoninj* pc eight inches; also ishwaasoninj
nishwaasosagoons* nm eight thousand; also
ishwaasosagoons
nishwaasozid* pc eight feet; also ishwaasozid
nishwaasoobii'igan* na eight (card); pi
nishwaasoobii'iganag; also ishwaasoobii'igan
nishwaasooshkin pc eight bags; also
ishwaasooshkin
nishwaaswaabik* pc eight dollars; also
ishwaaswaabik
nishwaaswaak* nm eight hundred; also
ishwaaswaak
nishwaaswewaan* pc eight sets, eight pairs; also
ishwaaswewaan
nishwaaswi* nm eight; also ishwaaswi
nisidawinan vti recognize s.t. by sight; Isg
ninisidawinaan; prt nesidawinang
nisidawinaw vta recognize s.o. by sight; Isg
ninisidawinawaa; prt nesidawinawaad
nisidawinaadiwag /nisidawinaadi-/ vai they
recognize each other; Ipl ninisidawinaadimin;
prt nesidawinaadijig
nisidiwag /nisidi-/ vai they kill each other; Ipl
ninisidimin; pn nesidijig
nisidizo vai kill oneself, commit suicide; Isg
ninisidiz; prt nesidizod
nisidomaam vta recognize s.o. by smell; Isg
ninisidomaamaa; prt nesidomaamaad
nisidomaandan vti recognize s.t. by smell; Isg
ninisidomaandaan; prt nesidomaandang
nisidotam vai2 understand; hg ninisidotam; prt
nesidotang
nisidotan mi understand s.t., recognize s.t. by
sound; Isg ninisidotaan; prt nesidotang
nisidotaw vta understand s.o., recognize s.o. by
sound; Isg ninisidotawaa; prt nesidotawaad
nisidotaadiwag /nisidotaadi-/ vai they understand
each other; //>/ninisidotaadimin;pii
nesidotaadijig
nisidotaagozi vai be understood; prt
nesidotaagozid
nisidotaagwad vii be understood; prt
nesidotaagwak
nisimidana nm thirty
nisinoon /nisin-/ vii they are three; prt nesingin
nising pc three times, thrice
nisiwag /nisi-/ vai they are three; Ipl ninisimin; prt
nesijig
niso-pv4 three
niso-anama'e-giizhigad vii be three weeks; prt
neso-anama'e-giizhigak
niso-anama'e-giizhik /v three weeks
niso-biboon pc three years
niso-biboonagad vii be three years; pn neso-
biboonagak
niso-biboonagizi vai be three years old; Isg niniso-
biboonagiz; prt neso-biboonagizid
niso-diba'igan pc three hours, three miles
niso-diba'iganed vii be three o'clock; prt neso-
diba'iganek

99 
niso-diba'igaans—niigitoon
niso-diba'igaans pc three minutes, three acres
niso-dibikpc three nights
niso-giizhik /x three days
niso-giizispc three months
nisogon pc three days
nisogonagad vii be three days; pn nesogonagak
nisogonagizi vai be the third day of the month, be
three days old; pn nesogonagizid
nisoninj pc three inches
nisosagoons nm three thousand
nisozid pc three feet
nisoobii'igan na three (card), trey; pi
nisoobii'iganag
nisooshkin pc three bags
niswaabikp£ three dollars
niswaak nm three hundred
niswaakodaabaan ni travois; pi
niswaakodaabaanan
niswewaan pc three sets, three pairs
niswi nm three
nitam pc first
nitamaw vta kill (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg ninitamawaa;
pn netamawaad
nitamaage vai kill (s.t.) for people; Isg
ninitamaage; pn netamaaged
nitamaazo vai kill (s.t.) for oneself; Isg
ninitamaaz; pn netamaazod
nitamige vai live in the Erst house; Isg
ninitamige; pn netamiged
nitamoozhaan na eldest child, first-born; pi
nitamoozhaanag; dim nitamoozhaanens
nitawag /-tawag-/ nid my ear; pi nitawagan; loc
nitawagaang
nitaa- pv4 know hovr to do something, being good
at, being skilled at, frequently do
nitaage vai kill game, mourn; Isg ninitaage; pn
netaaged
nitaawe vai be skilled in speaking or singing; Isg
ninitaawe; frt netaawed
nitaawichige vai be skilled at things, know how to
make things; Isg ninitaawichige; pn
netaawichiged
nitaawigi vai grow up; Isg ninitaawig; pn
netaawigid
nitaawigi' vta grow s.o., raise s.o. (e.g., a child);
Isg ninitaawigi'aa; pn netaawigi'aad
nitaawigin vii grow up; pn netaawiging
nitaawigitoon vti2 grow s.t., raise s.t. (e.g., a
crop); Isg ninitaawigitoon; pn netaawigitood
nitaawi* vta know how to make s.o.; Isg
ninitaawi'aa; pn netaawi'aad
nitaawitoon vti2 know how to make s.t.; Isg
ninitaawitoon; pn netaawitood
nitoon vti2 kill s.t.; Isg ninitoon; pn netood
niwiidigemaagan /-wiidigemaagan-/ na my
spouse, my wife, my husband, my companion;
pi niwiidigemaaganag
niwiiw /-wiiw-/ nad my wife; pi niwiiwag
niibawi vai stand; Isg niniibaw; pn naabawid
niibawi' vta make s.o. stand up; Isg niniibawi'aa;
pn naabawi'aad
niibawitoon vti2 make s.t. stand up; Isg
niniibawitoon; pn naabawitood
niibaa- pv4 at night
niibaa-anama'e-giizhigad vii be Christmas; prt
naabaa-anama'e-giizhigak
niibaabizo vai drive at night; Isg niniibaabiz; pn
naabaabizod
niibaa-dibikpc late at night
niibaashkaa vai travel at night; Isg niniibaashkaa;
pn naabaashkaad
niibid /-iibid-/ nid my tooth; pi niibidan; he
niibidaang
niibidebiwag /niibidebi-/ vai they sit side by side in
a row; Ipl niniibidebimin; pn naabidebijig
niibideshinoog /niibideshin-/ vai they lie side-by-
side in a row; Ipl niniibideshinimin; pn
naabideshingig
niibidesinoon /niibidesin-/ vii they lie side by side
in a row; pn naabidesingin
niibidoon vti2 weave s.t.; Isg niniibidoon; pn
naabidood
niibin vii be summer; prt naabing
niibinaakwaanininj ni finger; pi
niibinaakwaanininjiin; loc
niibinakwaanininjiing; dim
niibinaakwaanininjiins
niibinaakwaanizidaan ni toe; pi
niibinaakwaanizidaanan; loc
niibinaakwaanizidaaning; dim
niibinaakwaanizidaanens
niibinishi vai spend the summer somewhere; Isg
niniibinish; pn naabinishid
niibinishiiwigamig ni cottage, resort; pi
niibinishiiwigamigoon; loc
niibinishiiwigamigong; dim
niibinishiiwigamigoons
niibinongpc last summer
niibowa pc many, much; oho niibiwa*
niibowagadoon /niibowagad-/ vii they are many,
there is much of it; pn naabowagakin
niibowagiziwag /niibowagizi-/ vai they are many,
there is much of it; prt naabowagizijig
niigaan pc ahead, leading, at the front
niigaanabi vai sit in front; Isg niniigaanab; pn
naagaanabid
niigaanagoode vii hang in front; pn
naagaanagoodeg; aug niigaanagoodemagad;
pn aug naagaanagoodemagak
niigaanagoozh /niigaanagooN-/ vta hang s.o. in
front; Isg niniigaanagoonaa; pn
naagaanagoonaad
niigaanagoodoon vti2 hang s.t. in front; Isg
niniigaanagoodoon; pn naagaanagoodood
niigaanagoojin vai hang in front; pn
naagaanagoojing
niigaanigaabawi vai stand in front; Isg
niniigaanigaabaw; pn naagaanigaabawid
niigaaniwizh /nigaaniwiN-/ vta lead s.o.; Isg
niniigaaniwinaa; pn naagaaniwinaad
niigaanii vai go ahead, lead; Isg niniigaanii; prt
naagaaniid
niigi vai be born, increase in number; Isg niniig;
pn naagid
niigi' vta bear s.o., make s.o. grow, make s.o. in-
crease in number; Isg niniigi'aa; pn naagi'aad
niigitoon vti2 make s.t. grow, make s.t. increase in
number; Isg niniigitoon; pn naagitood

niigode—niisiiwezh
100
niigode vii break by heat; prt naagodeg; aug
niigodemagad; prt aug naagodemagak
niigoshin vai break on impact; prt naagoshing
niigoshkan vti break s.t. with foot or body; Isg
niniigoshkaan; prt naagoshkang
niigoshkaa vii be broken; prt naagoshkaag; aug
niigoshkaamagad; prt aug naagoshkaamagak
niigosidoon vn2 break s.t. by dropping; Isg
niniigosidoon; prt naagosidood
niigosin vii break on impact; pn naagosing
niigozo vai break by heat; pn naagozod
niiji- pn my fellow
niijikiwenh /-iijikiweny-/ riadmy (male's) brother,
my (male's) male friend; pi niijikiwenyag
niijikwe /-iijikwew-/ nad my (female's) female
friend; pi niijikweg
niijii nad my friend vocative form, usually male to
male
niijiinini nad my fellow man
niikaan /-iikaan-/ nad my (male's) male friend
ritual use, my (male's) brother ritual use, pi
niikaanag
niikaanis /-iikaanis-/ nad my (male's) brother ritual
use, my (male's) male friend ritual use; pi
niikaanisag
niikimo vai growl (of a dog); Isg niniikim; pn
naakimod
niima' /niima'w-/ via pick s.o. up using something,
carry s.o. using something; Isg niniima'waa;
prt naama'waad
niima'an vti pick s.t. up using something, carry s.t.
using something; Isg niniima'aan; prt
naama'ang
niimam vta pick s.o. up in mouth, carry s.o. in
mouth; Isg niniimatnaa;/>jt naamamaad
niimandan vti pick s.t. up in mouth, carry s.t. in
mouth; /s,e niniimandaan;pr; rtaamandang
niimaakwa* /niimaakwa'w-/ vta pick s.o. up (as or
as with something stick- or wood-like); Isg
niniimaakwa'waa: pn naamaakwa'waad
niimaakwa'an vti pick s.t. up (as or as with
something stick- or wood-like); Isg
niniimaakwa'aan; pn naamaakwa'ang
niirni vai dance; Isg niniim; pn naamid
niimibaashkizigane vai take along a gun; Isg
niniimibaashkizigane; pn
naamibaashkiziganed
niimidana nm forty
niimi'idii-nagamon ni dance song; pi niimi'idii-
nagamonan
niimi' vta make s.o. dance; Isg niniirni'aa; pn
naami'aad
niimi'idiwag /niimi'idi-/ vai they dance; Ipl
niniimiMdimin; pn naami'idijig
niimi'idiiwigamig ni dance hall; pi
niimi'idiiwigamigoon; loc
niimi'idiiwigamigong; dim
niimi'idiiwigamigoons
niimi'iwe vai give a dance; Isg niniimi'iwe; pn
naami'iwed
niimikaw vta dance for s.o.; Isg niniimikawaa; pn
naamikawaad
niimikaage vai dance for people (for a purpose);
Isg niniimikaage; prt naamikaaged
niin pr I, me first person singular personal pronoun
niinag /-iinag-/ nid my penis; loc niinagaang
niinamad vii be weak; prt naanamak
niinaminaagozi vai look weak; Isg
niniinaminaagoz; prt naanaminaagozid
niinarninaagwad vii look weak; prt
naanam i naagwak
niinamizi vai be weak, be frail; Isg niniinamiz; pn
naanamizid
niinawind pr we first person exclusive plural pronoun,
us first person exclusive plural pronoun
niindaa* vta send (s.t.) to s.o.; Isg niniindaa'aa; prt
naandaa'aad
niindaa'iwe vai send (s.t.) to people; Isg
niniindaa'iwe; prt naandaa'iwed
niineta^r only me, first person singular personal
pronoun
niinetawind/>r only us first person exclusive plural
personal pronoun
niingidawadamon /niingidawadamo-/ z>n fork (as
a road or trail); pn naangidawadamog
niingidawitigweyaa vii fork (as a river); prt
naangidawitigweyaag; aug
niingidawitigweyaamagad; prt aug
naangidawitigweyaamagak
niinim /-iinimw-/ nad my sibling-in-law of the op-
posite sex, my (female's) brother-in-law, my
(male's) sister-in-law; pi niinimoog
niinimoshenh /-iinimosheny-/ nad my sweetheart,
my cross-cousin of the opposite sex; pi
niinimoshenyag
niinindib /-iinindib-/ nid my brain; loc
niinindibaang
niinitam pr my turn first person singular personal
pronoun
niinitamawind pr our turn, first person exclusive
plural personal pronoun
niinizis /-iinisiz-/ nid my (strand of) hair; pi
niinizisan; loc niinizising
niinzob /-iinzoby-/ nid my gallbladder; pi
niinzobiin; loc niinzobiing
niisayi'ii pc down from it
niisaajiwan pc downstream
niisaakiiwe vai go downhill; hg niniisaakiiwe; prt
naasaakiiwed
niisaakiiwebatoo vai run downhill; Isg
niniisaakiiwebatoo; pn naasaakiiwebatood
niisaandawe vai climb down, go downstairs; Isg
niniisaandawe; prt naasaandawed
niisaandawebatoo vai run down; Isg
niniisaandawebatoo; prt
naasaandawebatood
niisaandawebizo vai climb down fast; Isg
niniisaandawebiz; prt naasaandawebizod
niisaanendam voi'feel depressed; Isg
niniisaanendam; pn naasaanendang
niishtana nm twenty
niishtana-ashi-niizh ni twenty-two (gun)
niisibidoon vti2 pull s.t. down, tear s.t. down; Isg
niniisibidoon; prt naasibidood
niisibizh /niisibiN-/ vta pull s.o. down, tear s.o.
down; Isg niniisibinaa; prt naasibinaad
niisiiwe-minjikaawan na glove; pi niisiiwe-
minjikaawanag
niisiiwezh /niisiiwezhw-/ vta cut fringe in s.o.; Isg
niniisiiwezhwaa; prt naasiiwezhwaad

101 
niisiiwezhan—niizho-diba'iganed
niisiiwezhan vti cut fringe in s.t.; Isg
niniisiiwezhaan; prt naasiiwezhang
niisiiwezhigan ni fringe; pi niisiiwezhiganan; loc
niisiiwezhiganing; dim niisiiwezhigaans
niisiiwezhigaade mi be fringed; prt
naasiiwezhigaadeg; aug
niisiiwezhigaademagad; prt aug
naasiiwezhigaademagak
niisiiwezhigaazo vai be fringed; prt
naasiiwezhigaazod
niiskaadad vii be bad weather; prt naaskaadak
niiskindibe vai have messy hair; Isg niniiskindibe;
prt naaskindibed
niitaa /-iitaaw-/ nad rny (male's) brother-in-law; pi
niitaag
niitaawis /-iitaawis-/ nad my (male's) male cross-
cousin (male's father's sister's son or male's
mother's brother's son); pi niitaawisag
niiwana' /niiwana'w-/ vta slaughter s.o., beat s.o.
to death; Isg niniiwana'waa; prt
naawana'waad
niiwanishin vai die in an accident; Isg
niniiwanishin; prt naawanishing
niiwaabik />i four dollars
niiwaak nm four hundred
niiwewaan pc four sets, four pairs
niiwezh /niiweN-/ vta defeat s.o. in a contest or
game, beat s.o.; hg niniiwenaa; prt
naawenaad
niiwezhiwe vai defeat people in a contest or game;
Isg niniiwezhiwe; prt naawezhiwed
niiwin nm four
niiwing pc four times
niiwinoon /niiwin-/ mi they are four; prt naawingin
niiwiwag /niiwi-/ vai they are four; Ipl niniiwimin;
prt naawijig
niiwo- pv4 four; also iniiyo-
niiwo-anama'e-giizhigad vii be four weeks; prt
naawo-anama'e-giizhigak; also niiyo-
anama'e-giizhigad
niiwo-anama'e-giizhikpc four weeks; also niiyo-
anama'e-giizhik
niiwo-biboon pc four years; also niiyo-biboon
niiwo-biboonagad vii be four years; pn naawo-
biboonagak; also niiyo-biboonagad
niiwo-biboonagizi vai be four years old; Isg
niniiwo-biboonagiz; prt naawo-biboonagizid;
also niiyo-biboonagizi
niiwo-diba'igan pc four hours, four miles; also
niiyo-diba'igan
niiwo-diba'igaans pc four minutes, four acres; also
niiyo-diba'igaans
niiwo-dibik A four nights; also niiyo-dibik
niiwo-giizhigad vii be Thursday; prt naawo-
giizhigak; also niiyo-giizhigad
niiwo-giizhik/x four days; also niiyo-giizhik
niiwo-giizis pc four months; also niiyo-giizis
niiwogon pc four days; also niiyogon
niiwogonagad vii be four days; prt
naawogonagak; also niiyogonagad
niiwogonagizi vai be the fourth day of the month,
be four days old; prt naawogonagizid; also
niiyogonagizi
niiwoninj pc four inches; also niiyoninj
niiwosagoons nm four thousand; also
niiyosagoons
niiwozid pc four feet; also niiyozid
niiwoobii'igan na four (card); pi niiwoobii'iganag;
also niiyoobii'igan
niiwooshkin pc four bags; also niiyooshkin
niiyaw /-iiyaw-/ nid my body; pi niiyawan; loc
niiyawing
niiyawen'enh /-iiyawen'eny-/ nad my namesake
(reciprocal relationship between name-giving
sponsor and child); pi niiyawen'enyag
niiyaas /-iiyaas-/ nid my flesh, my meat (of the
body); loc niiyaasing
niiyo- pv4 four; also niiwo-
niiyo-anama'e-giizhigad vii be four weeks; prt
naayo-anama'e-giizhigak; also niiwo-
anama'e-giizhigad
niiyo-anama'e-giizhik/>c four weeks; also niiwo-
anama'e-giizhik
niiyo-biboon pc four years; also niiwo-biboon
niiyo-biboonagad vii be four years; prt naayo-
biboonagak; also niiwo-biboonagad
niiyo-biboonagizi vai be four years old; Isg
niniiyo-biboonagiz; prt naayo-biboonagizid;
also niiwo-biboonagizi
niiyo-diba'igan pc four hours, four miles; also
niiwo-diba'igan
niiyo-diba'iganed vii be four o'clock; prt naayo-
diba'iganek; also niiwo-diba'iganed
niiyo-diba'igaans pc four minutes, four acres; also
niiwo-diba'igaans
niiyo-dibik pc four nights; also niiwo-dibik
niiyo-giizhigad vii be Thursday; prt naayo-
giizhigak; also niiwo-giizhigad
niiyo-giizhik pc four days; also niiwo-giizhik
niiyo-giizis pc four months; also niiwo-giizis
niiyogon pc four days; also niiwogon
niiyogonagad vii be four days; prt naayogonagak;
also niiwogonagad
niiyogonagizi vai be the fourth day of the month,
be four days old; prt naayogonagizid; also
niiwogonagizi
niiyoninj pc four inches; also niiwoninj
niiyosagoons nm four thousand; also
niiwosagoons
niiyoobii'igan na four (card); pi niiyoobii'iganag;
also niiwoobii'igan
niizh nm two
niizhing pc two times, twice
niizhinoon /niizhin-/ vii they are two; prt
naazhingin
niizhiwag /niizhi-/ vai they are two; Ipl
niniizhimin; prt naazhijig
niizho- pv4 two
niizho-anama'e-giizhigad pc be two weeks
niizho-anama'e-giizhik pc two weeks
niizho-biboon pc two years
niizho-biboonagad vii be two years; prt naazho-
biboonagak
niizho-biboonagizi vai be two years old; Isg
niniizho-biboonagiz; prt naazho-
biboonagizid
niizho-diba'igan pc two hours, two miles
niizho-diba'iganed vii be two o'clock; pn naazho-
diba'iganek

niizho-diba'igaans—nookwezan 
102
niizho-diba'igaans pc two minutes, two acres
niizho-dibikpc two nights
niizho-giizhigad vii be Tuesday; pn naazho-
giizhigak
niizho-giizhik pc two days
niizho-giizis pc two months
niizhogon pc two days
niizhogonagad vii be two days; pn
naazhogonagak
niizhogonagizi vai be the second day of the
month, be two days old; pn naazhogonagizid
niizhoninj pc two inches
niizhosagoons nm two thousand
niizhozid pc two feet
niizhoobii'igan na deuce, two (card);£/
niizhoobii'iganag
niizhoodenh na twin; pi niizhoodenyag
niizhooshkin pc two bags
niizhwaabik pc two dollars
niizhwaaching pc seven times
niizhwaachinoon /niizhwaachin-/ vii they are
seven; prt naazhwaachingin
niizhwaachiwag /niizhwaachi-/ vai they are seven;
Ipl niniizhwaachimin; pn naazhwaachijig
niizhwaak nm two hundred
niizhwaasimidana nm seventy
niizhwaaso- pv4 seven
niizhwaaso-anama'e-giizhigad pc be seven weeks
niizhwaaso-anama'e-giizhikpc seven weeks
niizhwaaso-biboon pc seven years
niizhwaaso-biboonagad vii be seven years; prt
naazhwaaso-biboonagak
niizhwaaso-biboonagizi vai be seven years old; Isg
niniizhwaaso-biboonagiz; pn naazhwaaso-
biboonagizid
niizhwaaso-diba'igan pc seven hours, seven miles
niizhwaaso-diba'iganed viibe seven o'clock;prt
naazhwaaso-diba'iganek
niizhwaaso-diba'igaans pc seven minutes, seven
acres
niizhwaaso-dibikpc seven nights
niizhwaaso-giizhikpc seven days
niizhwaaso-giizis pc seven months
niizhwaasogon pc seven days
niizhwaasogonagad vii be seven days; prt
naazhwaasogonagak
niizhwaasogonagizi vai be the seventh day of the
month, be seven days old; pn
naazhwaasogonagizid
niizhwaasoninj pc seven inches
niizhwaasosagoons nm seven thousand
niizhwaasozid pc seven feet
niizhwaasoobii'igan na seven (card); pi
niizhwaasoobii'iganag
niizhwaasooshkin pc seven bags
niizhwaaswaabikp£ seven dollars
niizhwaaswaak nm seven hundred
niizhwaaswewaan pc seven sets, seven pairs
niizhwaaswi nm seven
niizhwewaan pc two sets, two pairs '
noodamikwe vai hunt beaver, trap beaver; Isg
ninoodamikwe; prt nwaadamikwed
noodendam vai2 flirt; Isg ninoodendam; pn
nwaadendang
noodin vii be windy, there is a wind; prt nwaading
noogibatoo vai stop running; Isg ninoogibatoo;
pn nwaagibatood
noogibide vii stop speeding, stop driving; prt
nwaagibideg; aug noogibidemagad; prt aug
nwaagibidemagak
noogibizo vai stop speeding, stop driving; Isg
ninoogibiz; pn nwaagibizod
noogigaabawi vai stop and stand in place; Isg
ninoogigaabaw; pn nwaagigaabawid
noogin vta stop s.o. by hand; Isg ninooginaa; pn
nwaaginaad
nooginan vti stop s.t. by hand; Isg ninooginaan;
pn nwaaginang
noogise vai come to a stop; Isg ninoogise; prt
nwaagised
noogishkaa vai stop (moving); Isg ninoogishkaa;
pn nwaagishkaad
noogishkaa vii stop (moving); pn nwaagishkaag;
aug noogishkaamagad; pn aug
nwaagishkaamagak
noogishkaawigamig ra hotel; pi
noogishkaawigarnigoon; he
noogishkaawigamigong; dim
noogishkaawigamigoons
noojigiigoonyiwe vai go fishing; Isg
ninoojigiigoonyiwe; pn nwaajigiigoonyiwed
nooji' vta seek s.o., go after s.o., hunt for s.o.; Isg
ninooji'aa; pn nwaaji'aad
nooji'iwe vai seek people, hunt for people; Isg
ninooji'iwe; pn nwaaji'iwed
noojimo vai recover from an illness; Isg ninoojim;
prt nwaajimod
noojitoon vti2 seek s.t., go after s.t., hunt for s.t.;
Isg ninoojitoon; prt nwaajitood
noojiikwewe vai actively seek the company of
women; Isg ninoojiikwewe; pn
nwaajiikwewed
nookaa vii be soft, be tender; pn nwaakaag; aug
nookaamagad; prt aug nwaakaamagak
nookaabaawe vai be softened in water; pn
nwaakaabaawed
nookaabaawe vii be softened in water; pn
nwaakaabaaweg; aug nookaabaawemagad;
pn aug nwaakaabaawemagak
nookaadad vii be mild; pn nwaakaadak
nookaadizi vai be meek, be mild; Isg
ninookaadiz; prt nwaakaadizid
nookide vii be cooked tender; prt nwaakideg; aug
nookidemagad; prt aug nwaakidemagak
nookiz /nookizw-/ vta cook s.o. tender; Isg
ninookizwaa; pn nwaakizwaad
nookizan vti cook s.t. tender; Isg ninookizaan; prt
nwaakizang
nookizi vai be soft, be tender; pn nwaakizid
nookizo vai be cooked tender; pn nwaakizod
nookiigad vii be soft (as something sheet-like); prt
nwaakiigak
nookiigizi vai be soft (as something sheet-like); prt
nwaakiigizid
nookomis /-ookomis-/ nad my grandmother; pi
nookomisag
nookoo nad grandma vocative form of nookomis
my grandmother
nookwezan vtiburn s.t. as medicine; Isg
ninookwezaan; pn nwaakwezang

103
nookwezigan-—oboodashkwaanishiinh
nookwezigan ni medicine for burning; pi
nookweziganan
nookwezige vai burn things as medicine; Isg
ninookwezige; pit nwaakweziged
noomag pc for a spell, a short while
noomaya pc recently
noomininjii vai put lotion on one's hand; Isg
ninoomininjii; prt nwaamininjiid
noomininjiiwin m'hand lotion; pi
noomininjiiwinan
noonaawaso vai nurse a child; Isg ninoonaawas;
prt nwaanaawasod
noondam vai2 hear; Isg ninoondam; prt
nwaandang
noondan vti hear s.t.; Isg ninoondaan; prt
nwaandang
noondaw vta hear s.o.; Isg ninoondawaa; prt
nwaandawaad
noondaagochigan ni musical instrument (espe-
cially a wind instrument), whistle, horn,
harmonica; pi noondaagochiganan; lac
noondaagochiganing; dim
noondaagochigaans
noondaagochigan (horn)
noondaagochige vai play a wind instrument; Isg
ninoondaagochige; prt nwaandaagochiged
noondaagotoon vti2 play s.t. as a wind instru-
ment; Isg ninoondaagotoon; prt
nwaandaagotood
noondaagozi vai can be heard, make noise, make
a characteristic call (e.g., neigh, moo); Isg
ninoondaagoz; prt nwaandaagozid
noondaagwad vii be heard, make noise; prt
nwaandaagwak
noonde-pv4 need to, before the usual time
noondesachige vai run short of things; Isg
ninoondesachige; prt nwaandesachiged
noondesa' vta run short of s.o.; Isg
ninoondesa'aa; prt nwaandesa'aad
noondesatoon ™'2run short of s.t.; Isg
ninoondesatoon; prt nwaandesatood
noondese vai run short; Isg ninoondese; prt
nwaandesed
noondeshin vai be fatigued, be exhausted; Isg
ninoondeshin; prt nwaandeshing
noongom pc now, today, nowadays
nooni vai suckle (of child or offspring); Isg
ninoon; prt nwaanid
nooni1 vta breast feed s.o.; Isg ninooni'aa; prt
nwaani'aad
noopiming pc inland, in the woods, in the bush
noopinadoon vti2 go after s.t., follow s.t.; Isg
ninoopinadoon; prt nwaapinadood
noopinazh /noopinaN-/ vta go after s.o., follow
s.o.; Iff; ninoopinanaa; prt nwaapinanaad
noos /-oos-/ nad my father old-fashioned', pi noosag
nooshkaachigaade vii be winnowed; prt
nwaashkaachigaadeg; aug
nooshkaachigaademagad; prt aug
nwaashkaachigaademagak
nooshkaachige vai winnow things (e.g., wild rice);
Isg ninooshkaachige; prt nwaashkaachiged
nooshkaachinaagan ni winnowing tray; pi
nooshkaachinaaganan; loc
nooshkaachinaaganing; dim
nooshkaachinaagaans
nooshkaachinaagan (winnowing tray)
nooshkaatoon vti2 winnow s.t. (e.g., wild rice);
Isg ninooshkaatoon; prt nwaashkaatood
nooskwaada' /nooskwaada*w-/ vta lick s.o.; Isg
ninooskwaada'waa; prt nwaaskwaada'waad
nooskwaada'an vti lick s.t.; Isg
ninooskwaada'aan; prt nwaaskwaada'ang
noozh InooN-l vta nurse s.o. (e.g., a baby); Isg
ninoonaa; prt nwaanaad
noozhishenh /-oozhisheny-/ nad my grandchild; pi
noozhishenyag
noozis nad grandchild vocative form of
noozhishenh my grandchild
o
o— pre third person prefix before consonants in verbs
and nouns
o- pv2 go over to; also a'o-, awi-
obikwaaj nid bulb; pi obikwaajiin; loc
obikwaajiing; dim obikwaajiins
obiigomakakii na toad; pi obiigomakakiig; dim
obiigomakakiins
obiimiskodisii na snail; pi obiimiskodisiig; dim
obiimiskodisiins
oboodashkwaanishiinh na dragonfly; pi
oboodashkwaanishiinyag

od=—odoonibii 
104
od= pre third person prefix before vowels in verbs and
non-dependent nouns
odakiimi vai have land; Isg indoodakiim; prt
wedakiimid
odamino urn play; Ipl indoodamin; prt
wedaminod
odaminoowigamig ni recreation building; pi
odaminoowigamigoon; loc
odaminoowigamigong; dim
odaminoowigamigoons
odaminwaagan na doll; pi odaminwaaganag; loc
odaminwaaganing; dim odaminwaagaans
odaminwaagan (doll)
odaminwaagan m toy, plaything; pi
odaminwaaganan; loc odaminwaaganing; dim
odaminwaagaans
odaminwaage vai+o use (s.t.) as a toy; Isg
indoodaminwaage, indoodaminwaagen; prt
wedaminwaaged
odasiniinsimi vai have gallstones; Isg
indoodasiniinsimi; pn wedasiniinsimid
odatagaagomin na blackberry; pi
odatagaagominag; dim odatagaagominens
odatagaagominagaawanzh na blackberry bush; pi
odatagaagominagaawanzhiig; he
odatagaagominagaawanzhiing; dim
odatagaagominagaawanzhiins
odayi vai have a dog, have a horse; Isg indooday;
prt wedayid
odaabaadan vti drag s.t.; Isg indoodaabaadaan;
prt wedaabaadang
odaabaan na car, wagon, sled, sleigh; pi
odaabaanag; loc odaabaaning; dim
odaabaanens
odaabaanikewigamig ni repair garage; pi
odaabaanikewigamigoon; loc
odaabaanikewigamigong; dim
odaabaanikewigamigoons
odaabaanikewinini na mechanic; pi
odaabaanikewininiwag
odaabaazh /odaabaaN-/ vta drag s.o.; Isg
indoodaabaanaa; prt wedaabaanaad
odaabii vai drag (something); Isg indoodaabii; prt
wedaabiid
odaabii' vta drive s.o. (e.g., a draft animal or a
car); Isg indoodaabii'aa; pn wedaabii'aad
odaabii'aagan na draft animal; pi
odaabii'aaganag; dim odaabii'aagaans
odaabii'iwe vai drive; Isg indoodaabii'iwe; prt
wedaabii'iwed
odaabii'iwe-mazina'igaans ni driver's license; pi
odaabii'iwe-mazina'igaansan
odaabii'iwewinini na driver; pi
odaabii'iwewininiwag; dim
odaabii'iwewininiins
odaake vai steer, direct affairs; Isg indoodaake;
pn wedaaked
odaakewigimaa na director, governor; pi
odaakewigimaag; dim odaakewigimaans; also
odaake-ogimaa
odaani vai have a daughter; Isg indoodaan; pn
wedaanid
odaanisi zw'havc a daughter; Isg indoodaanis; pn
wedaanisid
odaapin vta accept s.o., take s.o. offered, pick s.o.
up; Isg indoodaapinaa; pn wedaapinaad
odaapinamaw vta accept (s.t.) from s.o., take
(s.t.) offered by s.o., pick (s.t.) up from s.o.;
Isg indoodaapinamawaa; pn
wedaapinamawaad
odaapinan vti accept s.t., take s.t. offered, pick s.t.
up; Isg indoodaapinaan; prt wedaapinang
odaapinigaade vii be taken, be accepted; pn
wedaapinigaadeg; aug odaapinigaademagad;
pn aug wedaapinigaademagak
odaapinigaazo vai be taken, be accepted; prt
wedaapinigaazod
odaapinige vai accept things, take things offered,
pick up things; Isg indoodaapinige; pn
wedaapiniged
odaapishkaa vii shrink; prt wedaapishkaag; aug
odaapishkaamagad; pn aug
wedaapishkaamagak
odaapishkaa vai shrink; prt wedaapishkaad
odaawaa na Odawa (Ottawa); pi odaawaag; dim
odaawaans
odaawaamo vai speak Odawa (Ottawa); Isg
indoodaawaam; pn wedaawaamod
ode'imin ni strawberry; pi ode'iminan; dim
ode'iminens
ode'imini-giizis na June
odish /odiS-/ vta come up to s.o., visit s.o., reach
s.o.; Isg indoodisaa; pn wedisaad
odishiwe vai visit people; Isg indoodishiwe; pn
wedishiwed
oditan vti come up to s.t., reach s.t.; Isg
indooditaan; pn weditang
odoodemi vai have a totem (clan); Isg
indoodoodem; prt wedoodemid
odoodemindiwag /odoodemindi-/ vai they have a
mutual totem (clan); Ipl
indoodoodemindimin; pn wedoodemindijig
odoondanegwaajigan ni tab at heel of moccasin;
pi odoondanegwaajiganan; dim
odoondanegwaajigaans
odoonibii na tullibee; pi odoonibiig; dim
odoonibiins; also odoonibiins, -ag

105 
ogaa—ojiishinike
ogaa na pickerel, walleye; pi ogaawag; dim ogaans
ogichidaa na warrior, ceremonial headman; pi
ogichidaag
ogichidaakwe na ceremonial headwoman, wife of
ceremonial headman; pi ogichidaakweg
ogidajiw* pc on top of a mountain; also agidajiw,
wagidajiw
ogidakamig* pc on top of the ground; also
agidakamig, wagiidakamig
ogidasin* pc on top of a rock; also agidasin,
wagidasin
ogidaabik* pc on something mineral (e.g., metal,
glass, rock); also agidaabik, wagidaabik
ogidaajiwan* pc upstream; also agidaajiwan,
wagidaajiwan
ogidaaki*£c on top oFa hill; also agidaaki,
wagidaaki
ogidibiig*pc on top of the water; also agidibiig,
wagidibiig
ogidigamig* pc on top of the house; also
agidigamig, wagidigamig
ogidiskwam* pc on top of the ice; also
agidiskwam, wagidiskwam
ogijayi'ii* pc on top of it; also agijayi'ii, wagijayi'ii
ogiji-* pn on top of; also agiji-, wagiji-
ogimaa na chief, boss, leader; pi ogimaag; dim
ogimaans
ogimaa na king (card); pi ogimaag
ogimaakandan un'rule s.t., govern s.t.; Isg
indoogimaakandaan; pn wegimaakandang
ogimaakandaw vta rale s.o., govern s.o.; Isg
indoogimaakandawaa; pn
wegimaakandawaad
ogimaakaw vta make s.o. chief, make s.o. leader;
Isg indoogimaakawaa; prt wegimaakawaad
ogimaakwe na wife of chief or leader, woman
leader, queen; pi ogimaakweg; dim
ogimaakwens
ogimaakwens na princess; pi ogimaakwensag
ogimaawi vai be a leader, be a chief; Isg
indoogimaaw; prt wegimaawid
ogimaawigamig ni head office, administration
office; pi ogimaawigamigoon; loc
ogimaawigamigong; dim
ogimaawigamigoons
ogimaawiwin ni government, authority, leader-
ship; pi ogimaawiwinan
ogin na rose hip, tomato; pi oginiig; loc oginiing;
dim oginiins
oginii-dagonigan ni catsup
oginii-waabigwan ni rose; pi oginii-waabigwaniin;
loc oginii-waabigwaniing; dim oginii-
waabigwaniins
ogiishkimanisii na kingfisher; p/ogiishkimanisiig;
dim ogiishkimanisiins
ogow* pr these animate plural demonstrative; also
ogo*, ongow, ongo
ogowedig* pr these over here animate plural
demonstrative; also ongowedig
o'o pr this inanimate singular demonstrative; also
o'ow, 'ow, *o, o'o
o'omaa pc here; also omaa
o'owedi pr this over here inanimate singular
demonstrative; oho owed!
ojaanimendam vai2 be anxious, be impatient; Isg
indoojaanimendam; prt wejaanimendang
ojaanimi- pv4 busy, noisy
ojaanimi' vta make s.o. hurry, rush s.o.; Isg
indoojaanimi'aa; pn wejaanimi'aad
ojaanimim vta hurry s.o. by speech; Isg
indoojaanimimaa; pn wejaanimimaad
ojaanimitaa vai be busy (in some work or activ-
ity); Isg indoojaanimitaa; pn wejaanimitaad
ojaanimitoon vti2 be eager to do s.t.; Isg
indoojaanimitoon; pn wejaanimitood
ojaanimizekwe vai cook in a hurry; Isg
indoojaanimizekwe; pn wejaanimizekwed
ojaanimizi vai be busy; Isg indoojaanimiz; pn
wejaanimizid
ojibwe na Ojibwe; pi ojibweg; dim ojibwens
ojibwekwe na Ojibwe woman; pi ojibwekweg; dim
ojibwekwens
ojibwemo vai speak Ojibwe; Isg indoojibwem; pn
wejibwemod
ojibwemotaw vta speak Ojibwe to s.o.; Isg
indoojibwemotawaa; prt wejibwemotawaad
ojibwemowin ni Ojibwe language; pi
ojibwemowin
ojibwewanishinaabe na Ojibwe; pi
ojibwewanishinaabeg; dim
ojibwewanishinaabens; also ojibwe-
anishinaabe
ojibwewi vai be Ojibwe; Isg indoojibwew; pn
wejibwewid
ojibwewibii'an vti write s.t. in Ojibwe; hg
indoojibwewibii'aan; pn wejibwewibii'ang
ojibwewibii'igaade vii be written in Ojibwe; prt
wejibwewibii'igaadeg; aug
ojibwewibii'igaademagad; pn aug
wejibwewibii'igaademagak
ojibwewibii'ige vai write things in Ojibwe; Isg
indoojibwewibii'ige; prt wejibwewibii'iged
ojibwewisidoon vti2 put s.t. into Ojibwe; Isg
indoojibwewisidoon; prt wejibwewisidood
ojibwewisin vii be written in Ojibwe (e.g., a book);
prt wejibwewising
ojichaagobiishin vii reflect in water; pn
wejichaagobiishing
ojichaagobiisin vii reflect in water; prt
wejichaagobiising
ojijise vii come (as time), pass (as time); pn
wejijiseg; aug ojijisemagad; pn aug
wejijisemagak
ojijiingwanabi vai kneel; Isg indoojijiingwanab;
pn wejijiingwanabid
ojiibik ni root; pi ojiibikan; loc ojiibikaang; dim
ojiibikens
ojiibikaawan vii have roots; pn wejiibikaawang
ojiibikaawi vai have roots; pn wejiibikaawid
ojiig na fisher; pi ojiigag; dim ojiigens
ojiigiwayaan na fisher hide; pi ojiigiwayaanag; loc
ojiigiwayaaning; dim ojiigiwayaanens
ojiim vta kiss s.o.; Isg indoojiimaa; pn wejiimaad
ojiindiwag /ojiindi-/ vai they kiss each other; Ipl
indoojiindimin; prt wejiindijig
ojiishigi vai have a scar; Isg indoojiishig; prt
wejiishigid
ojiishinike vai have scar on one's arm; Isg
indoojiishinike; prt wejiishiniked

ojiishininjii—ombiwebinan
106
ojiishininjii vai have scar on one's hand; Isg
indoojiishininjii; pn wejiishininjiid
ojiishiingwe vai have scar on one's face; Isg
indoojiishiingwe; pn wejiishiingwed
okanakosimaan ni squash; pi okanakosimaanan;
loc okanakosimaaning; dim
okanakosimaanens
okanaapine vai have arthritis, have rheumatism;
Isg indookanaapine; pn wekanaapined
okawi" vta find s.o.'s tracks; Isg indookawi'aa; pn
wekawi'aad
okawitoon vti2 find the tracks of s.t.; Isg
indookawitoon; pn wekawitood
okaadakik na legged kettle, treaty kettle; pi
okaadakikoog; loc okaadakikong; dim
okaadakikoons
okaadaak ni carrot; pi okaadaakoon; loc
okaadaakong; dim okaadaakoons
okaaden vta braid s.o., braid s.o.'s hair; Isg
indookaadenaa; pn wekaadenaad
okaadenan vti braid s.t.; Isg indookaadenaan; pn
wekaadenang
okaadenigan ni braided rug, braid; pi
okaadeniganan; loc okaadeniganing; dim
okaadenigaans
okaadenigaade vii be braided; pn
wekaadenigaadeg; aug
okaadenigaademagad; pn aug
wekaadenigaademagak
okaadenige vai braid things, have braids; Isg
indookaadenige; pn wekaadeniged
okeyaw na fish decoy; pi okeyawag
okij ni pipestem; pi okijiin; loc okijiing; dim okijiins
okijaabik ni stovepipe, tailpipe; pi okijaabikoon;
loc okijaabikong; dim okijaabikoons
okikaandag na jack pine; pi okikaandagoog: loc
okikaandagong; dim okikaandagoons; also
wakikaandag
okoshim vta pile s.o., stack s.o.; hg
indookoshimaa; pn wekoshimaad
okoshin vai lie in a pile; pn wekoshing
okosidoon vti2 pile s.t., stack s.t.; Isg
indookosidoon; pn wekosidood
okosimaan ni pumpkin, squash; ^?/okosimaanan;
loc okosimaaning; dim okosimaanens
okosin vii lie in a pile; pn wekosing
okwapide vii be tied in a bunch; pn wekwapideg;
aug okwapidemagad; pn aug
wekwapidemagak
okwapidoon vti2 tie s.t. in a bunch; Isg
indookwapidoon; pn wekwapidood
okwapizh /okwapiN-/ vta tie s.o. in a bunch; Isg
indookwapinaa; pn wekwapinaad
okwapizo vai be tied in a bunch; pn wekwapizod
okwaakoshim vta stack s.o. (as something stick-
or wood-like); Isg indookwaakoshimaa; pn
wekwaakoshimaad
okwaakosidoon vti2 stack s.t. (as something stick-
or wood-like); Isg indookwaakosidoon; pn
wekwaakosidood
omakakii na frog; pi omakakiig; dim omakakiins
omakakiiwinini na Finn; pi omakakiiwininiwag
omanoominii na Menominee; pi omanoominiig
omashkiigoo na Cree; pi omashkiigoog
omashkiigoomo vai speak Cree; Isg
indoomashkiigoom; prt wernashkiigoomod
omashkooz na elk; pi omashkoozoog; dim
omashkoozoons
omaapc here; also o'omaa
omaamaayi vai have a mother; Isg
indoomaamaay; pn wemaamaayid
ombaabate vii go upwards as smoke; pn
wembaabateg
ombaabiigin vta hoist s.o., lift s.o. (as with some-
thing string-like); Isg indoombaabiiginaa; pn
wembaabiiginaad
ombaabiiginan vti hoist s.t., lift s.t. (as with some-
thing string-like); Isg indoombaabiiginaan; pn
wembaabiiginang
ombaakwa' /ombaakwa'w-/ via raise s.o. (as or as
with something stick- or wood-like); Isg
indoombaakwa'waa; pn wembaakwa'waad
ombaakwa'an vti raise s.t. (as or as with some-
thing stick- or wood-like); Isg
indoombaakwa'aan; pn wembaakwa'ang
ombaashi vai be blown upwards; Isg
indoombaash; prt wembaashid
ombaasin vii be blown upwards; pn wembaasing
ombendam vai2 be excited, be hopeful; Isg
indoombendam; pn wembendang
ombibide vii fly upwards, speed upwards; prt
wembibideg; aug ombibidemagad; pn aug
wembibidemagak
ombibizo vai fly upwards, speed upwards; Isg
indoombibiz; pn wembibizod
ombigamizan vtiboil s.t. to sugar; Isg
indoombigamizaan; pn wembigamizang
ombigamizigan ni boiling sugar; pi
ombigamiziganan; loc ombigamiziganing
ombigamizige vai boil to sugar, sugar off; Isg
indoombigamizige; pn wembigamiziged
ombigwaashkwani vai jump upwards; Isg
indoombigwaashkwan; pn
wembigwaashkwanid
ombi' vta excite s.o., stir s.o. up; Isg indoornbi'aa;
pn wembi'aad
ombijiishkaa vai have a swollen stomach; Isg
indoombijiishkaa; pn wembijiishkaad
ombin vta lift s.o.; Isg indoombinaa; pn
wembinaad
ombinamaw vta lift (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
indoombinamawaa; pn wembinamawaad
ombinan vti lift s.t.; Isg indoombinaan; pn
wembinang
ombinikeni vai lift one's arm; Isg indoombiniken;
pn wembinikenid
ombishkaa vai go upwards; Isg indoombishkaa;
prt wembishkaad
ombishkaa vii go upwards; pn wembishkaag; aug
ombishkaamagad; prt aug
wembishkaamagak
ombisijigaans ni baking powder; pi
ombisijigaansan; loc ombisijigaansing
ombiwane vai lift a pack to one's back; Isg
indoombiwane; pn wembiwaned
ombiwebin vta throw s.o. upwards; Isg
indoombiwebinaa; pn wernbiwebinaad
ombiwebinan vti throw s.t. upwards; Isg
indoombiwebinaan; pn wembiwebinang

107 
ombiwidoon—onaagoshi-wiisini
ombiwidoon vti2 lift and carry s.t.; Isg
indoombiwidoon; pn wembiwidood
ombiwizh /ombiwiN-/ vta lift and carry s.o.; Isg
indoombiwinaa; pn wembiwinaad
ombizigan ni baking soda; loc ombiziganing
ombiigizi vai be loud, be noisy; Isg indoombiigiz;
pn wembiigizid
ombiigwewe vai be loud (in operation); pn
wembiigwewed
ombiigwewe viibe loud (in operation);pit
wembiigweweg; aug ombiigwewemagad; pn
aug wembiigwewemagak
omboom vta lift s.o. on one's back; pn
wemboomaad
omboondan vti lift s.t. on one's back; Isg
indoomboondaan; pn wemboondang
ombwewebinige vai throw things around, make a
mess; Isg indoombwewebinige; pn
wembwewebiniged
omigii vai have sores, have scabs; Isg indoomigii;
pn wemigiid
omigiingwe vai have scabs on one's face; Isg
indoomigiingwe; pn wemigiingwed
omiimii na dove, pigeon; pi omiimiig; dim
omiimiins
omiimiisi na mayfly; pi omiimiisiwag
omooday ni bottle; pi omoodayan; loc
omoodaang
omoodayaabik ni (piece of) glass, broken glass (as
from a bottle); pi omoodayaabikoon; loc
omoodayaabikortg; dim omoodayaabikoons
onabi vai take a seat; Isg indoonab; pn wenabid
onabi' vta seat s.o.; Isg indoonabi'aa; pn
wenabi'aad
onabi'iwe vai seat people; Isg indoonabi'iwe; pn
wenabi'iwed
onadin vta mold s.o., knead s.o., sculpt s.o.; Isg
indoonadinaa; pn wenadinaad
onadinan vti mold s.t, knead s.t., sculpt s.t.; Isg
indoonadinaan; pn wenadinang
onadinige vai knead things, mold things; Isg
indoonadinige; pn wenadiniged
onagim vta decide on s.o., appoint s.o,, set a price
on s.o.; Isg indoonagimaa; pn wenagimaad
onagindan vti set a price on s.t.; Isg
indoonagindaan; pn wenagindang
onagindaaso vai set a price; Isg indoonagindaas;
pn wenagindaasod
onagizh ni sausage; pi onagizhiin; loc onagizhiing;
dim onagizhiins; also onagizhiins
onagizhiinsan /onagizhiins-/ ni macaroni plural
onagoode vii hang in place; pn wenagoodeg; aug
onagoodemagad; pn aug wenagoodemagak
onagoodoon vti2 hang s.t. in place; Isg
indoonagoodoon; pn wenagoodood
onagoojin vai hang in place; pn wenagoojing
onagoozh /onagooN-/ vta hang s.o. in place; Isg
indoonagoonaa; pn wenagoonaad
onakidoon vti2 set s.t. up; Isg indoonakidoon; pn
wenakidood
onakizh /onakiN-/ vta set s.o. up; Isg
indoonakinaa; pn wenakinaad
onapide vii be tied in place; pn wenapideg; aug
onapidemagad; pn aug wenapidemagak
onapidoon vti2 tie s.t. in place; Isg
indoonapidoon; pn wenapidood
onapijige vai harness up; Isg indoonapijige; pn
wenapfjiged
onapizh /onapiN-/ vta tie s.o. in place, harness
s.o.; Isg indoonapinaa; pn wenapinaad
onapizo vai be harnessed; pn wenapizod
onashkinade vii be loaded; pn wenashkinadeg;
aug onashkinademagad; pn aug
wenashkinademagak
onashkinadoon vti2 load s.t. (e.g., a gun); Isg
indoonashkinadoon; pn wenashkinadood
onashkina' vta load s.o. (e.g., a pipe); Isg
indoonashkina'aa; pn wenashkina'aad
onaabam vta choose s.o., pick s.o.; Isg
indoonaabamaa; pn wenaabamaad
onaabanad vii there is a crust on the snow; pn
wenaabanak
onaabandan vti choose s.t., pick s.t.; Isg
indoonaabandaan; pn wenaabandang
onaabani-giizis na March
onaabanjigaade vii be chosen, be picked; pn
wenaabanjigaadeg; aug
onaabanjigaademagad; pn aug
wenaabanjigaademagaak
onaabanjigaazo vai be chosen, be picked; pn
wenaabanjigaazod
onaabanjige vai choose things, pick things; Isg
indoonaabanjige; pn wenaabanjiged
onaabemi vai have a husband; Isg indoonaabem;
pn wenaabemid
onaagan ni dish, plate; pi onaaganan; loc
onaaganing; dim onaagaans
onaagan (dish) or boozikinaagan (bowl)
onaagaans ni cup, small plate; pi onaagaansan; loc
onaagaansing
onaagin via bend s.o. into form; Isg
indoonaaginaa; pn wenaaginaad
onaaginan vti bend s.t. into form; Isg
indoonaaginaan; pn wenaaginang
onaagoshi-miijin vti3 eat s.t. for supper; Isg
indoonaagoshi-miijin; pn wenaagoshi-miijid
onaagoshin /onaagoshi-/ vii be evening; pn
wenaagoshig
onaagoshi-wiisini vai eat supper; Isg
indoonaagoshi-wiisin; pn wenaagoshi-
wiisinid

onaakon—oninan 
108
onaakon vta decide on s.o., judge s.o.; hg
indoonaakonaa; pn wenaakonaad
onaakonan vti decide on s.t., plan s.t.; Isg
indoonaakonaan; pn wenaakonang
onaakonige vat plan things, decide things, judge
things, be in court; Isg indoonaakonige; pn
wenaakoniged
onaakosidoon vti2 set s.t. up as a frame; Isg
indoonaakosidoon; pn wenaakosidood
on dad am on /ondadamo-/ vii lead from a certain
place (as a road or trail); pn wendadamog
ondademo vat cry for a certain reason, come from
a certain place crying; Isg indoondadem; pn
wendademod
onda'ibaan ni water well, water source; pi
onda'ibaanan; loc onda'ibaaning; dim
onda'ibaanens
onda'ibii vai get water from a certain place; Isg
indoonda'ibii; pn wenda'ibiid
ondakwazhiwe vai paddle from a certain place,
swim from a certain place (as a fish); Isg
indoondakwazhiwe; pn wendakwazhiwed
ondamanokii vai be kept busy in work; Isg
indoondamanokii; pn wendamanokiid
ondamendam vai2 be preoccupied, be worried;
hg indoondamendam; pn wendamendang
ondamendan vti worry about s.t., be preoccupied
with s.t.; hg indoondamendaan; pn
wendamendang
ondamenim vta worry about s.o., be preoccupied
with s.o.; hg indoondamenimaa; pn
wendamenimaad
ondami' vta hinder s.o., get in s.o.'s way; Isg
indoondami'aa; pn wendami'aad
ondamitaa vai be kept busy in an activity; Isg
indoondamitaa; pn wendamitaad
ondamizi vai be busy; hg indoondamiz; pn
wendamizid
ondaabate vii come from a certain place (as
smoke); pn wendaabateg; aug
ondaabatemagad; pn aug wendaabatemagak
ondaadad vii come from a certain place, originate
in a certain place; pn wendaadak
ondaadagaa vai swim from a certain place; Isg
indoondaadagaa; pn wendaadagaad
ondaadagaazii vaiwade from a certain place; Isg
indoondaadagaazii; pn wendaadagaaziid
ondaada'e vai skate from a certain place; Isg
indoondaada'e; pn wendaada'ed
ondaadizi vai be born, come from a certain place;
Isg indooridaadiz; pn wendaadizid
ondaadiziike vai give birth; hg indoondaadiziike;
pn wendaadiziiked
ondaanimad vii come as wind from a certain
direction; pn wendaanimak
ondaaspc on this side, come here!
ondaasagaam pc on this side of the water
ondaasayi'ii pc on this side of it
ondaashaan pc come here! (especially said to
children)
ondaashi vai be blown from a certain place, sail
from a certain place; Isg indoondaash; pn
wendaashid
ondaasikana/>£ on this side of the road, on this
side of the trail
ondaasin vii be blown from a certain place, sail
from a certain place; pn wendaasing
ondaasishkode pc on this side of the fire
onde vii boil; pn wendeg; aug ondemagad; pn
aug wendemagak
ondendam vai2 strongly desire; hg
indoondendam; pn wendendang
ondendi vai be gone from a certain place, be
absent from a certain place; Isg indoondend;
pn wendendid
ondenim vta envy s.o.; hg indoondenimaa; pn
wendenimaad
ondin vii wind conies from a certain direction; pn
wending
ondin vta get s.o. from a certain place, obtain s.o.
from a certain place; hg indoondinaa; pn
wendinaad
ondinamaw vta get (s.t.) for s.o. from a certain
place, obtain (s.t.) for s.o. from a certain place;
hg indoondinamawaa; pn wendinamawaad
ondinamaazo vai get (s.t.) for oneself from a
certain place; Isg indoondinamaaz; pn
wendinamaazod
ondinan vti get s.t. from a certain place, obtain s.t.
from a certain place; hg indoondinaan; pn
wendinang
ondinigaade vii be obtained from a certain place;
pn wendinigaadeg; aug ondinigaademagad;
pn aug wendinigaademagak
ondinigaazo vaibe obtained from a certain place;
pn wendinigaazod
ondinige vai get things from a certain place, obtain
things from a certain place; hg indoondinige;
pn wendiniged
ondizi vai make a living a certain way, earn from a
certain place, inherit from a certain source; hg
indoondiz; pn wendizid
ondose vai walk from a certain place; hg
indoondose; pn wendosed
ondoode vai crawl from a certain place; hg
indoondoode; pn wendooded
ondoom vta carry s.o. on back from a certain
place; hg indoondoomaa; pn wendoomaad
ondoomigo vai ride from a certain place on
horseback; hg indoondoomig; pn
wendoomigod
ondoondan vti carry s.t. on back from a certain
place; hg indoondoondaan; pn
wendoondang
onendam vai2 decide what to do, figure something
out; /^indoonendam;/^/wenendang
ongowpr these animate plural demonstrative; also
ongo, ogow*, ogo*
ongowedig pr these over here animate plural
demonstrative; also ogowedig*
Onigamiinsingptace Duluth
onikodan vti cut s.t. to shape; hg indoonikodaan;
pn wenikodang
onikozh /onikoN-/ vta cut s.o. to shape; hg
indoonikonaa; pn wenikonaad
onin vta put s.o. in order, assemble s.o., deal s.o.
(e.g., cards); hg indooninaa; pn weninaad
oninan vti put s.t. in order, assemble s.t.; Isg
indooninaan; pn weninang

109 
oninasabii—onzo
oninasabii vai prepare a net for setting; hg
indooninasabii; pn weninasabiid
oninige vai put things in order, assemble things,
deal cards; hi; indooninige; pn weniniged
oninjii-baashkizigan in handgun; pi oninjii-
baashkiziganan; loc oninjii-baashkiziganing;
dim oninjii-baashkizigaans
onishkaa vai get up (from a prone position); Isg
indoonishkaa; pn wenishkaad
onizhishi vai be nice, be pretty; hg indoonizhish;
pn wenizhishid
onizhishi' vta make s.o. nice, make s.o. well; Isg
indoonizhishi'aa; prt wenizhishi'aad
onizhishin vii be nice, be pretty; pn wenizhishing
onizhishitoon vti2 make s.t. nice, make s.t. well;
Isg indoonizhishitoon; pn wenizhishitood
oniijaanisensi vai have a small child; Isg
indooniijaanisens; pn weniijaanisensid
oniijaanisi vai have a child; hg indooniijaanis; prt
weniijaanisid
oniijaaniw na doe; pi oniijaaniwag; dim
oniijaaniins
onji- pv3 from a certain place, for a certain reason,
because
onjibatoo vai run from a certain place; hg
indoonjibatoo; pn wenjibatood
onjibaa vai come from a certain place; hg
indoonjibaa; pn wenjibaad
onjibide vii speed from a certain place, drive from
a certain place, fall from a certain place; prt
wenjibideg; aug onjibidemagad; pn aug
wenjibidemagak
onjibizo vai speed from a certain place, drive from
a certain place, fall from a certain place; hg
indoonjibiz; prt wenjibizod
onjida pc on purpose
onjidaabii'iwe vai drive from a certain place; hg
indoonjidaabii'iwe; pn wenjidaabii'iwed
onjigaa vii leak, drip, run with sap; pn wenjigaag;
aug onjigaamagad; pn aug wenjigaamagak
onjijiwan vii flow from a certain place; pn
wenjijiwang
onjinawe' vta anger s.o. for a certain reason, make
s.o. mad for a certain reason; hg
indoonjinawe'aa; pn wenjinawe'aad
onjinazh /onjinaN-/ vta kill s.o. for a certain
reason; hg indoonjinanaa; pn wenjinanaad
onjinizhirno vai run from a certain place in flight;
hg indoonjinizhim; prt wenjinizhimod
onjise vai fly from a certain place; hg indoonjise;
pn wenjised
onjise vii fly from a certain place; prt wenjiseg; aug
onjisemagad; pn aug wenjisemagak
onjishkawa'o vai paddle against the wind; hg
indoonjishkawa'; pn wenjishkawa'od; also
onjishkawa'ann
onjishkawishkaa vai go against the wind; hg
indoonjishkawishkaa; pn wenjishkawishkaad
onjiwidoon vti2 take s.t. from a certain place, carry
s.t. from a certain place; hg indoonjiwidoon;
pn wenjiwidood
onjiwizh /onjiwiN-/ vta take s.o. from a certain
place, carry s.o. from a certain place; hg
indoonjiwinaa; prt wenjiwinaad
onjii vai come from a certain place; hg indoonjii;
pn wenjitd
onow pr these inanimate plural demonstrative,
this, these animate obviative demonstrative',
also ono
onowedin pr these over here inanimate plural
demonstrative, this/these over here obviative
demonstrative
onwaachige vai foretell the future; hg
indoonwaachige; prt wenwaachiged
onwaawe vai hiccough; Isg indoonwaawe; pn
wenwaawed
onzan vti boil s.t.; hg indoonzaan; prt wenzang
onzaabi vai look out from a certain place; hg
indoonzaab; pn wenzaabid
onzaam pc too much, excessively, extremely
onzaamashkinadoon vti2 overfill s.t. with solids;
hg indoonzaamashkinadoon; pn
wenzaamashkinadood
onzaamashkina' vta overfill s.o. with solids; hg
indoonzaamashkina'aa; prt
wenzaamashkina'aad
onzaamaakide vii be burnt crisp; pn
wenzaamaakideg; aug onzaamaakidemagad;
prt aug wenzaamaakidemagak
onzaamaakizo vai be burnt crisp; prt
wenzaamaakizod
onzaamendam vai2 give too much consideration;
Isg indoonzaamendam; pn wenzaamendang
onzaamenimo vai be elated, be overexcited; hg
indoonzaamenim; pn wenzaamenimod
onzaamibadoon vti2 overfill s.t. (with a liquid);
hg indoonzaamibadoon; pn
wenzaamibadood
onzaamibazh /onzaamibaN-/ vta give s.o. too
much to drink; hi? indoonzaamibanaa; pn
wenzaamibanaad
onzaamibii vai drink too much; hg
indoonzaamibii; pn wenzaamibiid
onzaamichige vai overdo things; Isg
indoonzaamichige; pn wenzaamiehiged
onzaamide vii be overcooked; pn wenzaamideg;
aug onzaamidemagad; pn aug
wenzaamidemagak
onzaamidoon vai talk too much; hg
indoonzaamidoon; prt wenzaamidoong
onzaamine vai be very sick; hg indoonzaamine;
prt wenzaamined
onzaamingwaam vai oversleep; hg
indoonzaamingwaam; pn
wenzaamingwaang
onzaamiwane waa pack too much of a load; hg
indoonzaamiwane; pn wenzaamiwaned
onzaamiz /onzaamizw-/ vta overcook s.o.,
overheat s.o.; hg indoonzaamizwaa; prt
wenzaamizwaad
onzaamizan vti overcook s.t., overheat s.t.; hg
indoonzaamizaan; prt wenzaamizang
onzaamizo vai be overcooked; pn wenzaamizod
onzaamiinad vii be too much, be too many; pn
wenzaamiinak
onzaamiino vai be too much, be too many; prt
wenzaamiinod
onzo vai boil; pn wenzod

onzo—ozaawaakwad 
110
onzo /onzw-/ vta boil s.o.; Isg indoonzwaa; prt
wenzwaad
opichi na robin; pi opichiwag; dim opichiins
opime-ayi'ii pc on the side of it; also opimeya'ii
opimekana pc along the side of the road, along the
side of the trail
opimese vai fall on the side; prt wepimesed
opimeshim uaz'lay s.o. on side; Isg
indoopimeshimaa; prt wepimeshimaad
opimeshin vai lie on one's side; Isg
indoopimeshin; prt wepimeshing
opimesidoon vti2 lay s.t. on side; Isg
indoopimesidoon; prt wepimesidood
opimesin vii lie on side; prt wepimesing
opin na potato; pi opiniig; dim opiniins
opwaagan na pipe (for smoking); pi opwaaganag;
lac opwaaganing; dim opwaagaans
opwaagan (pipe), okij (pipe stem)
opwaaganasin na pipestone; pi opwaaganasiniig
opwaagaans na cigarette; pi opwaagaansag; loc
opwaagaansing
oshaakaw vta scare s.o. away (e.g., game); Isg
indooshaakawaa; prt weshaakawaad
oshedinaa vii there is a ridge; prt weshedinaag;
aug oshedinaamagad; prt aug
weshedinaamagak
oshkagoojin vai be new (of a moon); prt
weshkagoojing; also oshki-agoojin
oshkanzhiikaajigan HI horseshoe; pi
oshkanzhiikaajiganan; loc
oshkanzhiikaajiganing; dim
oshkanzhiikaajigaans
oshkaya'aawi vai be young; Isg indooshkaya'aaw;
prt wedooshkaya'aawid; also oshki-aya'aawi
oshkaya'aa na someone new, someone young; pi
oshkaya'aag; dim oshkaya'aans; also oshki-
aya'aa
oshkayi'ii ni something new, something young; pi
oshkayi'iin; dim oshkayi'iins; also oshki-ayi*ii
oshkayi'iiwan vii be young, be new; prt
weshkayi'iiwang
oshkaabewis na ceremonial attendant, ceremonial
messenger; pi oshkaabewisag; dim
oshkaabewisens
oshki- pv4 new, young, for the first time
oshki-bimaadizi vai be young; Isg indooshki-
bimaadiz; prt weshki-bimaadizid
oshki-dibikad vii be early in the night; prt weshki-
dibikak
oshki'o vai wear new clothes; Isg indooshki'; prt
weshki'od
oshki-inini na young man; pi oshki-ininiwag
oshkikonaye vai dress in a new outfit; Isg
indooshkikonaye; prt weshkikonayed
oshkinawe na young man, adolescent boy; pi
oshkinaweg; dim oshkinawens
oshkinawewi vai be a young man, be an adoles-
cent boy; Isg indooshkinawew; prt
weshkinawewid
oshkiniigi vai be young, be an adolescent; Isg
indooshkiniig; prt weshkiniigid
oshkiniigikwe na young woman, adolescent girl; pi
oshkiniigikweg; dim oshkiniigikwens
oshkiniigikwewi vai be a young woman, be an
adolescent girl; Isg indooshkiniigikwew; prt
weshkiniigikwewid
oshkiinaagozi vai look young, look new; Isg
indooshkiinaagoz; prt weshkiinaagozid
oshkiinaagwad vii look new; prt weshkiinaagwak
oshkiinzhigokaajiganan ni eyeglasses plural; loc
oshkiinzhigokaajiganing; dim
oshkiinzhigokaajigaansan; also
oshkiinzhikokaanan
oshkiinzhigokewinini na optometrist; pi
oshkiinzhigokewininiwag
oshtigwaanens ni postage stamp; pi
oshtigwaanensan; he oshtigwaanensing
oshtigwaanzhaabonigan in common pin;pi
oshtigwaanzhaaboniganan
osidaawendam vai2 be sad, be dejected, be sor-
rowful; Isg indoosidaawendam; prt
wesidaawendang
owapc exclamation of agreeable surprise
owed! pr this over here inanimate singular
demonstrative; also o'owedi
owidi pc over here; also o'owidi
owiiyawen'enyi vai be a namesake; Isg
indoowiiyawen'enh; prt wewiiyawen'enyid
ozagaskwaajime na leech, bloodsucker; pi
ozagaskwaajimeg; dim ozagaskwaajimens;
also zagaskwaajime
ozaawaa vii be brown, be yellow; prt wezaawaag;
aug ozaawaamagad; prt aug wezaawaamagak
ozaawaabik ni (piece of) brass; pi
ozaawaabikoon; loc ozaawaabikong
ozaawaabikad vii be brown (as something miner-
al), be yellow (as something mineral), be brass;
prt wezaawaabikak
ozaawaabikizi vai be brown (as something miner-
al), be yellow (as something mineral), be brass;
prt wezaawaabikizid
ozaawaabikoons na cent, penny; pi
ozaawaabikoonsag; loc ozaawaabikoonsing
ozaawaabiigad vii be brown (as something string-
like), be yellow (as something string-like); prt
wezaawaabiigak
ozaawaabiigizi vai be brown (as something string-
like), be yellow (as something string-like); prt
wezaawaabiigizid
ozaawaakizan vti brown s.t. by fire, toast s.t.
brown; Isg indoozaawaakizaan; prt
wezaawaakizang
ozaawaakozi vai be brown (as something stick- or
wood-like), be yellow (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt wezaawaakozid
ozaawaakwad vii be brown (as something stick- or
wood-like), be yellow (as something stick- or
wood-like); prt wezaawaakwak

1 1 1 
ozaawaande—ozhibii'ige
ozaawaande mi be colored brown, be colored
yellow; pn wezaawaandeg; aug
ozaawaandemagad; pn aug
wezaawaandemagak
ozaawaanzo vai be colored brown, be colored
yellow; pn wezaawaanzod
ozaawaa-zhooniyaa ni gold; loc ozaawaa-
zhooniyaang; dim ozaawaa-zhooniyaans; also
ozhaawaa-zhocmiyaa
ozaawaa-zhooniyaawaande vii be colored gold;
prt wezaawaa-zhooniyaawaandeg; aug
ozaawaa-zhooriiyaawaandemagad; pn aug
wezaawaa-zhooniyaawaandemagak; also
ozhaawaa-zhooniyaawaande
ozaawaa-zhooniyaawaanzo vai be colored gold;
pn wezaawaa-zhooniyaawaanzod; also
ozhaawaa-zhooniyaanzo
ozaawegad vii be brown (as something sheet-like),
be yellow (as something sheet-like); pn
wezaawegak
ozaawegizi vai be brown (as something sheet-
like), be yellow (as something sheet-like); prt
wezaawegizid
ozaawi- pv4 brown, yellow
ozaawi-bimide ni butter; loc ozaawi-bimideng
ozaawi'o vai wear brown, wear yellow; Isg
indoozaawi'; pn wezaawi'od
ozaawikaadaak ni carrot; pi ozaawikaadaakoon;
loc ozaawikaadaakong; dim
ozaawi kaadaakoons
ozaawikosimaan ni pumpkin; pi
ozaawikosimaanan; loc ozaawikosimaaning;
dim ozaawikosiimaanens
ozaawindibe vai be blond, have brown hair; hg
indoozaawindibe; prt wezaawindibed
ozaawizi vai be brown, be yellow; pn wezaawizid
ozhaashadamon /ozhaashadamo-/ vii be slippery
(as a road or trail); pn wezhaashadamog
ozhaashaa vii be slippery, be slick; prt
wezhaashaag; aug ozhaashaamagad; prt aug
wezhaashaamagak
ozhaashaabikad vii be slippery (as something
mineral); prt wezhaashaabikak
ozhaashaabikizi vai be slippery (as something
mineral); pn wezhaashaabikizid
ozhaashaakozi vai be slippery (as something stick-
or wood-like); prt wezhaashaakozid
ozhaashaakwad vii be slippery (as something
stick- or wood-like); prt wezhaashaakwak
ozhaashigob na slippery elm; pi ozhaashigobiig;
loc ozhaashigobiing; dim ozhaashigobiins
ozhaashikoshin vai slip and fall on the ice; Isg
indoozhaashikoshin; pn wezhaashikoshing
ozhaashikwadamon /ozhaashikwadamo-/ vii be
slippery with ice (as a road or trail); prt
wezhaashikwadamog
ozhaashikwaa vii mere is slippery ice; prt
wezhaashikwaag; aug ozhaashikwaamagad;
pn aug wezhaashikwaamagak
ozhaashishin vai slip and fall; Isg
indoozhaashishin; pn wezhaashishing
ozhaashizi vai be slippery, be slick; pn
wezhaashizid
ozhaawashko- pv4 blue, green
ozhaawashko-aniibiish ni green tea; loc
ozhaawashko-aniibiishing
ozhaawashko-bineshiinh na bluebird; pi
ozhaawashko-bineshiinyag
ozhaawashko'o vai wear blue, wear green; Isg
indoozhaawashko'; pn wezhaawashko'od
ozhaawashko-manoomin ni green wild rice; loc
ozhaawashko-manoomining
ozhaawashkozi vai be blue, be green; prt
wezhaawashkozid
ozhaawashkwaa vii be blue, be green; prt
wezhaawashkwaag; aug
ozhaawashkwaamagad; prt aug
wezhaawashkwaamagak
ozhaawashkwaabi vai have a black eye; Isg
indoozhaawashkwaab; prt
wezhaawashkwaabid
ozhaawashkwaabikad vii be blue (as something
mineral), be green (as something mineral); prt
wezhaawashkwaabikak
ozhaawashkwaabikizi vai be blue (as something
mineral), be green (as something mineral); pn
wezhaawashkwaabikizid
ozhaawashkwaabiigad vii be blue (as something
string-like), be green (as something string-like);
prt wezhaawashkwaabiigak
ozhaawashkwaabiigizi vai be blue (as something
string-like), be green (as something string-like);
prt wezhaawashkwaabiigizid
ozhaawashkwaakozi vai be blue (as something
stick- or wood-like) j be green (as something
stick- or wood-like); prt
wezhaawashkwaakozid
ozhaawashkwaakwad vii be blue (as something
stick- or wood-like), be green (as something
stick- or wood-like); pn
wezhaawashkwaakwak
ozhaawashkwaanagiingwe vai have a bruised
face; Isg indoozhaawashkwaanagiingwe; pn
wezhaawashkwaanagiingwed
ozhaawashkwegad vii be blue (as something
sheet-like), be green (as something sheet-like);
prt wezhaawashkwegak
ozhaawashkwegizi vai be blue (as something
sheet-like), be green (as something sheet-like);
prt wezhaawashkwegizid
ozhibii' /ozhibii'w-/ vta write s.o. down; Isg
indoozhibii'waa; pn wezhibii'waad
ozhibii'amaw vta write (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
indoozhibii'amawaa; pn wezhibii'amawaad
ozhibii'an vti write s.t., write s.t. down; Isg
indoozhibii'aan; pn wezhibii'ang
ozhibii'igan m letter of the alphabet, something
written; pi ozhibii'iganan; loc ozhibii'iganing;
dim ozhibii'igaans
ozhibii'iganaaboo ni ink; loc ozhibii'iganaaboong
ozhibii'iganaak HI pen, pencil; pi
ozhibii'iganaakoon; loc ozhibii'iganaakong;
dim ozhibii'iganaakoons
ozhibii'igaade vii be written; prt wezhibii'igaadeg;
aug ozhibii'igaademagad; pn aug
wezhibii'igaademagak
ozhibii'ige vai write; Isg indoozhibii'ige; pn
wezhibii'iged

ozhibii'ige-adoopowin—taayaa 
112
ozhibii'ige-adoopowin m desk; pi ozhibii'ige-
adoopowinan; he ozhibii'ige-adoopowining;
dim ozhibii'ige-adoopowinens
ozhibii'igewigamig ni office; pi
ozhibii'igewigamigoon; he
ozhibii'igewigamigong; dim
ozhibii'igewigamigoons
ozhibii'igewikwe na secretary (female), clerk
(female); pi ozhibii'igewikweg
ozhibii'igewinini na secretary (male), clerk (male);
pi ozhibii'igewininiwag
ozhichigaade vii be made, be built; prt
wezhichigaadeg; aug ozhichigaademagad; prt
aug wezhichigaademagak
ozhichigaazo vai be made, be built; prt
wezhichigaazod
ozhichige vai make diings; Isg indoozhichige; prt
wezhichiged
ozhiga'ige vai tap trees; 7^indoozhiga'ige;prt
wezhiga'iged
ozhigaw vta build a house for s.o.; Isg
indoozhigawaa; prt wezhigawaad
ozhige vai build a lodge; Isg indoozhige; prt
wezhiged
ozhi* vta make s.o., build s.o., form s.o.; Isg
indoozhi'aa; prt wezhi'aad
ozhim vta escape from s.o.; Isg indoozhimaa; prt
wezhimaad
ozhimo vai flee; Isg indoozhim; pn wezhimod
ozhitamaw vta make (s.t.) for s.o., build (s.t.) for
s.o.; Isg indoozhitamawaa; pn
wezhitamawaad
ozhitaw vta make (s.t.) for s.o., build (s.t.) for s.o.;
Isg indoozhitawaa; prt wezhitawaad
ozhitoon vti2 make s.t., build s.t., form s.t.; Isg
indoozhitoon; prt wezhitood
ozhiwanikaadan vti make a pack of s.t.; Isg
indoozhiwanikaadaan; prt
wezhiwanikaadang
ozhiwanike vai pack up; Isg indoozhiwanike; prt
wezhiwaniked
ozhiitaa vai get ready, prepare; Isg indoozhiitaa;
pn wezhiitaad
ozhooniyaami uazhave money; Isg
indoozhooniyaam; pn wezhooniyaamid
ozide-miikana ni footpath; /)/ ozide-miikanan; he
ozide-miikanaang; dim ozide-miikanens,
ozide-miikanaans
ozisijige vai make a bed; Isg indoozisijige: pn
wezisijiged; also ozhisijige
ozisinaagane vai set the table; Isg
indoozisinaagane; prt wezisinaaganed
oziigaa vii be wrinkled; pn weziigaag; aug
oziigaamagad; pn aug weziigaamagak
oziigishkaa vai wrinkle up; prt weziigishkaad
oziigishkaa vii wrinkle up; pn weziigishkaag; aug
oziigishkaamagad; pn aug
weziigishkaamagak
oziigizi vai be wrinkled; Isg indooziigiz; pn
weziigizid
oziigiingwe vai have a wrinkled face; Isg
indooziigiingwe; prt weziigiingwed
oziisigobimizh na willow; ^/oziisigobimizhiig; he
oziisigobimizhiing; dim oziisigobimizhiins
oziisigobimizhii-makak ni willow basket; pi
oziisigobimizhii-makakoon; he
oziisigobimizhii-makakong; dim
oziisigobimizhii-makakoons
ozosodam vai2 cough; Isg indoozosodam; prt
wezosodang
ozosodamoo-mashkiki ni cough medicine
ozosodamwaapine vai have a respiratory illness,
have tuberculosis; Isg indoozosodamwaapine;
prt wezosodamwaapined
ozosodamwaapinewin ni tuberculosis
oo pc oh!
oodena ni town; pi oodenawan; he oodenaang;
dim oodenawens, oodenaans
oojii na fly (insect); pi oojiig; dim oojiins; also
oojiins
ookwe na maggot; pi ookweg; dim ookwens
ookwemin ni black cherry; pi ookweminan; dim
ookweminens
ookweminagaawanzh na black cherry bush; pi
ookweminagaawanzhiig; he
ookweminagaawanzhiing; dim
ookweminagaawanzhiins
oonhpc oh!, so...
P
pane pc always, continuously; also apane
S
sa pc emphatic', also isa
-sh pc and, and then; also dash, idash
shi pc plus used in counting; also ashi
T
taayaa pc man's expression of mild displeasure or
disdain; also aatayaa

113
w=—wanisin
w
w= pre third person prefix before an initial ii of a
dependent noun stem
wabaashiiwan vii ttiere is a narrows; prt
webaashiiwang
wabigamaa vii there is a channel between lakes,
there is a narrows; prt webigamaag; aug
wabigamaama.gad; prt aug webigamaamagak
wadab na spruce root; pi wadabiig; loc wadabiing;
dim wadabiins
wadabii-makak ni basket of spruce root; pi
wadabii-makakoon; loc wadabii-makakong;
dim wadabii-makakoons
wadikwan ni branch; pi wadikwanan; loc
wadikwaning; dim wadikwaans
wadiswan ni bird nest; pi wadiswanan; loc
wadiswaning; dim wadiswaans
wado na blood clot; pi wadowag
wadoop ni alder; pi wadoopiin; he wadoopiing;
dim wadoopiins
wagidajiw pc on top of a mountain; also ogidajiw*,
agidajiw
wagidakamig pc on top of the ground; also
ogidakamig*, agidakamig
wagidasin pc on top of a rock; also ogidasin*,
agidasin
wagidaabikpc on something mineral (e.g., metal,
glass, rock); also ogidaabik*, agidaabik
wagidaajiwan pc upstream; also ogidaajiwan*,
agidaajiwan
wagidaaki pc on top of a hill; also ogidaaki*,
agidaaki
wagidibiig/>£ on top of the water; also ogidibiig*,
agidibiig
wagidigamig pc on top of the house; also
ogidigamig*, agidigamig
wagidiskwam pc on top of the ice; also
ogidiskwam*, agidiskwam
wagijayi'ii pc on top of it; aha ogijayi'ii*, agijayi'ii
wagiji- pn on top of; oho ogiji-*, agiji-
wa'aw pr this animate singular demonstrative
wa'awedi pr this over here animate singular
demonstrative
wajepii vai be fast; Isg niwajepii; prt wejepiid
wajiw ni mountain; pi wajiwan; loc wajiwing; dim
wajiwens
wakewaji vai can't take the cold, get chilled easily;
Isg niwakewaj; pn wekewajid
wanagek na bark (of a tree); pi wanagekwag; loc
wanagekong; dim wanagekoons
wanagekogamig ni bark lodge; pi
wanagekogamigoon; he
wanagekogamigong; dim
wanagekogamigoons
wanagim vta miscount s.o.; Isg niwanagimaa; prt
wenagimaad
wanagindan vti miscount s.t., misread s.t.; Isg
niwanagindaain; prt wenagindang
wanagindaaso vai miscount, misread; Isg
niwanagindaas; prt wenagindaasod
wanakong pc on trie tip, on the treetop
wanaabidoo'an vti make a mistake beading s.t. on
a loom; Isg niwanaabidoo'aan; pn
wenaabidoo*ang
wanaabidoo'ige vai make a mistake beading
things on a loom; Isg niwanaabidoo'ige; pn
wenaabidoo'iged
wanaanimizi vai have stage fright, be confused;
Isg niwanaanimiz; prt wenaanimizid
wanendam vai2 forget; Isg niwanendam; prt
wenendang
wanendamaa vai faint; Isg niwanendamaa; prt
wenendamaad
wanendan vti forget s.t.; Isg niwanendaan; prt
wenendang
wanenim vta forget s.o.; Isg niwanenimaa; prt
wenenimaad
wani- pv4 in error, by mistake
wanibatoo vai run the wrong way; Isg
niwanibatoo; prt wenibatood
wanibizo vai get lost driving; Isg niwanibiz; prt
wenibizod
wanibii'an vti make a mistake writing s.t.; Isg
niwanibii'aan; pn wenibii'ang
wanibii'ige vai make a mistake writing; Isg
niwanibii'ige; prt wenibii'iged
wanicbige vai make a mistake; Isg niwanichige;
pn wenichiged
wanigiizhwe vai make a mistake speaking, mis-
pronounce; Isg niwanigiizhwe; pn
wenigiizhwed
wanigwaadan vti make a mistake sewing on s.t.;
Isg niwanigwaadaan; prt wenigwaadang
wanigwaaso vai make a mistake sewing; hg
niwanigwaas; prt wenigwaasod
wanigwaazh /wanigwaaN-/ vta make a mistake
sewing on s.o.; Isg niwanigwaanaa; pn
wenigwaanaad
wani' vta lose s.o.; hg niwani'aa; pn weni'aad
wanim vta mislead s.o. by speech, confuse s.o. by
speech; Isg niwanimaa;/>/; wenimaad
wanin vta take s.o. who/that is the wrong one,
touch s.o. who/that is the wrong one; hg
niwaninaa; prt weninaad
waninan vti take s.t. that is the wrong one, touch
s.t. that is the wrong one; hg niwaninaan; prt
weninang
waninawe'an vti stir s.t.; hg niwaninawe'aan; prt
weninawe'ang
waninawe'igan ni eggbeater, mixer; pi
waninawe'iganan; he waninawe'iganing; dim
waninawe'igaans
wanishim vta misplace s.o.; hg niwanishimaa; prt
wenishimaad
wanishin vai be lost, get lost; Isg niwanishin; prt
wenishing
wanishkwe* vta distract s.o., interrupt s.o.; hg
niwanishkwe'aa; pn wenishkwe'aad
wanishkwem vta disturb s.o. by speech, interrupt
s.o. by speech; hg niwanishkwemaa; pn
wenishkwemaad
wanishkweyendam vai be distracted; Isg
niwanishkweyendam; pn wenishkweyendang
wanisidoon vri2 misplace s.t.; /s^niwanisidoon;
pn wenisidood
wanisin vii be lost, get lost; pn wenising

wan i tarn—waaban d i zo win
114
wan it am vai2 misunderstand something heard; Isg
n i wan i tarn; prt wenitang
wanitaw via misunderstand (what) s.o. (says); Isg
niwanitawaa; prt wenitawaad
wanitoon vti2 lose s.t.; Isg niwanitoon; prt
wenitood
wanii'amaw vta trap for s.o.; Isg niwanii'amawaa;
prt wenii'amawaad
wanii'igan ni trap; pi wanii'iganan; loc
wanii'iganing; dim wanii'igaans
wanii'ige vai'trap; ./j^ni wanii'ige; prr wenii'iged
wanii'igewinini na trapper; pi wanii'igewininiwag
waniike vai+o forget (s.t.); Isg ni wan like,
niwaniiken; prt weniiked
wapaa' vta disturb s.o.'s sleep; Isg niwapaa'aa; prt
wepaa'aad
washkibagizo vai turn in place; Isg
n i wash ki bag! z; prt weshkibagizod
washkigaabawi vai turn while standing; Isg
niwashkigaabaw; prt weshkigaabawid
washki-giiwe vai turn and go back; Isg niwashki-
giiwe; prt weshki-giiwed
wash kitigweyaa mi flow around a bend (as a
river); prt weshkitigweyaag; aug
washkitigweyaamagad; prt aug
wesh kitigweyaamagak
wawaase= < waase
wawaasese vii there is lightning; prt wewaaseseg;
aug wawaasesemagad; pn aug
wewaasese magak
wawenabi vai sit down, be seated; Isg
niwawenab; prt wewenabid
wawezhichigaade viibe decorated, be made
pretty; prt wewezhichigaadeg; aug
wawezhichigaademagad; prt aug
wewezhichigaademagak
wawezhichigaazo vai be decorated; prt
wewezh i ch i gaazod
wawezhichige vai decorate things; Isg
niwawezhichige; prt wewezhichiged
wawezhi' vta decorate s.o., dress s.o. up, make s.o.
up; Isg niwawezhi'aa; prt wewezhi'aad
wawezhi'o vai dress up, make up oneself; Isg
ni wawezhi'; prt wewezh Pod
wawezhitoon vti2 decorate s.t.; Isg
ni wawezhi toon; pn wewezhitood
wawiyadendaagozi vai be considered cute, be
considered funny (comical); Isg
niwawiyadendaagoz; pn wewiyadendaagozid
wawiyadendaagwad vii be cute; prt
wewiyaden d aagwak
wawiyadenim vta think s.o. cute, think s.o. comi-
cal; Isg niwawiyadenimaa; prt
wewiyaden imaad
wawiyazh pc funny, comical
wawiyazhinaagozi vai look cute, look funny (com-
ical); Isg ni wawiyazh inaagoz; pn
wewiyazhinaagozid
wawiyazh inaagwad vii look cute, look funny
(comical); prt wewiyazhinaagwak
wawiyazhitaagozi vai sound cute, sound funny
(comical); Isg ni wawiyazh itaagoz; prt
wewiyazhitaagozid
wawiyazh itaagwad vii sound cute, sound funny
(comical); pn wewiyazhitaagwak
wawiinge /)c well, properly, carefully, completely
wawiingechige vai do exactly, do skilfully; Isg
niwawiingechige; pn wewiingechiged
wawiinge' vta make s.o. skilfully; Isg
niwawiinge'aa; prt wewiinge'aad
wawiingetoon vti2 make s.t. skilfully; Isg
niwawiingetoon; prt wewiingetood
wawiingezi vai be skilful; Isg niwawiingez; prt
wewiingezid
way pc exclamation
wayaabishkiiwed na-pt white person; pi
wayaabishkiiwejig
wayekwaase vii come to an end; prt
weyekwaaseg; aug wayekwaasemagad; pn
aug weyekwaasemagak
wayeshkad pc at first, in the beginning
wayezhim vta cheat s.o., deceive s.o.; Isg
niwayezhimaa; pn weyezh imaad
wayezhinge vai cheat people, deceive people; Isg
niwayezhinge; prt weyezhinged
wayiiba /v soon, early, in a little while; also wiiba*
wazhashk na muskrat; pi wazhashkwag; dim
wazhashkoons
wazhashk way aan na muskrat hide; pi
wazhashkwayaanag; loc
wazhashk way aan ing; dim
wazhashk way aanens
wazhashk we do na fungus; pi wazhashkwedowag;
dim wazhaskwedoons
wazhashkwedoons na mushroom; pi
wazhashkwedoonsag
wazhashkwiish ni muskrat lodge; pi
wazhashkwiishan; loc wazhashkwiish ing
waa pc exclamation
waa- pvl will, want to changed form of
future Idesiderative verb prefix
waabam vta see s.o.; Isg niwaabamaa; pn
wayaabamaad
waabam oojichaagwaan ni mirror; pi
waabam oojichaagwaanan; loc
waabamoojichaagwaaning; dim
waabamoojichaagwaanens
waaban vii be dawn, be tomorrow; prt wayaabang
waabananokii vai work until dawn; Isg
niwaabananokii; prt wayaabananokiid
waabanda* vta show (s.t.) to s.o.; Isg
niwaabanda'aa; prt wayaabanda'aad
waabanda'iwe vai show (s.t.) to people; Isg
niwaabanda'iwe; prt wayaabanda'iwed
waabanda* iwewin ni show, exhibition; pi
waabanda'iwewinan; loc
waaban d a' iwewin ing
waabandan vti see s.t.; Isg niwaabandaan; pn
wayaabandang
waabandiwag /waabandi-/ vai they see each other;
I pi niwaabandimin; pn wayaabandijig
waabandizo vai see oneself; Isg niwaabandiz; pn
wayaabandizod
waabandizowin ni mirror; pi waabandizowinan;
loc waabandizowin ing; dim
waabandizowinens

1 1 5
waabang—waagaakwadoons
waabang vii tomorrow conjunct form of verb
waaban
waabange vai observe people, be a spectator, be a
witness; Isg n waabange; pn wayaabanged
waabani-noodin ni east wind
waabanjigaade vii be seen; pn wayaabanjigaadeg;
aug waabanjigaademagad; pn aug
wayaabanjigaademagak
waabanjigaazo vai be seen; pn wayaabanjigaazod
waabanong pc in die east, to the east
waabashkiki ni swamp; pi waabashkikiin; loc
waabashkikiing; dim waabashkikiins
waabashkikiiwan vii be swampy; pn
wayaabashkikiiwang
waabaabigan na white clay
waabaaso vai fade from light; pn wayaabaasod
waabaate vii fade from light; pn wayaabaateg;
aug waabaaternagad; pn aug
wayaabaatemagak
waabi vai have vision, see; Isg niwaab; pn
wayaabid
waabide vii be faded, be bleached; pn
wayaabideg; aug waabidemagad; pn aug
wayaabidemagak
waabigan na clay; loc waabiganing
waabiganikaade vii be made of clay, be made of
concrete; pn wayaabiganikaadeg; aug
waabiganikaademagad; prt aug
wayaabiganikaademagak
waabigwan ni flower; pi waabigwaniin; loc
waabigwaniing; dim waabigwaniins
waabigwanii-giizis na May
waabijiiyaa vii be grey; prt wayaabijiiyaag; aug
waabijiiyaamagad; pn aug
wayaabijiiyaarnagak
waabijiizi vai be grey; pn wayaabijiizid
waabikwe vai have grey hair; Isg niwaabikwe; pn
wayaabikwed
waabi-makade ni smokeless gunpowder
waabi-manoomin ni white rice; loc waabi-
manoomining
waabishkawedoon vai have white whiskers; Isg
niwaabishkawedoon; pn
wayaabishkawedoong
waabishkaa vii be white; pn wayaabishkaag; aug
waabishkaamagad; pn aug
wayaabishkaamagak
waabishkaabikad vii be white (as something min-
eral); prt wayaabishkaabikak
waabishkaabikizi vai be white (as something min-
eral); pn wayaabishkaabikizid
waabishkaabiigad vii be white (as something
string-like);pn wayaabishkaabiigak
waabishkaabiigizi vai be white (as something
string-like); pn wayaabishkaabiigizid
waabishkaakozi vai be white (as something stick-
or wood-like); prt wayaabishkaakozid
waabishkaakwad vii be white (as something stick-
or wood-like); pn wayaabishkaakwak
waabishkaanakwad vii there are white clouds; pn
wayaabishkaanakwak
waabishkaande vii be colored white; pn
wayaabishkaandeg; aug
waabishkaandemagad; pn aug
wayaabishkaandemagak
waabishkaanzo vai be colored white; pn
wayaabishkaanzod
waabishki- pv 4 white
waabishki'o vai wear white; Isg niwaabishki'; pn
wayaabishki'od
waabishkindibe vai have white hair; Isg
niwaabishkindibe; pn wayaabishkindibed
waabishkizi vai be white; pn wayaabishkizid
waabishkiigad vii be white (as something sheet-
like); pn wayaabishkiigak
waabishkiigin ni sheet, white cloth; pi
waabishkiiginoon; loc waabishkiiginong; dim
waabishkiiginoons
waabishkiigizi vai be white (as something sheet-
like); pn wayaabishkiigizid
waabishkiingwechigan m face powder; loc
waabishkiingwechiganing; dim
waabishkiingwechigaans
waabishkiingwechige vai use face powder; Isg
niwaabishkiingwechige; pn
wayaabishkiingwechiged
waabishkiiwe vai be a white person; Isg
niwaabishkiiwe; pn wayaabishkiiwed
waabizhagindibe vai be bald; Isg
niwaabizhagindibe; pn wayaabizhagindibed
waabizheshi na marten; pi waabizheshiwag; dim
waabizheshiins
waabizheshiwayaan na marten hide; pi
waabizheshiwayaanag; loc
waabizheshiwayaaning; dim
waabizheshiwayaanens
waabizii na swan; pi waabiziig; dim waabiziins
waabizo vai be faded, be bleached; pn
wayaabizod
waabiingwe vai be pale faced; Isg niwaabiingwe;
pn wayaabiingwed
waaboozwayaan na rabbit skin; pi
waaboozwayaanag; dim waaboozwayaanens
waabooyaan ni blanket; pi waabooyaanan; he
waabooyaaning; dim waabooyaanens; also
waabowayaan
waabooz na snowshoe hare, rabbit; pi
waaboozoog; dim waaboozoons
waaboozwaaboo ni rabbit soup; loc
waaboozwaaboong
waagaa vii be bent; pn wayaagaag; aug
waagaamagad; pn aug wayaagaamagak
waagaabikad vii be bent (as something mineral);
pn wayaagaabikak
waagaabikizi vai be bent (as something mineral);
pn wayaagaabikizid
waagaakozi vai be bent (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn wayaagaakozid
waagaakwad ni ax; pi waagaakwadoon; loc
waagaakwadong; dim waagaakwadoons
waagaakwad vii be bent (as something stick- or
wood-like); pn wayaagaakwak
waagaakwadoons ni hatchet; pi
waagaakwadoonsan; loc
waagaakwadoonsing

waagaakwadwaatig—waaseyiigad 
116
waagaakwadwaatig in ax handle; pi
waagaakwadwaatigoon; loc
waagaakwadwaatigong; dim
waagaakwadwaatigoons
waagibidoon vti2 bend s.t. with hands; Isg
niwaagibidoon; pri wayaagibidood
waagibizh /waagibiN-/ vta bend s.o. with hands;
Isg niwaagibinaa; prt wayaagibinaad
waagikomaan ni crooked knife; pi
waagikomaanan; dim waagikomaanens
waagikomaan (crooked knife)
waagin vta bend s.o. with hand; Isg niwaaginaa;
prt wayaaginaad
waaginan vti bend s.t. with hand; Isg
niwaaginaan; prt wayaaginang
waaginaa na canoe rib; pi waaginaag; loc
waaginaang; dim waaginaans
waaginogaan ni domed lodge, wigwam; pi
waaginogaanan; loc waaginogaaning; dim
waaginogaanens
waaginogaan (domed lodge, wigwam)
waagizi vai be bent; prt wayaagizid
waagosh na fox; pi waagoshag; dim waagoshens
waagoshiwayaan na fox hide; pi
waagoshiwayaanag; dim waagoshiwayaanens
waak ni fish egg; pi waakwan
waakaa'igan ni house, building; pi waakaa'iganan;
he waakaa'iganing; dim waakaa'igaans
waakaa'ige vai build a house; Isg niwaakaa'ige;
prt wayaakaa'iged
waakaa'igewinini na carpenter; pi
waakaa'igewininiwag
waangawi' vta tame s.o.; 7j^niwaangawi'aa;p«
wayaangawi'aad
waangawizi vai be tame; Isg niwaangawiz; prt
wayaangawizid
waangoom vta adopt s.o.; Isg niwaangoomaa; prt
wayaangoomaad
waanikaan ni excavated hole; pi waanikaanan; loc
waanikaaning; dim waanikaanens
waanike vai dig a hole; Isg niwaanike; prt
wayaaniked
waanzh ni den, cave, burrow; pi waanzhan; loc
waanzhing; dim waanzhens
waanzhibiiyaa vii be a pond, be a pothole of
water, be a puddle; prt wayaanzhibiiyaag; aug
waanzhibiiyaamagad; prt aug
wayaanzhibiiyaamagak
waasa pc far, distant
waasamowin ni lightning, electricity
waasatnoo- pv4 powered, electric
waasamoo-anokiiwinini na electrician; pi
waasamoo-anokiiwininiwag
waasamoo-bimide ni gasoline; loc waasamoo-
bimideng
waasamoo-jiimaan ni motor launch; pi
waasamoo-jiimaanan; loc waasamoo-
jiimaaning; dim waasamoo-jiimaanens
waasamoo-waazakonenjigan ni electric lamp; pi
waasamoo-waazakonenjiganan; loc
waasamoo-waazakonenjiganing; dim
waasamoo-waazakonenjigaans
waasamoowidaabaan na car; pi
waasamoowidaabaanag; loc
waasamoowidaabaaning; dim
waasamoowidaabaanens
waasawad vii be far; prt wayaasawak
waasaabikide vii shine (as something mineral),
reflect (as something mineral); pri
wayaasaabikideg; aug waasaabikidemagad;
prt aug wayaasaabikidemagak
waasaabikizo vai shine (as something mineral),
reflect (as something mineral); prt
wayaasaabikizod
waasechigan ni window; pi waasechiganan; loc
waasechiganing; dim waasechigaans
waasechiganaabik ni window glass, window pane;
pi waasechiganaabikoon; loc
waasechiganaabikong; dim
waasechiganaabikoons
waasese vii there is a flash of lightning; prt
wayaaseseg; aug waasesemagad; prt aug
wayaasesemagak
waasete vii be bright inside; prt wayaaseteg; aug
waasetemagad; prt aug wayaasetemagak
waaseyaa vii be bright, be sunny; prt
wayaaseyaag; aug waaseyaamagad; prt aug
wayaaseyaamagak
waaseyaaban vii be light at dawn; prt
wayaaseyaabang
waaseyaanakwad vii clouds can be seen through;
prt wayaaseyaanakwak
waaseyiigad vii be bright (as something sheet-
like), be shiny (as something sheet-like); prt
wayaaseyiigak

117 
waaseyiigizi—webinige
waaseyiigizi vai be bright (as something sheet-
like), be shiny (as something sheet-like); pn
wayaaseyiigizid
waashkobaagamig ni-pt soft drink; pi
waashkobaagamigin
waashkobizid bakwezhigan na-pt sweet roll,
pastry, cake; pi waashkobizijig
bakwezhiganag
Waashtanong place Washington, D.C.
waasiko' via make s.o. shiny; hg niwaasiko'aa; pn
wayaasiko'aad
waasikotoon vti2 make s.t. shiny; Isg
niwaasikotoon; pn wayaasikotood
waasikwa' vta polish s.o., shine s.o.; Isg
niwaasikwa'waa; pn wayaasikwa'waad
waasikwa'an cri polish s.t.s shine s.t.; Isg
niwaasikwa'aan; pn wayaasikwa'ang
waaswaa vai shine for game or fish, jacklight; Isg
niwaaswaa; pn wayaaswaad
waaswaagan ni torch; pi waaswaaganan; loc
waaswaaganing; dim waaswaagaans
waatebagaa vii there are bright leaves; pn
wayaatebagaag; aug waatebagaamagad; pn
aug wayaatebagaamagak
waatebagaa-giizis na October, September; also
waatebago-gims
waawan ni egg; pi waawanoon; loc waawanong;
dim waawanoons
waawaabiganoojiinh na mouse; pi
waawaabiganoojiinyag; dim
waawaabiganoojiins
waawaashkeshi na deer; pi waawaashkeshiwag:
dim waawaashkeshiins
waawaashkeshiwayaan na deer hide; pi
waawaashkeshiwayaanag; loc
waawaashkeshiwayaaning; dim
waawaashkeshiwayaanens
waawaashkeshiwi»wiiyaas ni deer meat
waawaatesi na firefly; pi waawaatesiwag; dim
waawaatesiins; also wewaatesi
waawiyebii'igan ni compass (drawing instrument);
pi waawiyebii'iganan; loc waawiyebii'iganing;
dim waawiyebii'igaans
waawiyebii'ige vai draw a circle; Isg
niwaawiyebii'ige; pn wayaawiyebii'iged
waawiye" vta make s.o. round; Isg niwaawiye'aa;
pn wayaawiye 'aad
waawiyem'magad vii be round (as something ball-
like); pn wayaawiyeminagak
waawiyeminagizi vai be round (as something ball-
like); pn wayaawiyeminagizid
waawiyetoon vti2 make s.t. round; Isg
niwaawiyetoon; pn wayaawiyetood
waawiyeyaa vii be round, be circular; pn
wayaawiyeyaa g; aug waawiyeyaamagad; pn
aug wayaawiyeyaamagak
waawiyeyaabikad vii be round (as something min-
eral); pn wayaawiyeyaabikak
waawiyeyaabikizi vai be round (as something
mineral); pn wayaawiyeyaabikizid
waawiyeyaakozi vai be round (as something stick-
or wood-like); pn wayaawiyeyaakozid
waawiyeyaakwad vii be round (as something
stick- or wood-like); pn wayaawiyeyaakwak
waawiyezi vai be round, be circular; Isg
niwaawiyez; pn wayaawiyezid
waawiindamaw vta explain (s.t.) to s.o., tell about
(s.t.) to s.o., promise (s.t.) to s.o.; Isg
niwaawiindamawaa; pn
wayaawiindamawaad
waawiindamaage vai explain (s.t.) to people,
promise (s.t.) to people; Isg
niwaawiindamaage; pn wayaawiindamaaged
waawiinjigaade vii be explained, be talked about
all the time; pn wayaawiinjigaadeg; aug
waawiinjigaademagad; pn aug
wayaawiinjigaademagak
waawiinjigaazo vai be talked about all the time;
pn wayaawiinjigaazod
waawiinzh /waawiinN-/ vta mention s.o., name
s.o.; Isg ninwaawiinaa; pn wayaawiinaad
waawoono vai howl (e.g., a dog); pn
wayaawoonod
waazakone vii glow, give off light; pn
wayaazakoneg; aug waazakonemagad; pn
aug wayaazakonemagak
waazakonebidoon vti2 turn s.t. on for a light; Isg
niwaazakonebidoon; pn
wayaazakonebidood
waazakonenjigan ni lamp; pi
waazakonenjiganan; loc
waazakonenjiganing; dim
waazakonenjigaans
waazakonenjiganaaboo in kerosene; loc
waazakonenjigan aaboong
waazakonenjiganaaboowadaawewigamig ni gas
station; also waazakonenjiganaaboo-
adaawewigamig
waazakonenjiganaaboowakik na gas tank, gas
can; pi waazakonenjiganaaboowakikoog; loc
waazakonenjiganaaboowakikong; dim
waazakonenjiganaaboowakikoons
waazakonenjiganaatig ni light pole; pi
waazakonenjiganaatigoon; he
wazakonenjiganaatigong; dim
waazakonenjiganaatigoons
weba' /weba'w-/ vta shove s.o. away using some-
thing; Isg niweba'waa; pn wayeba'waad
weba'an mi shove s.t. away using something; Isg
niweba'aan; pn wayeba'ang
webaashi vai be blown away; Isg niwebaash; pn
wayebaashid
webaasin vii be blown away; pn wayebaasing
webin vta throw s.o. away; Isg niwebinaa; pn
wayebinaad
webinan vti throw s.t. away; Isg niwebinaan; pn
wayebinang
webinidiwag /webinidi-/ vai they separate from
each other, they divorce each other; Ipl
niwebinidimin; pn wayebinidijig
webinigan na someone abandoned; pi
webiniganag; dim webinigaans
webinigaade vii be thrown away; prt
wayebinigaadeg; aug webinigaademagad; pn
aug wayebinigaademagak
webinigaazo vai be thrown away; pn
wayebinigaazod
webinige vai throw things away; Isg niwebinige;
prt wayebiniged

wegimaawabid—wiigiwaamaak 
1 1 8
wegimaawabid na-pt councillor, government offi-
cial; pi wegimaawabijig
wegodogwen pr I don't know what inanimate
dubitative, I wonder what inanimate dubitative;
plural wegodogwenan
wegodogwen igo pr whatever it might be
inanimate dubitative
wegonen pr what inanimate interrogative; plural
wegonenan; also awegonen
wegonesh pr what, and what inanimate
interrogative
wegwaagi pc behold!
wemitigoozhi na Frenchman; pi
wemitigoozhiwag; dim wemitigoozhiins
wemitigoozhiimo vai speak French; hg
niwemitigoozhiim; prt wayemitigoozhiimod
Wenabozho na name of aadizookaan character
viewed as culture hero and trickster; also
Nenabozho*
wenda- pv4 really, completely, just so
wendad vii be easy, be cheap; prt wayendak
wendaginde vii be cheap; prt wayendagindeg; aug
wendagindemagad; prt aug
wayendagindemagak
wendaginzo vai be cheap; prt wayendaginzod
wendaabang vii east, where the dawn comes from
conjunct of: ondaaban
wendizi vai be easy, be cheap; prt wayendizid
weniban pc disappeared!, gone!
wenipanad vii be easy, be cheap; prt wayenipanak
wenipanendan vti consider s.t. easy; Isg
niwenipanendaan; prt wayenipanendang
wenipanizi vai be easy; prt wayenipanizid
wenipazh pc at hand, easily
wenipazhi* vta get s.o. easily; Isg niwenipazhi'aa;
prt wayenipazhi'aad
wenipazhitoon vd2 get s.t. easily; Isg
niwenipazhitoon; prt wayenipazhitood
wenji- pv3 from a certain place, for a certain
reason, because changed from o/onji-
wese'an vii be a tornado; prt wayese'ang
wetotwaag ni-pt jello
wewayiiba pc every little while; also wewiiba*
wewaagijiizid ni-pt banana; pi wewaagijiizijig
wewebanaabii vai fish with a hook and line; Isg
niwewebanaabii; prt wayewebanaabiid
wewebaanoweni vai wag one's tail; prt
wayewebaanowenid
wewebikweni vai nod one's head; Isg
niwewebikwen; pn wayewebikwenid
wewebikwetaw vta shake one's head at s.o.; Isg
niwewebikwetawaa; pn
wayewebikwetawaad
wewebizo vai swing; Isg niwewebiz; prt
wayewebizod
wewebizon ni swing; pi wewebizonan; loc
wewebizoning; dim wewebizonens
wewebizoo-apabiwin ni rocking chair; pi
wewebizoo-apabiwinan; loc wewebizoo-
apabiwining; dim wewebizoo-apabiwinens
weweni pc properly, correctly, carefully
wewese' /wewese'w-/ vta fan s.o.; Isg
niwewese'waa; pn wayewese'waad
wewese'idizo vai fan oneself; 7s^niwewese*idiz;
pn wayewese'idizod
wewese'igan ni hand fan; pi wewese'iganan; loc
wewese'iganing; dim wewese'igaans
wewese'ige vai fan things; Isg niwewese'ige; pn
wayewese'iged
wewiib pc in a hurry, quickly, hurry
wewiibendam vai be eager, want to hurry; Isg
niwewiibendam; pn wayewiibendang
wewiibi* vta hurry s.o., hurry making s.o.; Isg
niwewiibi'aa; pn wayewiibi'aad
wewiibim vta tell s.o. to hurry; Isg niwewiibimaa;
pn wayewiibimaad
wewiibingwaange na teal; pi wewiibingwaangeg;
dim wewiibingwaangens
wewiibishkaa vai hurry; Isg niwewiibishkaa; pn
wayewiibishkaad
wewiibitaa vaihurry (in some work or activity);
Isg niwewiibitaa; pn wayewiibitaad
wewiibitoon vti hurry s.t., hurry making s.t.; hg
niwewiibitoon; prt wayewiibitood
wewiibizi vai be in a hurry; hg niwewiibiz; pn
wayewiibizid
wezaawiminagazid na-pt orange (fruit); pi
wezaawiminagizijig
wii- pvl want to, will futureldesideratwe verb prefix
wiibidaakaajiganan ni false teeth plural; also
wiibidaakaanan
wiibidaa-mashkikiiwinini na dentist; pi wiibidaa-
mashkikiiwininiwag
wiibwaa vii become narrow, constrict; pn
waabwaag; aug wiibwaamagad; pn aug
waabwaamagak
wiidabim vta sit with s.o.; Isg niwiidabimaa; pn
waadabimaad
wiidagwazhem vta share a cover with s.o.; Isg
niwiidagwazhemaa; pn waadagwazhemaad
wiidanokiim vta work with s.o.; hg
niwiidanokiimaa; pn waadanokiimaad
wiidige vai marry, be married; hg niwiidige; pn
waadiged
wiidigem vta marry s.o., be married to s.o.; hg
niwiidigemaa; pn waadigemaad
wiidigendiwag /wiidigendi-/ vai they marry each
other, they are married to each other; Ipl
niwiidigendimin; pn waadigendijig
wiidosem vta walk with s.o.; hg niwiidosemaa;
pn waadosemaad
wiidookaw vta help s.o.; hg niwiidookawaa; pn
waadookawaad
wiidookaage vai help people; hg niwiidookaage;
pn waadookaaged
wiidookaazo vai help; hg niwiidookaaz; prt
waadookaazod
wiidookodaadiwag /wiidookodaadi-/ vai they
help each other; Jp/niwiidookodaadimin;pn
waadookodaadijig
wiidoopatn vta eat with s.o.; hg niwiidoopamaa;
prt waadoopamaad
wiidoopange vai eat with people; hg
niwiidoopange; pn waadoopanged
wiigiwaam ni wigwam, lodge; pi wiigiwaaman; loc
wiigiwaaming; dim wiigiwaamens
wiigiwaamaak ni wigwam frame; pi
wiigiwaamaakoon; loc wiigiwaamaakong;
dim wiigiwaamaakoons

119 
wiigiwaamaatig—wiimbwewe
wiigiwaamaatig ni wigwam pole; pI
wiigiwaamaatigoon; loc wiigiwaamaatigong;
dim wiigiwaamaatigoons
wiigiwaamtge vai live in a wigwam; Isg
niwiigiwaamige; prt waagiwaamiged
wiigiwaamike vai make a wigwam; Isg
niwiigiwaamike; prt waagiwaamiked
wiigob na basswood tree; pi wiigobiig
wiigob ni inner bark of basswood; pi wiigobiin; loc
wiigobiing; dim wiigobiins
wiigobaatig na basswood tree; pi wiigobaatigoog;
loc wiigobaatigong; dim wiigobaatigoons
wiigobimizh na basswood tree;/>/wiigobimizhiig;
dim wiigobimixhiins
wiigwaas na birch tree; pi wiigwaasag; loc
wiigwaasing; dim wiigwaasens
wiigwaas ni birch bark; pi wiigwaasan; loc
wiigwaasing; dim wiigwaasens
wiigwaasabakway ni birch bark covering, roll of
birch bark roofing; pi wiigwaasabakwayan
wiigwaasabakwaain na birch bark roof; pi
wiigwaasabakwaanag; loc
wiigwaasabakwaaning
wiigwaasigamig ni birch bark lodge; pi
wiigwaasigamigoon; loc wiigwaasigamigong;
dim wiigwaasigamigoons
wiigwaasi-jiimaan ni birch bark canoe; pi
wiigwaasi-jiimaanan; loc wiigwaasi-
jiimaaning; dim wiigwaasi-jiimanens
wiigwaasikaa mi there are many birches; prt
waagwaasikaag; aug wiigwaasikaamagad; prt
aug waagwaasikaamagak
wiigwaasike vai remove birch bark from the tree;
Isg niwiigwaasike; prt waagwaasiked
wiigwaasi-makak ni birch bark box, birch bark
basket; pi wiigwaasi-makakoon; loc wiigwaasi-
makakong; dim wiigwaasi-makakoons
wiigwaasi-mitig na birch (tree); p/wiigwaasi-
mitigoog; loc wiigwaasi-mitigong; dim
wiigwaasi-mitigoons; also wiigwaasaatig
wiigwaasinaagan ni birch bark dish; pi
wiigwaasinaaganan; loc wiigwaasinaaganing;
dim wiigwaasinaagaans
wiij'anokiim vta work with s.o.; Isg
niwiij'anokiimaa; prt waaj'anokiimaad; also
wiiji-anokiim
wiij'ayaaw vta be with s.o., stay with s.o.; Isg
niwiij'ayaawaa; prt waaj'ayaawaad; also wiiji-
ayaaw
wiiji- pv4 with, in company with
wiijigamigishkaw vta be a neighbor to s.o.; Isg
niwiijigamigishkawaa; prt
waajigamigishkawaad
wiijigim vta be the same age as s.o.; Isg
niwiijigimaa; prt waajigimaad
wiijigindiwag /wiijigindi-/ vai they are the same
age; Ipl niwiijigindimin; prt waajigindijig
wiiji' vta play with s.o.; Isg niwiiji'aa; prt waaji'aad
wiijishimotaw vta dance with s.o.; Isg
niwiijishimotawaa; prt waajishimotawaad
wiijii'iwe vai go with people, accompany people;
Isg niwiijii'iwe; prt waajii'iwed
wiijiindiwag /wiijiindi-/ vai they go with each
other, they accompany each other; Ipl
niwiijiindimin; pn waajiindijig
wiijiiw vta go with s.o., accompany s.o.; Isg
niwiijiiwaa; prt waajiiwaad
wiijiiwaagan na companion, partner; pi
wiijiiwaaganag
wiikaa pc late, seldom, ever
wiikenh na sweet flag; pi wiikenyag
wiikobidaw vta pull (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
niwiikobidawaa; prt waakobidawaad
wiikobidoon vti2 pull s.t.; Isg niwiikobidoon; prt
waakobidood
wiikobijigan ni dresser, chest of drawers; pi
wiikobijiganan; loc wiikobijiganing; dim
wiikobijigaans
wiikobijigaade vii be pulled; prt waakobijigaadeg;
aug wiikobijigaademagad; prt aug
waakobijigaademagak
wiikobijigaazo vai be pulled; pn waakobijigaazod
wiikobijige vai pull things; Isg niwiikobijige; prt
waakobijiged
wiikobizh /wiikobiN-/ vta pull s.o.; Isg
niwiikobinaa; prt waakobinaad
wiikom vta invite s.o. to a feast (especially as part
of a religious ceremony); Isg niwiikomaa; prt
waakomaad
wiikondiwag /wiikondi-/ vai they have a feast; Ipl
niwiikondimin; prt waakondijig
wiikonge vai give a feast, invite people to a feast
(especially as part of a religious ceremony); Isg
niwiikonge; prt waakonged
wiikwa'ibaan ni pump; pi wiikwa'ibaanan; loc
wiikwa'ibaaning; dim wiikwa'ibaanens
wiikwa'ibii vai pump water; Isg niwiikwa'ibii; prt
waakwa'ibiid
wiikwaji'o vai try to get free; Isg niwiikwaji'; prt
waakwaji'od
wiikwajitoon vti2 try to do s.t., try to get free of
s.t.; Isg niwiikwajitoon; pn waakwajitood
wiikwam vta suck on s.o., draw on s.o. with
mouth (e.g., a pipe); Isg niwiikwamaa; prt
waakwamaad
wiikwamo vai suck; Isg niwiikwam; prt
waakwamod
wiikwandan vti suck on s.t., draw on s.t. with
mouth; Isg niwiikwandaan; prt waakwandang
wiikwanjige vai suck on things, draw on things
with mouth; Isg niwiikwanjige; prt
waakwanjiged
wiikwaabiigin vta pull s.o. (as with something
string-like); Isg niwiikwaabiiginaa; prt
waakwaabiiginaad
wiikwaabiiginan vtipuU s.t. (as with something
string-like); Isg niwiikwaabiiginaan; prt
waakwaabiiginang
wiikwegamaa vii be a bay; prt waakwegamaag;
aug wiikwegamaamagad; prt aug
waakwegamaamagak
wiimaashkaa vai detour; Isg niwiimaashkaa; pn
waamaashkaad
wiimbaa vii be hollow; prt waambaag; aug
wiimbaamagad; pn aug waambaamagak
wiimbizi vai be hollow; Isg niwiimbiz; prt
waambizid
wiimbwewe vii give a hollow sound; pn
waambweweg; aug wiimbwewemagad; prt
aug waambwewemagak

wiin—wiisookaw
120
wiin pc contrastive panicle
wiin prhe thirdperson singular personal pronoun, she
third person singular personal pronoun
wiinad vii be dirty; prt waanak
wiinawaa^>r they third person plural personal pronoun
wiinaagamin /wiinaagami-/ ^z'z'be dirty (as a
liquid); prt waanaagamig
wiinaajimo vai tell a dirty story; Isg niwiinaajim;
prt waanaajimod
wiindamaw vta tell s.o. about (s.t.); Isg
niwiindamawaa; prt waandamawaad
wiindamaage vai tell about (s.t.) to people, an-
nounce (s.t.) to people; Isg niwiindamaage;
prt waandamaaged
wiindan uft'name s.t., mention the name of s.t.; Isg
niwiindaan; prt waandang
wiinde vii have a name; prt waandeg; aug
wiindemagad; prt aug waandemagak
wiindigoo na windigo: winter cannibal monster; pi
wiindigoog; dim wiindigoons
wiindigoo-bineshiinh na kingbird; pi wiindigoo-
bineshiinyag
wiindigoowi vai be a windigo; Isg niwiindigoow;
prt waandigoowid
wiineta pr only him thirdperson singular personal
pronoun, only her third person singular personal
pronoun
wiinetawaa pr only them third person plural personal
pronoun
wiingashk in sweet grass; pi wiingashkoon; loc
wiingashkong; dim wiingashkoons
wiinibiigoo na Winnebago; pi wiinibiigoog; dim
wiinibiigoons
wiinichige vai dirty things; Isg niwiinichige; prt
waanichiged
wiinigiizhwe vai speak nastily; 7s£ niwiinigiizhwe;
prt waanigiizhwed
wiini" vta make s.o. dirty; Isg niwiini'aa; prt
waani'aad
wiinijiishkiwagaa vii there is a muddy patch; prt
waanijiishkiwagaag; aug
wiinijiishkiwagaamagad; prt aug
waanijiishkiwagaamagak
wiinin ni fat; loc wiininong
wiinininjii vai have a dirty hand; Isg niwiinininjii;
pn waanininjiid
wiinino vai be fat; Isg niwiinin; pn waaninod
wiinishagaandibaan ni dandruff
wiinishagaandibe vai have a dirty scalp; Isg
niwiinishagaandibe; prt waanishagaandibed
wiinitam pr his turn thirdperson singular personal
pronoun, her turn third person singular personal
pronoun
wiinitamawaa pr their turn third person plural
personal pronoun
wiinitoon vti2 dirty s.t.; Isg niwiinitoon; prt
waanitood
wiinizi vai be dirty; lsgn(v/\'m\i;prt waanizid
wiinizik na yellow birch; pi wiinizikoog; dim
wiinizikoons
wiinizisimaani-zagaakwa'igan ni hairpin; pi
wiinizisimaani-zagaakwa'iganan; dim
wiinizisimaani-zagaakwa'igaans
wiinzh /wiinN-/ vta name s.o., mention the name
of s.o., give s.o. a name; Isg niwiinaa; prt
waanaad
wiinzo vai have a name; Isg niwiinz; prt waanzod
wiipem vta sleep with s.o.; Isg niwiipemaa; prt
waapemaad
wiipendan vti sleep with s.t.; Isg niwiipendaan; pn
waapendang
wiipemaawaso vai sleep with children protec-
tively; Isg niwiipemaawas; prt
waapemaawasod
wiipendiwag /wiipendi-/ vai they sleep with each
other; Ipl niwiipendimin; prt waapendijig
wiisagan vii be bitter; prt waasagang; also
wiisagaa
wiisagaagamin /wiisagaagami-/ vii be bitter (as a
liquid); prt waasagaagamig
wiisagendam vai suffer pain; Isg niwiisagendam;
prt waasagendang
wiisagigonewe vai have a sore throat; Isg
niwiisagigonewe; prt waasagigonewed
wiisagi-jiisens ni radish; pi wiisagi-jiisensan; loc
wiisagi-jiisensing
wiisagine vai be in pain; Isg niwiisagine; prt
waasagined
wiisagipogozi vai taste bitter; prt waasagipogozid
wiisagipogwad vii taste bitter; prt waasagipogwak
wiisagishin vai get hurt; Isg niwiisagishin; prt
waasagishing
wiisagishkaw vta hurt s.o. with foot or body; Isg
niwiisagishkawaa; prt waasagishkawaad
wiisagizi vai be bitter; prt waasagizid
wiisaakodewikwe na woman of mixed ancestry,
Metis woman; pi wiisaakodewikweg
wiisaakodewinini na person of mixed ancestry,
Metis; pi wiisaakodewininiwag
wiishkoban vii be sweet; pn waashkobang
wiishkobaaboo ni maple sap; loc
wiishkobaaboong
wiishkobaagamin /wiishkobaagami-/ vii be sweet
(as a liquid); prr waashkobaagamig
wiishkobi- pv4 sweet
wiishkobi-bakwezhigan na sweet roll, pastry,
cake; pi wiishkobi-bakwezhiganag; loc
wiishkobi-bakwezhiganing; dim wiishkobi-
bakwezhigaans
wiishkobi-jiis ni sugar beet; pi wiishkobi-jiisan
wiishkobipogozi vai taste sweet; prt
waashkobipogozid
wiishkobipogwad vii taste sweet; prt
waashkobipogwak
wiishkobizi vai be sweet; prt waashkobizid
wiisini vai ear, lsgmvtikm;prt waasinid
wiisiniwin ni food; pi wiisiniwinan; loc
wiisiniwining
wiisinii-adaawewigamig ni grocery store; pi
wiisinii-adaawewigamigoon; loc wiisinii-
adaawewigamigong; dim wiisinii-
adaawewigamigoons
wiisiniiwigamig ni restaurant, cafe; pi
wiisiniiwigamigoon; loc wiisiniiwigamigong;
dim wiisiniiwigamigoons
wiisookaw vta associate with s.o.; Isg
niwiisookawaa; prt waasookawaad

121 
wi iwakwaan—zaka'
wiiwakwaan m'hat; pi wiiwakwaanan; loc
wi iwakwaan ing; dim wiiwakwaanens
wiiwegin vta wrap s,o. (as or as with something
sheet-like); /s^niwiiweginaa; prt
waaweginaad
wiiweginan vti wrap s.t. (as or as with something
sheet-like); Isg niwiiweginaan; prt
waaweginang
wiiweginigan ni wrapped package; pi
wiiweginiganan; loc wiiweginigan ing; dim
wiiweginigaans
wiiyagasenh ni dust, dirt; pi wiiyagasenyan
wiiyaas ni meat; loc wiiyaasing; dim wiiyaasens
wiiyaas-adaawewigamig ni meat market; pi
wiiyaas-adaawewigamigoon; loc wiiyaas-
ad aa we wi garni gong
wiiyaasaaboo ni-broth; loc wiiyaasaaboong
wiiyaasi-dakoniwewintni na game warden,
conservation officer; p/wiiyaasi-
dakon iwewi n in i wag
wiiyaasi-naboob ni stew; loc wiiyaasi-naboobiing
wiizhaam vta ask s.o. along, urge s.o. to come; Isg
niwiizhaamaa; prt waazhaamaad
z
zaga' /zaga'w-/ vta fasten s.o. together; Isg
inzaga'waa; prt zega'waad
zaga'an vti fasten s.t. together; Isg inzaga'aan; prt
zega'ang
zaga'igan ni nail; pi zaga'iganan; loc zaga'iganing;
dim zaga'igaans
zagakim vta tell s.o. to settle down; Isg
inzagakimaa; prt zegakimaad
zagakin vta put s.o. away, tidy s.o.; Isg
inzagakinaa; prt zegakinaad
zagakinan vti put s.t. away, tidy s.t.; Isg
inzagakinaan; prt zegakinang
zagakinigaade vii be put away, be tidied; prt
zegakinigaadeg; aug zagakinigaademagad;
prt aug zegakinigaademagak
zagakinigaazo vai be put away, be tidied; prt
zegakinigaazod
zagakinige vai put things away, tidy things; Isg
inzagakinige; pit zegakiniged
zagakishim vta put s.o. in order; Isg
inzagakishimaa; prt zegakishimaad
zagakisidoon vtiZ put s.t. in order; Isg
inzagakisidoon: prt zegakisidood
zagakisijige vti put 'things in order; Isg
inzagakisijige; prt zegakisijiged
zagapide vii be tied on, be towed; prt zegapideg;
aug zagapidemagad; prt aug zegapidemagak
zagapidoon vti2 tie s.t. on, tow s.t.; hg
inzagapidoon; prt zegapidood
zagapijigan ni trailer; pi zagapijiganan; he
zagapijiganing; dim zagapijigaans
zagapizh /zagapiN-/ vta tie s.o. on, tow s.o.; Isg
inzagapinaa; prt zegapinaad
zagapizo vai be tied on, be towed; Isg inzagapiz;
prt zegapizod
zagaswaa vai smoke (tobacco); Isg inzagaswaa;
prt zegaswaad
zagaswaadan vti smoke s.t. (e.g., kinnickinnick);
Isg inzagaswaadaan; prt zegaswaadang
zagaswaazh /zagaswaaN-/ vta smoke s.o. (e.g.,
tobacco); Isg inzagaswaanaa; prt
zegaswaanaad
zagaswe' vta give a smoke to s.o., share a smoke
with s.o. (especially a pipe in a ceremony); Isg
inzagaswe'aa; prt zegaswe'aad
zagaswe'idiwag /zagaswe'idi-/ vai they have a
council meeting; Ipl inzagaswe'idimin; prt
zegaswe'idijig
zagaswe'idiiwinini na councillor; pi
zagaswe'idiiwininiwag
zagaswe'iwe vai give a ceremony, convene a coun-
cil; Isg inzagaswe'iwe; prt zegaswe'iwed
zagataagan na tinder, punk; />/ zagataaganag; loc
zagataaganing
zagaakwa' /zagaakwa'w-/ vta fasten s.o., pin s.o.,
button s.o. up; Isg inzagaakwa'waa; prt
zegaakwa'waad
zagaakwa'an vti fasten s.t., pin s.t.; Isg
inzagaakwa'aan; prt zegaakwa'ang
zagaakwa'igan ni pin, safety pin; pi
zagaakwa'iganan; loc zagaakwa'iganing; dim
zagaakwa'igaans
zagaakwa'igaade vii be fastened, be pinned; prt
zegaakwa'igaadeg; aug
zagaakwa'igaademagad; prt aug
zegaakwa'igaademagak
zagaakwa'igaazo vai be fastened, be pinned; prt
zegaakwa'igaazod
zagaakwa'ige vai fasten things, pin things; Isg
inzagaakwa'ige; prt zegaakwa'iged
zagaakwa'odizo vai button up oneself; Isg
inzagaakwa'odiz; prt zegaakwa'odizod
zagaakwa'on na brooch, pin; pi zagaakwa'onag;
loc zagaakwa'oning; dim zagaakwa'onens
zagaakwajin vai get snagged on a limb; Isg
inzagaakwajin; prt zegaakwajing
zagaakwaa vii be dense woods; pn zegaakwaag;
aug zagaakwaamagad; pn aug
zegaakwaamagak
zagidoonebijigan ni bridle, bit; pi
zagidoonebijiganan; loc zagidoonebijiganing;
dim zagidoonebijigaans
zagime na mosquito; pi zagimeg; dim zagimens
zagimekaa vii there are many mosquitoes; prt
zegimekaag; aug zagimekaamagad; prt aug
zegimekaamagak
zagimewayaan na mosquito net; pi
zagimewayaanag; loc zagimewayaaning; dim
zagimewayaanens
zagininjiin vta shake hands with s.o.; Isg
inzagininjiinaa; prt zegininjiinaad
zagininjiinidiwag /zagininjiinidi-/ vai they shake
hands with each other; Ipl inzagininjiinidimin;
prt zegininjiinidijig
zaka' /zaka'w-/ vta set s.o. on fire, light s.o. (e.g., a
pipe); Isg inzaka'waa; prt zeka'waad

zaka'amaw—zaagidenaniwetaw 
122
zaka'amaw vta set (s.t.) on fire for s.o., light (s.t.)
for s.o.; Isg inzaka'amawaa; prt
zeka'amawaad
zaka'an vti set s.t. on fire, light s.t.; Isg
inzaka'aan; prt zeka'ang
zaka'igan ni lighter; pi zaka'iganan; loc
zaka'iganing; dim zaka'igaans
zaka'ipwaagane vai light a pipe; Isg
inzaka'ipwaagane; prt zeka'ipwaaganed
zaka'o vai use a cane; Isg inzaka'; pn zeka'od
zaka'on ni cane; pi zaka'onan; loc zaka'oning; dim
zaka'onens
zakaasigan ni flashlight; pi zakaasiganan; loc
zakaasiganing; dim zakaasigaans
zakide vii burn; pn zekideg; aug zakidemagad;
pn aug zekidemagak
zakiz /zakizw-/ vta burn s.o., light s.o.; Isg
inzakizwaa; pn zekizwaad
zakizan wiburn s.t., light s.t.; Isg inzakizaan; pn
zekizang
zakizige vai burn things, light things; Isg
inzakizige; pn zekiziged
zakizo vai burn, have a fire at one's place; Isg
inzakiz; prt zekizod
zanagad vii be difficult, be hard (to manage); pn
zenagak
zanagendam vai2 consider things hard, consider
things difficult; Isg inzanagendam; prt
zenagendang
zanagendan vti consider s.t. hard, consider s.t.
difficult; Isg inzanagendaan; prt zenagendang
zanagenim vta consider s.o. hard, consider s.o.
difficult; Isg inzanagenimaa; pn
zenagenimaad
zanagi' vta make it difficult for s.o.; Isg
inzanagi'aa; pn zenagi'aad
zanagizi vai be difficult; Isg inzanagiz; pn
zenagizid
zasag= < zag=
zasak- < zak-
zasakwaa vii there is a heavy frost; pn zesakwaag
zasaswe < zaswe=
zasiko= < ziko=
zasiiko= < ziko-
zaswebidoon vti2 scatter s.t. with hands; Isg
inzaswebidoon; pn zeswebidood
zaswebizh /zaswebiN-/ vta scatter s.o. with hands;
Isg inzaswebinaa; prt zeswebinaad
zaswebiiga'andaw vta splash s.o.; Isg
inzaswebiiga'andawaa; prt
zeswebiiga'andawaad
zaswe'an vti scatter s.t. using something; Isg
inzaswe'aan; pn zeswe'ang
zasweshkan vti scatter s.t. with foot or body; Isg
inzasweshkaan; pn zesweshkang
zasweshkaw vta scatter s.o. with foot or body; Isg
inzasweshkawaa; pn zesweshkawaad
zazagaa vii there is dense underbrush; pn
zezagaag; aug zazagaamagad; prt aug
zezagaamagak
zazaagizi vai be stingy; Isg inzazaagiz; pn
zezaagizid
zazaanag= < zanag=
zazegaa pc dressed up, decorated
zazegaa'o vai dress up; Isg inzazegaa'; prt
zezegaa'od
zazegaa-ikwe na dressed-up woman; pi zazegaa-
ikwewag; dim zazegaa-ikwens
zazegaa-inini na dressed-up man; pi zazegaa-
ininiwag; dim zazegaa-ininiins
zaziikizi vai be the eldest (of siblings); Isg
inzaziikiz; pn zeziikizid
zaaga'am vai2 go out, exit, go to the toilet; Isg
inzaaga'am; pn zayaaga'ang
zaaga'amoowigamig ni toilet, outhouse, privy; pi
zaaga'amoowigamigoon; loc
zaaga'amoowigamigong; dim
zaaga'amoowigamigoons
zaaga'igan ni lake; pi zaaga'iganiin; loc
zaaga'iganiing; dim zaaga'igaans
zaagajiwe vai come out over a hill; Isg
inzaagajiwe; prt zayaagajiwed
zaagakii vai sprout; pn zayaagakiid
zaagakii vii sprout; pn zayaagakiig; aug
zaagakiimagad; prt aug zayaagakiimagak
zaagaakoshin vai lie sticking out (as something
stick- or wood-like); Isg inzaagaakoshin; prt
zayaagaakoshing
zaagaakosin vii lie sticking out (as something
stick- or wood-like); prt zayaagaakosing
zaagewe vai come suddenly into view as from
around a corner; Isg inzaagewe; prt
zayaagewed
zaagewebatoo vai run suddenly into view; Isg
inzaagewebatoo; prt zayaagewebatood
zaagewebide vii speed suddenly into view, drive
suddenly into view; prt zayaagewebideg; aug
zaagewebidemagad; pn aug
zayaagewebidemagak
zaagewebizo vai speed suddenly into view, drive
suddenly into view; Isg inzaagewebiz; pn
zayaagewebizod
zaagewe'o vai paddle suddenly into view; Isg
inzaagewe'; prt zayaagewe'od
zaagewekwazhiwe vai paddle suddenly into view,
swim as a fish suddenly into view; Isg
inzaagewekwazhiwe; pn
zayaagewekwazhiwed
zaagibagaa vii leaves bud; prt zayaagibagaag; aug
zaagibagaamagad; pn aug
zayaagibagaamagak
zaagibagaa-giizis na May
zaagichigaade vii be loved, be treasured, be held
stingily; prt zayaagichigaadeg; aug
zaagichigaademagad; pn aug
zayaagichigaademagak
zaagichigaazo vai be loved, be treasured, be held
stingily; pn zayaagichigaazod
zaagidawaa vii flow into a lake, be an inlet; pn
zayaagidawaag; aug zaagidawaamagad; pn
aug zayaagidawaamagak
zaagidaawanidiwag /zaagidaawanidi-/ vai they go
out in a group; Ipl inzaagidaawanidimin; prt
zayaagidaawanidijig
zaagidenaniweni vai stick out one's tongue; Isg
inzaagidenaniwen; pn zayaagidenaniwenid
zaagidenaniwetaw vta stick out one's tongue at
s.o.; Isg inzaagidenaniwetawaa; pn
zayaagidenaniwetawaad

123 
zaagidin—zesegwaabide'o
zaagidin vta put s.o. out, evict s.o.; hg
inzaagidinaa; prt zayaagidinaad
zaagidinan vti put s.t. out; Isg inzaagidinaan; prt
zayaagidinang
zaagidinidiwag /zaagidinidi-/ vai they are let out
together (as from school or a meeting); prt
zayaagidinidijig
zaagidoode vai crawl out; hg inzaagidoode; prt
zayaagidooded
zaagigi vai sprout, grow out; prt zayaagigid
zaagigin vii sprout, grow out; prt zayaagiging
zaagi* vta love s.o., Treasure s.o.; Isg inzaagi'aa; prt
zayaagi'aad
zaagi'idiwag /zaagi'idi-/ vai they love each other;
Ifl inzaagi'idimin; prt zayaagi'idijig
zaagijinaazha* /zaagijinaazha'w-/ vta tell s.o. to
go outside; Isg inzaagijinaazha'waa; fin
zayaagijinaazhai'waad
zaagijinizhikaw vta chase s.o. outside; hg
inzaagijinizhikawaa; prt
zayaagijinizhikawaad
zaagijiwan vii flow out; prt zayaagijiwang
zaagijiwebin vta throw s.o. outside; Isg
inzaagijiwebinaa; prt zayaagijiwebinaad
zaagijiwebinan vti throw s.t. outside; Isg
inzaagijiwebinaan; prt zayaagijiwebinang
zaagijiwebinigaade vii be thrown outside; prt
zayaagijiwebinigaadeg; aug
zaagijiwebinigaademagad; pn aug
zayaagijiwebinigaademagak
zaagijiwebinige vai throw things outside; hg
inzaagijiwebinige; prt zayaagijiwebiniged
zaagikweni vai stick out one's head; hg
inzaagikwen; pn zayaagikwenid
zaagitoon vu2 love s.t., treasure s.t.; Isg
inzaagitoon; pn zayaagitood
zaagiziba' vta run out with s.o.; hg
inzaagiziba'aa; prt zayaagiziba'aad
zaagiziba'idiwag /zaagiziba'idi-/ vai they run out
together; I pi inzaagiziba'idimin; pn
zayaagiziba'idijig
zaagizibatoo vai run out; Isg inzaagizibatoo; pn
zayaagizibatood
zaagizibatwaadan vti run out with s.t.; hg
inzaagizibatwaadaan; pn
zayaagizibatwaadang
zaagizibatwaazh /zaagizibatwaaN-/ vta run out
with s.o.; hg inzaagizibatwaanaa; pn
zayaagizibatwaanaad
zaagizi* vta take s.o. out, make s.o. go out; hg
inzaagizi'aa; prt zayaagizi'aad
zaagizitaw vta take (s.t.) out for s.o.; hg
inzaagizitawaa; pn zayaagizitawaad
zaagizitoon vti2 take s.t. out; Isg inzaagizitoon;
pn zayaagizitood
zaagiing pc at the inlet
zaasakokwaadan vti fry s.t.; Isg
inzaasakokwaadaan; prt zayaasakokwaadang
zaasakokwaade vii be fried; prt
zayaasakokwaadeg; aug
zaasakokwaademagad; pn aug
zayaasakokwaademagak
zaasakokwaan na fry bread; pi zaasakokwaanag;
he zaasakokwaaning; dim zaasakokwaanens
zaasakokwaazh /zaasakokwaaN-/ vta fry s.o.; hg
inzaasakokwaanaa; prt zayaasakokwaanaad
zaasakokwaazo vai be fried; pn
zayaasakokwaazod
zaasakokwe vai fry; hg inzaasakokwe; pn
zayaasakokwed
zaasaag= < zaag=
zaasaakwe vai give war whoops, whoop; hg
inzaasaakwe; pn zayaasaakwed
zaasigan na cracklings; pi zaasiganag
zaasijiwan vii flow with a ripple; pn zayaasijiwang
zaasoong= < zoong=
zaatemaagozi vai smell rancid; pn
zayaatemaagozid
zaatemaagwad vii smell rancid; pn
zayaatemaagwak
zaatepogozi vai taste rancid; pn zayaatepogozid
zaatepogwad vii taste rancid; pn zayaatepogwak
zaateshin vai turn rancid; pn zayaateshing
zaatesin vii turn rancid; pn zayaatesing
zegaabandam vai2 have a scary dream; hg
inzegaabandam; pn zayegaabandang
zegaanakwad vii there are storm clouds; pn
zayegaanakwak
zegaatese vii be a scary movie; prt zayegaateseg;
aug zegaatesemagad; pn aug
zayegaatesemagak
zegendam vai2 be nervous, be fearful; hg
inzegendam; pn zayegendang
zegendaagozi vai be considered scary, be con-
sidered dangerous; Isg inzegendaagoz; pn
zayegendaagozid
zegendaagwad vii be considered scary, be con-
sidered dangerous; prt zayegendaagwak
zegibanwaanishiinh na cedar waxwing; pi
zegibanwaanishiinyag
zegigaadeshin vai sprain one's leg; hg
inzegigaadeshin; pn zayegigaadeshing
zegi* vta scare s.o., frighten s.o.; hg inzegi'aa; prt
zayegi'aad
zegim vta intimidate s.o. by speech; Isg
inzegimaa; pn zayegimaad
zeginaagozi vai look scary; hg inzeginaagoz; pn
zayeginaagozid
zeginaagwad vii look scary; pn zayeginaagwak
zegingwashi vai have a nightmare; Isg
inzegingwash; pn zayegingwashid
zeginikeshin vai sprain one's arm; hg
inzeginikeshin; pn zayeginikeshing
zegizi vai be scared, be afraid; hg inzegiz; prt
zayegizid
zegizideshin vai sprain one's foot; hg
inzegizideshin; pn zayegizideshing
zegwewe vii rumble; pn zayegweweg; aug
zegwewemagad; pn aug zayegwewemagak
zenibaanh na ribbon, silk; pi zenibaanyag; loc
zenibaanying; dim zenibaans
zenibaawegin ni silk, satin; pi zenibaaweginoon;
loc zenibaaweginong; dim zenibaaweginoons
zesab na nettle; pi zesabiig; loc zesabiing
zeseg= < zeg=
zesegwaabide'o vai pick one's teeth; hg
inzesegwaabide'; pn zayesegwaabide'od

zesegwaabide'on—zhaagwaadad 
124
zesegwaabide'on ni toothpick; pi
zesegwaabide'onan; loc zesegwaabide'oning;
dim zesegwaabide'onens
zhagashkaandawe iia flying squirrel; pi
zhagashkaandaweg; dim
zhagashkaandawens
zhagashkitaa vai bend down; hg inzhagashkitaa;
pn zhegashkitaad
zhakamo vai put (something) in one's mouth; hg
inzhakam; frt zhekamod
zhakamodaw vta spoon feed s.o.; Isg
inzhakamodawaa; prl zhekamodawaad
zhakaa vii be damp; pn zhekaag; aug
zhakaamagad; prt aug zhekaamagak
zhakaagonagaa vii there is soft snow; pn
zhekaagonagaag; aug zhakaagonagaamagad;
prt aug zhekaagonagaamagak
zhakipon /zhakipo-/ vii there is heavy wet snow
falling; pn zhekipog
zhakizi vai be damp; pn zhekizid
zhakiigad vii be damp (as something sheet-like);
pn zhekiigak
zhakiigizi vai be damp (as something sheet-like);
pn zhekiigizid
zhashagi na blue heron; pi zhashagiwag; dim
zhashagiins
zhashingade= < zhingade=
zhawendaagozi vai be blessed, be pitied, be fortu-
nate; hg inzhawendaagoz; pn
zhewendaagozid
zhawenim vta bless s.o., pity s.o.; hg
inzhawenimaa; pn zhewenimaad
zhawenjige vai be merciful, be kind-hearted, have
pity; Isg inzhawenjige; prt zhewenjiged
zhawimin in grape; pi zhawiminan; also zhoomin
zhayiigwa pc now, already old-fashioned
zhazhiibitam vai2 be stubborn, be disobedient;
hg inzhazhiibitam; pn zhezhiibitang
zhaabobatoo vai run through; hg
inzhaabobatoo; prt zhayaabobatood
zhaabobii vii be saturated; prt zhayaabobiig; aug
zhaabobiimagad; prt aug zhayaabobiimagak
zhaabobiiginan vti strain s.t.; hg
inzhaabobiiginaan; pn zhayaabobiiginang
zhaabobiiginigan m strainer; pi
zhaabobiiginiganan; loc zhaabobiiginiganing;
dim zhaabobiiginigaans
zhaabokaawizi vai have diarrhea; hg
inzhaabokaawiz; prt zhayaabokaawizid
zhaabon vta put s.o. through; hg inzhaabonaa;
pn zhayaabonaad
zhaabonan vti put s.t. through; hg inzhaabonaan;
prt zhayaabonang
zhaabonigan ni needle; pi zhaaboniganan; loc
zhaaboniganing; dim zhaabonigaans
zhaabose vii go through, pass through; pn
zhayaaboseg; aug zhaabosemagad; pn aug
zhayaabosemagak
zhaaboshkaachigan ni sifter; pi
zhaaboshkaachiganan; loc
zhaaboshkaachiganing; dim
zhaaboshkaachigaans
zhaaboshkaachige vai sift things; hg
inzhaaboshkaachige; prt
zhayaaboshkaachiged
zhaaboshkaas /zhaaboshkaasw-/ vta sift s.o.; hg
inzhaaboshkaaswaa; prt
zhayaaboshkaaswaad
zhaaboshkaatoon vti2 sift s.t.; hg
inzhaaboshkaatoon; prt zhayaaboshkaatood
zhaabowe vai sing an accompaniment (of
women); hg inzhaabowe; pn zhayaabowed
zhaabozigan ni laxative; pi zhaaboziganan; loc
zhaaboziganing
zhaaboomin na gooseberry; pi zhaaboominag;
dim zhaaboominens
zhaaboominagaawanzh na gooseberry bush; pi
zhaaboominagaawanzhiig; loc
zhaaboominagaawanzhiing; dim
zhaaboominagaawanzhiins
zhaaboondawaan ni long lodge with doors at both
ends; pi zhaaboondawaanan; loc
zhaaboondawaaning; dim
zhaaboondawaanens
zhaabwayi'ii pc through it
zhaabwaabam vta see through s.o.; hg
inzhaabwaabamaa; prt zhayaabwaabamaad
zhaabwaabandan vti see through s.t.; hg
inzhaabwaabandaan: pn
zhayaabwaabandang
zhaabwaakizigan ni x-ray plate; pi
zhaabwaakiziganan
zhaabwaakizo vai get an x-ray; hg
inzhaabwaakiz; pn zhayaabwaakizod
zhaabwii vai go through, pass through, survive; hg
inzhaabwii; prt zhayaabwiid
zhaaganaash na Englishman; pi zhaaganaashag;
also zhaaganaashi
zhaaganaashiimo vai speak English; hg
inzhaaganaashiim; prt zhayaaganaashiimod
zhaaganaashiimotaw vta speak English to s.o.; hg
inzhaaganaashiimotawaa; pn
zhayaaganaashiimotawaad
Zhaaganaashiiwaki ni Canada; loc
Zhaaganaashiiwakiing
zhaaganaashiiwibii'amaw vta write in English to
s.o.; hg inzhaaganaashiiwibii'amawaa; pn
zhayaaganaashiiwibii'amawaad
zhaaganaashiiwibii'an vti write s.t. in English; Isg
inzhaaganaashiiwibii'aan; pn
zhayaaganaashiiwibii'ang
zhaaganaashiiwibii'ige vai write in English; hg
inzhaaganaashiiwibii'ige; pn
zhayaaganaashiiwibii'iged
zhaagode'e vai be cowardly; hg inzhaagode'e; pn
zhayaagode'ed
zhaagoodenim vta think s.o. is inadequate; hg
inzhaagoodenimaa; prt zhayaagoodenimaad
zhaagooji' vta defeat s.o., overcome s.o.; hg
inzhaagooji'aa; pn zhayaagooji'aad
zhaagooji'iwe vai defeat people, overcome people;
hg inzhaagooji'iwe; pn zhayaagooji'iwed
zhaagoojitoon vti2 defeat s.t., overcome s.t.; hg
inzhaagoojitoon; prt zhayaagoojitood
zhaagoozom vta defeat s.o. in speech, overcome
s.o. with speech; Isg inzhaagoozomaa; pn
zhayaagoozomaad
zhaagwaadad vii be weak in power, be ineffective;
pn zhayaagwaadak

125 
zhaagwaadizi—zhigweyaabandan
zhaagwaadizi vai be weak in power, be ineffective;
hg inzhaagwaadiz; fn zhayaagwaadizid
zhaagwaagamin /zhaagwaagami-/ vii be weak (as
a liquid); prt zhayaagwaagamig
zhaagwendan vti consider s.t. weak; hg
inzhaagwendaan; prt zhayaagwendang
zhaagwenim via consider s.o. weak, have doubts
about s.o.; Isg inzhaagwenimaa; prt
zhayaagwenimaad
zhaagwenimo vai lack self-confidence, be intro-
verted; Isg inzhaagwenim; pn
zhayaagweniniod
zhaagwiiwii vai be weak in muscular strength; hg
inzhaagwiiwii; prt zhayaagwiiwiid
zhaangaching f c nine times
zhaangachinoon /zhaangachin-/ vii they are nine;
prt zhayaangachingin
zhaangachiwag /zlfiaangachi-/ vai they are nine;
I pi inzhaangachimin; prt zhayaangachijig
zhaangasimidana nm ninety
zhaangaso- pv4 nine
zhaangaso-anamai'e-giizhik pc nine weeks
zhaangaso-biboon pc nine years
zhaangaso-biboortagad vii be nine years; prt
zhayaangaso-biboonagak
zhaangaso-bibooriagizi vai be nine years old; Isg
inzhaangaso-biboonagiz; prt zhayaangaso-
biboonagizid
zhaangaso-diba'igan pc nine hours, nine miles
zhaangaso-diba'iganed vii be nine o'clock; prt
zhayaangaso-diba'iganek
zhaangaso-diba'igaans pc nine minutes, nine acres
zhaangaso-giizhik pc nine days
zhaangaso-giizis pc nine months
zhaangasogon pc nine days
zhaangasogonagad vii be nine days; prt
zhayaangasogonagak
zhaangasogonagixi vai be the ninth day of the
month, be nine days old; prt
zhayaangasogonagizid
zhaangasoninj pc nine inches
zhaangasosagoons nm nine thousand
zhaangasozid pc nine feet
zhaangasoobii'igan na nine (card); pi
zhaangasoobi i'iganag
zhaangasooshkin pc nine bags
zhaangaswaabik ;n nine dollars
zhaangaswaak nm nine hundred
zhaangaswewaan pc nine sets, nine pairs
zhaangaswi nm nine
zhaangweshi na mink; pi zhaangweshiwag; dim
zhaangweshiins
zhaangweshiwayaian na mink hide; pi
zhaangweshiwayaanag; dim
zhaangweshiwayaanens
zhaashaabw= < zhaabw=
zhaashaaginizide vai be barefoot; hg
inzhaashaagin izide; pn zhayaashaaginizided
zhaashaagw= < zhaagw=
zhaashaagwam via chew s.o.; hg
inzhaashaagwamaa; prt
zhayaashaagwamaad
zhaashaagwamikiwe vai chew gum; Isg
inzhaashaagwamikiwe; pn
zhayaashaagwamikiwed
zhaashaagwandan vti chew s.t.; hg
inzhaashaagwandaan; prt
zhayaashaagwandang
zhaashaagwanjige vai chew things; Isg
inzhaashaagwanjige; pn
zhayaashaagwanjiged
zhaashaawanibiisens na purple martin; pi
zhaashaawanibiisensag
zhaashiing= < zhiing=
zhaawan pc south
zhaawani-noodin ni south wind
zhaawanong pc in the south, to the south
zhaawaabookaadeg bipakoombens ni pickle; pi
zhaawaabookaadegin bipakoombensan
zhebaa pc this morning (just past)
zhede na pelican; pi zhedeg; dim zhedens
zhegon vta stick s.o. in a tight place; hg
inzhegonaa; pn zhayegonaad
zhegonan vti stick s.t. in a tight place; hg
inzhegonaan; prt zhayegonang
zhegoshim vta put s.o. in a tight place; hg
inzhegoshimaa; prt zhayegoshimaad
zhegoshin vai lie in a tight place; hg inzhegoshin;
prt zhayegoshing
zhegosidoon vtiZ put s.t. in a tight place; hg
inzhegosidoon; prt zhayegosidood
zhegosin vii lie in a tight place; prt zhayegosing
zhegoode vai crawl in a tight place; hg
inzhegoode; prt zhayegoodeg
zhezhaangaswi nm nine each
zhigagowe vai vomit; hg inzhigagowe; prt
zhegagowed
zhigajibii* vta be tired of waiting for s.o.; hg
inzhigajibii'aa; prt zhegajibii'aad
zhigajibii'o vai be tired of waiting; hg
inzhigajibii'; pn zhegajibii'od
zhigajibiitoon vti2 be tired of waiting for s.t.; Isg
inzhigajibiitoon; pn zhegajibiitood
zhigajii vai be tired, be impatient; hg inzhigajii;
prt zhegajiid
zhigaag na skunk; pi zhigaagwag; dim
zhigaagoons
zhigaagawanzh na onion; pi zhigaagawanzhiig;
loc zhigaagawanzhiing; dim
zhigaagawanzhiins
zhigidan vti urinate on s.t.; Isg inzhigidaan; prt
zhegidang
zhigingwaam vai wet the bed; hg
inzhigingwaam; pn zhegingwaang
zhiginidizo vai urinate on oneself; hg inzhiginidiz;
prt zheginidizod
zhigizh /zhigiN-/ vta urinate on s.o.; hg
inzhiginaa; prt zheginaad
zhigwa pc now, at this time; also azhigwa, zhigo
zhigwameg na dogfish; pi zhigwamegwag; dim
zhigwamegoons
zhigwaajiganaak ni tool for extracting marrow
from bones; pi zhigwaajiganaakoon
zhigwaajige vai extract marrow from bones; hg
inzhigwaajige; pn zhegwaajiged
zhigweyaabam vta aim at s.o.; hg
inzhigweyaabamaa; prt zhegweyaabamaad
zhigweyaabandan vti aim at s.t.; hg
inzhigweyaabandaan; prt
zhegweyaabandang

zhigweyaabi—zhiibiigishkaa 
126
zhigweyaabi vai aim sights; Isg inzhigweyaab; prt
zhegweyaabid
zhimaagan ni spear, lance; pi zhimaaganan; loc
zhimaaganing; dim zhimaagaans
zhimaaganish na soldier, jack (card);p/
zhimaaganishag; dim zhimaaganishens
zhimaaganishii-aakoziiwigamig ni veteran's hos-
pital; pi zhimaaganishii-aakoziiwigamigoon;
loc zhimaaganishii-aakoziiwigamigong; dim
zhimaaganishii-aakoziiwigamigoons
zhimaaganishii-ogimaa na military officer; pi
zhimaaganishii-ogimaag
zhimaaganishiiwigamig in veteran's home; pi
zhimaaganishiiwigamigoon; loc
zhimaaganishiiwigamigong
zhinawa'oojigan ni small round bell, sleigh bell,
dance bell; pi zhinawa'oojiganan; loc
zhinawa'oojiganing; dim zhinawa'oojigaans
zhingaden via spread s.o. out; Isg inzhingadenaa;
prt zhengadenaad
zhingadenan vti spread s.t. out; Isg
inzhingadenaan; prt zhengadenang
zhingadeshim vta lay s.o. spread out; Isg
inzhingadeshimaa; prt zhengadeshimaad
zhingadeshin vai lie spread out; Isg
inzhingadeshin; prt zhengadeshing
zhingadesidoon vti2 lay s.t. spread out; Isg
inzhingadesidoon; prt zhengadesidood
zhingadesin mi lie spread out; prt zhengadesing
zhingibis na grebe locally called hell diver; boil,
carbuncle;/)/zhingibisag; dim zhingibisens
zhingishin vai\ie down; Isginzhingishin;prt
zhengishing
zhingob na balsam fir; pi zhingobiig; he
zhingobiing; dim zhingobiins
zhingobaaboo ni beer; loc zhingobaaboong
zhingobaandag na fir bough; pi
zhingobaandagoog; loc zhingobaandagong;
dim zhingobaandagoons
zhingos na weasel; pi zhingosag; dim zhingosens
zhingosiwayaan na weasel skin; pi
zhingosiwayaanag; loc zhingosiwayaaning;
dim zhingosiwayaanens
zhingwaak na white pine; pi zhingwaakwag; loc
zhingwaakong; dim zhingwaakoons
zhingwaakwaandag na pine bough; pi
zhingwaakwaandagoog; loc
zhingwaakwaandagong; dim
zhingwaakwaandagoons
zhinoodaagan ni net cord; pi zhinoodaaganan;
dim zhinoodaagaans
zhishigagowe vai keep vomiting; Isg
inzhishigagowe; pn zheshigagowed
zhishigobidoon vti2 crush s.t. with hands; Isg
inzhishigobidoon; pn zheshigobidood
zhishigobizh /zhishigobiN-/ vta crush s.o. with
hands; 7s^inzhishigobinaa;pr;
zheshigobinaad
zhishigoshkan vti crush s.t. by foot or body; Isg
inzhishigoshkaan; prt zheshigoshkang
zhishigoshkaw vta crush s.o. by foot or body; Isg
inzhishigoshkawaa; prt zheshigoshkawaad
zhishigwam vta gnaw s.o., chew s.o. to bits; Isg
inzhishigwamaa; prt zheshigwamaad
zhishigwandan vti gnaw s.t., chew s.t. to bits; Isg
inzhishigwandaan; pn zheshigwandang
zhishwajayi'ii pc alongside it
zhishwajigamig pc alongside the house
zhishwajikana pc alongside the road
zhizhoobii' /zhizhoobii'w-/ vta paint s.o.; Isg
inzhizhoobii'waa; prt zhezhoobii'waad
zhizhoobii'amaw vta paint (s.t.) for s.o.; Isg
inzhizhoobii'amawaa; pn
zhezhoobii'amawaad
zhizhoobii'an vti paint s.t.; Isg inzhizhoobii'aan;
prt zhezhoobii'ang
zhizhoobii'igan ni paint; pi zhizhoobii'iganan; he
zhizhoobii'iganing
zhizhoobii'iganaatig ni paint brush; pi
zhizhoobii'iganaatigoon; loc
zhizhoobii'iganaatigong; dim
zhizhoobii'iganaatigoons
zhizhoobii'ige vai paint things; Isg
inzhizhoobii'ige; prt zhezhoobii'iged
zhizhoobii'igewinini na painter; pi
zhizhoobii'igewininiwag
zhizhoo' /zhizhoo'w-/ vta spread s.o. using some-
thing; Isg inzhizhoo'waa; prt zhezhoo'waad
zhizhoo'an vti spread s.t. using something; Isg
inzhizhoo'aan; prt zhezhoo'ang
zhizhoo'ige vai spread things using something; Isg
inzhizhoo'ige; prt zhezhoo'iged
zhiibawaaseyaa vti be transparent; pn
zhaabawaaseyaag; aug
zhiibawaaseyaamagad; prt aug
zhaabawaaseyaamagak
zhiibawaasezi vai be transparent; Isg
inzhiibawaasez; pn zhaabawaasezid
zhiibaakwa' /zhiibaakwa'w-/ vta stretch s.o. on a
hide stretcher; Isg inzhiibaakwa'waa; pn
zhaabaakwa'waad
zhiibaakwa'ataan ni flat hide stretcher (especially
for muskrats); pi zhiibaakwa'ataanan; loc
zhiibaakwa'ataaning; dim
zhiibaakwa'ataanens
zhiibaangwashi vai take a quick nap; Isg
inzhiibaangwash; pn zhaabaangwashid
zhiibaayaabanjigan ni telescope, binoculars; pi
zhiibaayaabanjiganan; loc
zhiibaayaabanjiganing; dim
zhiibaayaabanjigaans
zhiibaayaakizo vai get x-rayed; Isg
inzhiibaayaakiz; prt zhaabaayaakizod
zhiibii vai stretch one's body; Isg inzhiibii;^>rr
zhaabiid
zhiibiiga' /zhiibiiga'w-/ vta stretch s.o. using some-
thing (as something sheet-like); Isg
inzhiibiiga'waa; pn zhaabiiga'waad
zhiibiiga'an vti stretch s.t. using something (as
something sheet-like); Isg inzhiibiiga'aan; prt
zhaabiiga'ang
zhiibiigibidoon vti2 stretch s.t. by pulling (as
something sheet-like); Isg inzhiibiigibidoon;
pn zhaabiigibidood
zhiibiigibizh /zhiibiigibiN-/ vta stretch s.o. by pull-
ing (as something sheet-like); Isg
inzhiibiigibinaa; prt zhaabiigibinaad
zhiibiigishkaa vii stretch (as something sheet-like);
prt zhaabiigishkaag; aug

127 
zhiigaa—zhoominens
zhiibiigishkaamagad: prt aug
zhaabiigishkaamagak
zhiigaa na widow, widower; pi zhiigaag
zhiigaawi vai be a widow, be a widower; hg
inzhiigaaw; prr zhaagaawid
zhiigon via empty s.o.; Isg inzhiigonaa; prt
zhaagonaad
zhiigonan vti empty s.t.; hg inzhiigonaan; prt
zhaagonang
zhiigonigaade vii be emptied; prt
zhaagonigaadeg; aug zhiigonigaademagad;
prt aug zhaagonigaademagak
zhiigonigaazo vai be emptied; prt
zhaagonigaazod
zhiigonige vai empty things; hg inzhiigonige; pn
zhaagoniged
zhiigoshkigani-adaawewigamig ni secondhand
clothing store; pi zhiigoshkigani-
adaawewigamigoon; loc zhiigoshkigani-
adaawewigamigong
zhiigozhigan ni carcass; pi zhiigozhiganan; loc
zhiigozhiganing; dim zhiigozhigaans
zhiigoojiinan vti deflate s.t.; Isg inzhiigoojiinaan;
pn zhaagoojiinang
zhiigwanaabik na grindstone; pi
zhiigwanaabikoog; loc zhiigwanaabikong; dim
zhiigwanaabikoons
zhiingendan vti dislike s.t., disapprove of s.t., hate
s.t.; hg inzhiingendaan; pn zhaangendang
zhiingendaagozi vai be disliked, be disapproved
of, be hated; Isg inzhiingendaagoz; pn
zhaangendaagozid
zhiingendaagwad vii be disliked, be disapproved
of, be hated; prt zhaangendaagwak
zhiingenim vta dislike s.o., disapprove of s.o., hate
s.o.; hg inzhiingenimaa; pn zhaangenimaad
zhiingenindiwag /zhiingenindi-/ vai they dislike
each other, they disapprove of each other, they
hate each other; Ipl inzhiingenindimin; prt
zhaangeninindijig
zhiishiib= < zhiib=
zhiishiib na duck; pi zhiishiibag; dim zhiishiibens
zhiishiibanwii-baashkizigan ni shotgun; pi
zhiishiibanwii-baashkiziganan; loc
zhiishiibanwii-baashkiziganing; dim
zhiishiibanwii-baashkizigaans
zhiishiibikojigan na duck decoy; pi
zhiishiibikojigan; loc zhiishiibikojiganing; dim
zhiishiibikojigaans
zhiishiig= < zhig=
zhiishiigi vai urinate; Isg inzhiishiig; prt
zhaashiigid
zhiishiigwan na rattle; pi zhiishiigwanag; he
zhiishiigwaning; dim zhiishiigwaans
zhiishiigwaans na sugar cone; pi
zhiishiigwaansag; loc zhiishiigwaansing
zhiishiigwe na rattlesnake; pi zhiishiigweg; dim
zhiishiigwens
zhiiwan vii be sour; pn zhaawang
zhiiwaaboo ni vinegar; he zhiiwaaboong
zhiiwaabookaade vii be pickled; pn
zhaawaabookaadeg; aug
zhiiwaabookaademagad; pn aug
zhaawaabookaademagak
zhiiwaagamide vii thicken into syrup; pn
zhaawaagamideg; aug
zhiiwaagamidemagad; prt aug
zhaawaagamidemagak
zhiiwaagamin /zhiiwaagami-/ vii be sour (as a
liquid); prt zhaawaagamig
zhiiwaagamizigan ni syrup; loc
zhiiwaagamiziganing
zhiiwaagamiziganike vai make syrup; hg
inzhiiwaagamiziganike; pn
zhaawaagamiziganiked
zhiiwaagamizige vai make syrup; hg
inzhiiwaagamizige; prt zhaawaagamiziged
zhiiwibag ni rhubarb; pi zhiiwibagoon; loc
zhiiwibagong; dim zhiiwibagoons
zhiiwi-bipakoombens ni pickle; pi zhiiwi-
bipakoombensan
zhiiwisijigan na sourdough; pi zhiiwisijiganag; he
zhiiwisijiganing
zhiiwitaagan ni salt; loc zhiiwitaaganing
zhiiwitaagana* /zhiiwitaagana'w-/ vta salt s.o.; hg
inzhiiwitaagana'waa; prt
zhaawitaagana'waad
zhiiwitaagana'an vti salt s.t.; hg
inzhiiwitaagana'aan; prt zhaawitaagana'ang
zhiiwitaagana'ige vai salt things; hg
inzhiiwitaagana'ige; prt zhaawitaagana'iged
zhiiwitaaganaagamin /zhiiwitaaganaagami-/ vii
be salty (as a liquid); pn
zhaawitaaganaagamig
zhiiwitaaganipogozi vai taste salty; pn
zhaawitaaganipogozid
zhiiwitaaganipogwad vii taste salty; prt
zhaawitaaganipogwak
zhiiwitaagani-gookoosh na salt pork
zhiiwizi vai be sour; pn zhaawizid
zhoobi' vta attract s.o., please s.o.; hg
inzhoobi'aa; pn zhwaabi'aad
zhoobizi vai be tempted; hg inzhoobiz; prt
zhwaabizid
zhoominaaboo ni wine; loc zhoominaaboong;
oho zhawiminaaboo
zhoominens ni raisin; pi zhoominensan
zhiishiigwan (rattle)

zhoomiingweni—zisiboozh 
128
zhoomiingweni vai smile; hg inzhoomiingwen;
prt zhwaamiingwenid
zhoomiingwetaw vta smile at s.o.; Isg
inzhoomiingwetawaa; prt
zhwaamiingwetawaad
zhooniyaa na money; loc zhooniyaang; dim
zhooniyaans
zhooniyaake vai make money, earn money; Isg
inzhooniyaake; prt zhwaaniyaaked
zhooniyaa-mashkimod ni purse, handbag; pi
zhooniyaa-mashkimodan; loc zhooniyaa-
mashkimodaang; dim zhooniyaa-
mashkimodens; also zhooniyaa-
mashkimodens
zhooniyaans na coin, dime; pi zhooniyaansag; loc
zhooniyaansing
zhooniyaawaabik na coin; pi
zhooniyaawaabikoog; loc
zhooniyaawaabikong; dim
zhooniyaawaabikoons
zhooniyaawaabik ni silver; pi
zhooniyaawaabikoon; dim
zhooniyaawaabikoons
zhooniyaawigamig ni bank; pi
zhooniyaawigamigoon; loc
zhooniyaawigamigong
zhooshkodaabaan na toboggan; pi
zhooshkodaabaanag; loc
zhooshkodaabaaning; dim
zhooshkodaanaanens
zhooshkodaabaan (toboggan)
zhooshkon vta slide s.o. with hand; Isg
inzhooshkonaa; prt zhwaashkonaad
zhooshkonan vti slide s.t. with hand; Isg
inzhooshkonaan; prt zhwaashkonang
zhooshkonige vai slide things, play checkers; Isg
inzhooshkonige; pn zhwaashkoniged
zhooshkoshimaan na ski; pi
zhooshkoshimaanag; also zhooshkoshime-
aagim
zhooshkozi vai be smooth, be slick; prt
zhwaashkozid
zhooshkwabi vai slide over sitting; Isg
inzhooshkwab; prt zhwaashkwabid
zhooshkwadamon /zhooshkwadamo-/ DM be
slippery (as a road or trail); prt
zhwaashkwadamog
zhooshkwajiwe vai go sliding; Isg
inzhooshkwajiwe; pn zhwaashkwajiwed
zhooshkwaa mi be smooth, be slick; pn
zhwaashkwaag; aug zhooshkwaamagad; prt
aug zhwaashkwaamagak
zhooshkwaabikad vii be smooth (as something
mineral), be rustless; pn zhwaashkwaabikak
zhooshkwaabikizi vai be smooth (as something
mineral), be rustless; prt zhwaashkwaabikizid
zhooshkwaada'aagan ni skate; pi
zhooshkwaada'aaganan; loc
zhooshkwaada'aaganing; dim
zhooshkwaada'aagaans
zhooshkwaada'e vai skate; Isg
inzhooshkwaada'e; pn zhwaashkwaada'ed
zhooshkwaada'ewigamig ni arena, rink; pi
zhooshkwaada'ewigamigoon; loc
zhooshkwaada'ewigamigong; dim
zhooshkwaada'ewigamigoons
zhooshkwaagim na ski; pi zhooshkwaagimag; loc
zhooshkwaagiming; dim zhooshkwaagimens
zhooshkwaagime vai ski; Isg
inzhooshkwaagime; pn zhwaashkwaagimed
zhooshkwaakozi vai be smooth (as something
stick- or wood-like); pn zhwaashkwaakozid
zhooshkwaakwad vii be smooth (as something
stick- or wood-like); prt zhwaashkwaakwak
zhooshkwegad vii be smooth (as something sheet-
like); prt zhwaashkwegak
zhooshkwega' /zhooshkwega*w-/ vta iron s.o.
(e.g., pants); Isg inzhooshkwega'waa; pn
zhwaashkwega'waad
zhooshkwega'an vti iron s.t.; Isg
inzhooshkwega'aan; prt zhwaashkwega'ang
zhooshkwega'igan ni clothes iron; pi
zhooshkwega'iganan; loc
zhooshkwega'iganing; dim
zhooshkwega'igaans
zhooshkwega'ige vai iron clothes; Isg
inzhooshkwega'ige; pn zhwaashkwega'iged
zhooshkwegizi vai be smooth (as something
sheet-like); pn zhwaashkwegizid
ziko vai spit; Isg inzik; pn. zekod
zikowin ni saliva, spit
zikwaadan vti spit on s.t.; Isg inzikwaadaan; pn
zekwaadang
zikwaajige vai spit on things; Isg inzikwaajige; pn
zekwaajiged
zikwaazh /zikwaaN-/ vta spit on s.o.; Isg
inzikwaanaa; prt zekwaanaad
zinigobidoon vti2 massage s.t. with something; Isg
inzinigobidoon; pn zenigobidood
zinigobizh /zinigobiN-/ vta massage s.o. with
something; hg inzinigobinaa; pn
zenigobinaad
zinigon vta rub s.o. with something; hg
inzinigonaa; pn zenigonaad
zinigonan vti rub s.t. with something; hg
inzinigonaan; pn zenigonang
zisiboodoon vti2 file s.t., grind s.t. down; hg
inzisiboodoon; pn zesiboodood
zisiboojigan ni file, rasp; pi zisiboojiganan; loc
zisiboojiganing; dim zisiboojigaans
zisiboojige vai file things; hg inzisiboojige; prt
zesiboojiged
zisiboozh /zisibooN-/ vta file s.o., grind s.o. down;
hg inzisiboonaa; prt zesiboonaad

129
ziibaaska'igan—zoogipon
ziibaaska'igan ni jingle (on dress); pi
ziibaaska'iganan; loc ziibaaska'iganing; dim
ziibaaska*igaans
ziibaaska'iganagooday ni jingle dress; pi
ziibaaska'iganagoodayan
ziibaaska'iganagooday (jingle dress)
ziibaaskobijige vai set a net under the ice; Isg
inziibaaskobijige; pn zaabaaskobijiged
ziibi ni river; pi ziibiwan; loc ziibiing; dim ziibiins
ziibiins ni creek; pi ziibiinsan; loc ziibiinsing
ziiga'andan vti water s.t., pour liquid on s.t.; Isg
inziiga'andaan; pn zaaga'andang
ziiga'andaw vta pour liquid on s.o., baptize s.o.;
Isg inziiga'andawaa; pn zaaga'andawaad
ziiga'igan ni sugar cake, sugar cone; pi
ziiga'iganan; he ziiga'iganing; dim
ziiga'igaans
ziiga'iganike vai make a sugar cone; Isg
inziiga'iganike; pn zaaga'iganiked
ziiga'ige vai cast sugar cones; Isg inziiga'ige; pn
zaaga'iged
ziigana' /ziigana'w-/ vta spoon feed s.o. a liquid;
Isg inziigana'waa; pn zaagana'waad
ziigashkinadoon vti2 fill s.t. to overflowing with
solids; Isg inziigashkinadoon; pn
zaagashkinadood
ziigashkina* vta fill s.o. to overflowing with solids;
Isg inziigashkina'aa; pn zaagashkina'aad
ziigibadoon vti2 fill s.t. to overflowing with a
liquid; Isg inziigibadoon; pn zaagibadood
ziigigamide vii boil over; pn zaagigamideg; aiig
ziigigamidemagad; pn aug
zaagigamidemagak
ziigigamizo vai boil over; pn zaagigamizod
ziiginan vti pour s.t., spill s.t.; Isg inziiginaan; pn
zaaginang
ziiginige vai pour things, spill things; Isg
inziiginige; pn zaaginiged
ziiginigewigamig ni tavern, bar; pi
ziiginigewigamigoon; loc
ziiginigewigamigong; dim
ziiginige wigamigoons
ziiginigewikwe na barmaid; pi ziiginigewikweg
ziiginigewinini na bartender; pi
ziiginigewininiwag
ziiginishaan ni ear drops
ziiginiingwaan ni eye drops
ziigise vii pour out, spill out; pn zaagiseg; aug
ziigisemagad; pn aug zaagisemagak
ziigwan vii be spring; pn zaagwang
ziigwanishi vai spend the spring somewhere; Isg
inziigwanish; pn zaagwanishid
ziigwanong/>t last spring
ziigwebinan vti spill s.t.; Isg inziigwebinaan; pn
zaagwebinang
ziigwebinigan ni dump, trash; pi ziigwebiniganan;
loc ziigwebiniganing; dim ziigwebinigaans
ziigwebinigewakik na slop pail; pi
ziigwebinigewakikoog; loc
ziigwebinigewakikong; dim
ziigwebinigewakikoons
ziikaa na car old fashioned', pi ziikaag; loc ziikaang;
dim ziikaans
ziikaapidan vti drink s.t. quickly; Isg
inziikaapidaan; pn zaakaapidang
ziikoobiiginan vti strain s.t.; Isg
inziikoobiiginaan; pn zaakoobiiginang
ziinaakwa'igan ni clothes wringer, clothespin; pi
ziinaakwa'iganan; loc ziinaakwa'iganing; dim
ziinaakwa'igaans
ziindaakoshin vai be wedged in tightly (as some-
thing stick- or wood-like); Isg inziindaakoshin;
pn zaandaakoshing
ziindaakosin vii be wedged in tightly (as some-
thing stick- or wood-like); pn zaandaakosing
ziinibidoon vti2 squeeze s.t., wring s.t.; Isg
inziinibidoon; pn zaanibidood
ziinibizh /ziinibiN-/ vta squeeze s.o., wring s.o.;
Isg inziinibinaa; pn zaanibinaad
ziinikiigomaan na snot
ziinikiigome vai blow one's nose; Isg
inziinikiigome; pn zaanikiigomed
ziinin vta milk s.o.; Isg inziininaa; pn zaaninaad
ziininiwe vai milk cows; Isg inziininiwe; pn
zaaniniwed
ziinzibaakwad ni maple sugar, sugar; loc
ziinzibaakwadong; dim ziinzibaakwadoons
ziinzibaakwado-makak ni birch bark basket for
maple sugar; pi ziinzibaakwado-makakoon
ziinzibaakwad-onaagaans ni sugar bowl; pi
ziinzibaakwad-onaagaansan; loc
ziinzibaakwad-onaagaansing
ziinzibaakwadowaapine vai have diabetes; Isg
inziinzibaakwadowaapine; pn
zaanzibaakwadowaapined; also
ziinzibaakwadwaapine
ziinzibaakwadoons ni candy; pi
ziinzibaakwadoonsan; he
ziinzibaakwadoonsing
ziinzibaakwadwaaboo ni maple sap; loc
ziinzibaakwad waaboong
ziinzoopizon ni bandage; pi ziinzoopizonan; loc
ziinzoopizoning; dim ziinzoopizonens
zoobam vta suck out of s.o.; Isg inzoobamaa; pn
zwaabamaad
zoobandan vti suck out of s.t.; Isg inzoobandaan;
pn zwaabandang
zoogipon /zoogipo-/ vii snow; pn zwaagipog

zoongan—zoongizi
130
zoongan vii be solid, be strong; prt zwaangang
zoongide'e vai be brave; Isg inzoongide'e; prt
zwaangide'ed
zoongigane vai have strong bones; Isg
inzoongigane; prt zwaangiganed
zoongi* vta make s.o. strong, make s.o. solid; Isg
inzoongi'aa; prt zwaangi'aad
zoongingwashi vai sleep deeply
zoonginike vai have a strong arm; Isg
inzoonginike; prt zwaanginiked
zoongininjii vai have a strong hand; Isg
inzoongininjii; prt zwaangininjiid
zoongishin vai lie firmly fixed in place; Isg
inzoongishin; prt zwaangishing
zoongisin vii lie firmly fixed in place; prt
zwaangising
zoongitoon vti2 make s.t. strong, make s.t. solid;
Isg inzoongitoon; prt zwaangitood
zoongizi vai be solid, be strong; Isg inzoongiz; prt
zwaangizid

Part II
English-Ojibwe Index

This page intentionally left blank 

133 
abandon—accidentally
A
ABANDON
ABANDON: abandon s.o. nagazh /nagaN-/
vta; abandon s.t. nagadan vti; abandon
people nagazhiwe vai
ABLE
ABLE: be able gashki'o vai; be able (to do
something) gashkichige vai
ABLE TO CARRY: be able to carry s.o.
gashkiwizh /gashkiwiN-/ vta; be able to
carry s.t. gashkiwidoon vti2
ABLE TO DO: be able to do s.t. gashkitoon
vti2
ABLE TO GET: be able to get (s.t.) for s.o.
gashkitaw vta
ABLE TO MANAGE: be able to manage (s.t.)
for s.o. gashkitaw vta
ABLE TO TAKE: be able to take s.o.
gashkiwizh /gashkiwiN-/ vta; be able to
take s.t. gashkiwidoon vti2
ABLE TO WORK: be able to work
gashkanokii vai
NOT ABLE: not able to bwaa- put
ABOARD
GET ABOARD: boozi vai
JUMP ABOARD: boozigwaashkwani vai
TELL TO GO ABOARD: tell s.o. to go
aboard boozinaazha' /boozinaazha'w-/
vta
ABOUT
ABOUT: going about babaa- pv2
BLOWN ABOUT: be blown about
babaamaashi vai; babaamaasin vn
CARRY ABOUT: carry s.o. about
babaamiwizh /babaamiwiN-/ vta; carry
s.t. about babaamiwidoon vti2
CHASE ABOUT: chase s.o. about
babaaminizliia' /babaaminizha'w-/ vta;
chase s.t. about babaaminizha'an vti;
chase things about babaaminizha'ige vai
CLOUDS MOVE ABOUT:
babaamaanakwad vii
CRAWL ABOUT: babaamoode vai
DANCE ABOUT: babaamishimo vai
DRIVE ABOUT: babaamibide,
babaamibidemagad vii; babaamibizo
vai; babaamidaabii'iwe vai
FLY ABOUT: babaamibide,
babaamibidemagad vii; babaamibizo
vai; babaamise vai; babaamise,
babaamisemagad vii
GO ABOUT CRYING: babaamademo vai
GO ABOUT IN A BOAT: babaamishkaa vai
GO ABOUT ON BUSINESS: go about on
one's business babaamizi vai
GO ABOUT ON THE ICE:
babaamaadagaako vai
GO ABOUT TRADING: babaamadaawe vai
GOING ABOUT: babaa- pv2
GUIDE ABOUT: guide s.o. about
babaamiwizh /babaamiwiN-/ vta
LIVE ABOUT: babaamaadizi vai
MOVE RESIDENCE ABOUT: move one's
residence about babaamigozi vai
PADDLE ABOUT: babaamishkaa vai
RIDE ABOUT ON HORSEBACK:
babaamoomigo vai
RUN ABOUT: babaamibatoo vai; they run
about together babaamiba'idiwag
/babaamiba'idi-/ vai
SAIL ABOUT: babaamaashi vai;
babaamaasin vii
SKATE ABOUT: babaamaada'e vai
SPEED ABOUT: babaamibide,
babaamibidemagad vii; babaamibizo vai
SPREAD THE NEWS ABOUT:
babaamaajimo vai
SWIM ABOUT: babaamaadagaa vai
TAKE ABOUT: take s.o. about babaamiwizh
/babaamiwiN-/ vta; take s.t. about
babaamiwidoon vti2
TRAVEL ABOUT: babaamaadizi vai
WADE ABOUT: babaamaadagaazii vai
WALK ABOUT: babaamose vai; babimose
vai
WANDER ABOUT: babaa-ayaa vai
ABOVE
ABOVE: ishpiming pc; above it ishpayi'ii pc
ABOVE ALL
ABOVE ALL: memindage pc
ABSCESSED
ABSCESSED TOOTH: have an abscessed
tooth miniiwaabide vai
ABSENT
ABSENT A CERTAIN LENGTH OF TIME:
be absent a certain length of time apiitendi
vai; inendi vai
ABSENT A CERTAIN NUMBER OF
DAYS: be absent a certain number of days
dasogonendi vai
ABSENT FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: be
absent from a certain place ondendi vai
ABUSE
ABUSE: abuse s.o. aanimi' vta; abuse s.t.
aanimitoon vti2
ACCEPT
ACCEPT: accept s.o. odaapin vta; accept s.t.
odaapinan vti; accept (s.t.) from s.o.
odaapinamaw vta; accept things
odaapinige vai
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED: be accepted odaapinigaade,
odaapinigaademagad vii; odaapinigaazo
vai
ACCIDENT
DIE IN AN ACCIDENT: niiwanishin vai
ACCIDENTALLY
ACCIDENTALLY: bichi-pv4
ACCIDENTALLY HIT: accidentally hit s.o.
bitaganaam vta; accidentally hit s.t.
bitaganaandan vti
CUT ACCIDENTALLY: cut s.o. accidentally
bitizh /bitizhw-/ vta; cut s.t. accidentally
bitizhan vti

accidentally—admired
134
HIT AGAINST ACCIDENTALLY: hit
against something accidentally (as
something stick- or wood-like) bitaakoshin
vai; bitaakosin vii
SHOOT ACCIDENTALLY: shoot s.o. acci-
dentally bichinaw via; shoot s.t. acciden-
tally bichinan vii; shoot things accidentally
bichinaage vai; shoot oneself accidentally
bichinaadizo vai
ACCOMPANY
ACCOMPANY: accompany s.o. wiijiiw vta;
accompany people wiijii'iwe vai; they
accompany each other wiijiindiwag
/wiijiindi-/ vai
ACCOMPLISH
ACCOMPLISH: gashki'ewizi vai
ACCUSE
ACCUSE: accuse s.o. anaamim vta
ACE
ACE: ace (card) bezhigoobii'igan, -ag na
ACHE
ACHE: dewizi vai
ACHE IN ARM: have an ache in one's arm
dewinike vai
ACHE IN BACK: have a backache
dewaawigan vai; dewipikwan vai
ACHE IN FOOT: have an ache in one's foot
dewizide vai
ACHE IN HAND: have an ache in one's hand
dewininjii vai
ACHE IN LEG: have an ache in one's leg
dewigaade vai
TOOTHACHE: have a toothache dewaabide
vai
ACNE
ACNE ON FACE: have acne on one's face
moosewiingwe vai
ACORN
ACORN: mitigomin, -an ni
ACQUAINTED
ACQUAINTED: be acquainted with s.o.
nagadenim vta; they are acquainted with
each other nagadenindiwag
/nagadenindi-/ vai
ACQUIRE
ACQUIRE: gashkichige vai
ACRE
CERTAIN NUMBER OF ACRES: a certain
number of acres daso-diba'igaans pc
ACROSS
ACROSS: agaami- pn; across it agaamayi'ii pc
ACROSS THE LAKE: agaaming pc
ACROSS THE ROAD: across the road or trail
agaamikana j?c
CARRY ACROSS: carry s.o. across
aazhogewizh /aazhogewiN-/ vta; carry s.t.
across aazhogewidoon vu2
CLIMB ACROSS: aazhawaandawe vai
DRIVE ACROSS: aazhogebizo vai;
aazhogedaabii'iwe vai; aazhoodaabii'iwe
vai
FERRY ACROSS: ferry s.o. across
aazhawa'oozh /aazhawa'ooN-/ vta; ferry
s.t. across aazhawa'oodoon vti2
GO ACROSS: aazhooshkaa vai
GO ACROSS BY BOAT: aazhawa'am vai2,
also aazhawa'o
GO ACROSS WATER: aazhoge vai
JUMP ACROSS: aazhawigwaashkwani vai
LAY ACROSS: lay s.o. across (as something
stick- or wood-like) aazhawaakoshim vta;
lay s.t. across (as something stick- or wood-
like) aazhawaakosidoon vti2
LIE ACROSS: lie across (as something stick-
or wood-like) aazhawaakoshin vai;
aazhawaakosin vii
OVER ACROSS: awasi- pn; over across it
awasayi'ii pc
OVER ACROSS THE FIRE: awasishkode £c
OVER ACROSS THE MOUNTAIN:
awasajiw pc
OVER ACROSS THE WATER: awasagaam
pc
OVER ACROSS THE WOODS: awasaakwaa
pc
RIGHT ACROSS: dibishkookamig pc
ROAD GOES ACROSS: go across (as a road
or trail) aazhoodamon /aazhoodamo-/ vii
RUN ACROSS: aazhoobatoo vai, also
aazhawibatooj they run across together
aazhogeba'idiwag /aazhogeba'idi-/ vai;
aazhooba'idiwag /aazhooba'idi-/ vai
RUN ACROSS WADING:
aazhawagaaziibatoo vai
SWIM ACROSS: aazhawaadagaa vai
TAKE ACROSS: take s.o. across
aazhogewizh /aazhogewiN-/ vta; take s.t.
across aazhogewidoon vti2
TAKE ACROSS BY BOAT: take s.o. across
by boat aazhawa'oozh /aazhawa'ooN-/
vta; take s.t. across by boat
aazhawa'oodoon vti2
TRAIL GOES ACROSS: go across (as a road
or trail) aazhoodamon /aazhoodamo-/ vii
WADE ACROSS: aazhawagaazii vai
ADD
ADD IN: add s.o. in dagon vta; add s.t. in
dagonan vti
ADD TOGETHER: asigagindaaso vai; add
s.o. together (e.g., money) asigagim vta;
add s.t. together asigagindan vti
ADDED
ADDED IN: be added in dagonigaade,
dagonigaademagad vii; dagonigaazo vai
ADDRESS
ADDRESS: address s.o. ganoozh /ganooN-/
vta
ADHERE
ADHERE: agoke vai; agoke. agokemagad
vii; bazagoke vai; bazagoke,
bazagokemagad vii
ADMIRED
ADMIRED: be admired minwaabamewizi
vai

135
adolescent—alone
ADOLESCENT
ADOLESCENT: be an adolescent oshkiniigi
vai
ADOLESCENT BOY: oshkinawe, -g na; be
an adolescent boy oshkinawewi vai
ADOLESCENT GIRL: oshkiniigikwe, -g na;
be an adolescent girl oshkiniigikwewi vai
ADOPT
ADOPT: adopt s.o. bami' via; waangoom via
ADOPTED
ADOPTED ONE: bami'aagan, -ag na
ADULT
ADULT: gichi-aya'aa, -g na; be an adult
gichi-aya'aawi vai
ADVANCE
IN ADVANCE: jjiizhaapt
ADVANCED
ADVANCED INTO A TIME: ishpi- pv4
AFRAID
AFRAID: be afraid gotaaji vai; zegizi vai; be
afraid of s.t. gotan vti
AFRICAN
AFRICAN: person of African descent
makade-wiiyaas, -ag na
AFRICAN WOMAN: woman of African
descent makade-wiiyaasikwe, -g na
AFTER
AFTER: ishkwaa- pv4
AFTER A WHILE
AFTER A WHILE: baanimaapc, also
baamaa; baanimaa apii pc, also
baanimaapii, baamaapii; bijiinag pc;
gegapii pc; naagaj pc
AFTERNOON
AFTERNOON: be afternoon ishkwaa-
naawakwe, ishkwaa-naawakwemagad vii
LATE MORNING OR EARLY
AFTERNOON: be late morning or early
afternoon ishpi-giizhigad vii
AGAIN
AGAIN: miinawaapc
AGAINST THE WIND
GO AGAINST THE WIND:
onjishkawisrukaa vai
PADDLE AGAINST THE WIND:
onjishkawa'o vai, also onjishkawa'am
AGE
CERTAIN AGE: be a certain age apiitizi vai
SAME AGE: they are the same age
wiijigindiwag /wiijigindi-/ vai; be the same
age as s.o. wiijigim vta
AGITATE
AGITATE: mamaazikaa vai
AGO
A LITTLE WHILE AGO: naanoomaya pc
LONG AGO: mewinzhapc
AGREE
AGREE: debwetam vai2; inendam vai2;
agree on something inaakonige vai; agree
with s.o. debwetaw vta; agree with s.o.
especially of something consumed; inverse
forms of: minokaw- vta
AGREEABLE
AGREEABLE: be agreeable minwendaagozi
vai
AHEAD
AHEAD: niigaanpc
GO AHEAD: niigaanii vai
AHEAD OF TIME
AHEAD OF TIME: nayaagpc
AIM
AIM: aim at s.o. zhigweyaabam vta; aim at
s.t. zhigweyaabandan vti
AIM SIGHTS: zhigweyaabi vai
AIR PUMP
AIR PUMP: boodaajii'igan, -an ni
AIRPLANE
AIRPLANE: bemisemagak, -in ni-pt
AIRPORT
AIRPORT: endazhi-booniimagak, -in ni-pt
ALARMED
ALARMED: be alarmed amaniso vai; be
alarmed by s.o. amanisodaw vta
ALCOHOL
RUBBING ALCOHOL: giziibiigazhewaaboo
ni
ALDER
ALDER: wadoop, -iin ni
ALGAE
ALGAE: ataagib ni
ALIGHT
ALIGHT: boonii vai
ALIVE
ALIVE: be alive bimaadizi vai
COME ALIVE: aabijiibaa vai
ALL
ALL: akina pc, also kina, gakina
ALL DAY: gabe-giizhikpc
ALL EVENING: gabe-onaagosh pc
ALL KINDS: anooj pc
ALL NIGHT: gabe-dibik/>i
ALL OVER: miziwe pc
ALL THE TIME: apane pc
ALLOT
ALLOT LAND: allot s.o. land mamakii* vta
ALLOTMENT
ALLOTMENT OF LAND: there is an
allotment of land mamakii'idim
/mamakii'idi-/ vai
ALLOW
ALLOW: allow s.o. bagidin vta; allow s.t.
bagidinan vti; allow (s.t.) to s.o.
bagidinamaw vta; allow things bagidinige
vai
ALLOWED
ALLOWED: be allowed bagidinigaade,
bagidinigaademagad vii; bagidinigaazo
vai
ALMOST
ALMOST: gegaapc
ALONE
ALONE: be alone bezhigo vai; nazhikewizi
vai
LIVE ALONE: nazhikewige vai

alone—along 
136
SIT ALONE: nazhikewaakwadabi vat
ALONG
ALONG: bimi- pv2; along it jiigayi'ii pc
ALONG THE SHORE: jiigew pc; jiigibiig pc
BLOWN ALONG: be blown along bimaashi
vai; bimaasin vii
CARRY A BABY ALONG ON BACK: carry a
baby along on one's back bimoomaawaso
vai
CARRY A PACK ALONG: bimiwane vai
CARRY ALONG: carry s.o. along bimiwizh
/bimiwiN-/ vta; carry s.t. along
bimiwidoon vti2; carry things along
bimiwijige vai
CARRY ALONG ON BACK: carry s.o. along
on one's back bimoom vta; carry s.t. along
on one's back bimoondan vti
CHASE ALONG: chase s.o. along biminizha'
/biminizha'w-/ vta; biminizhikaw vta;
chase s.t. along biminizha'an vti; chase
things along biminizha'ige vai; chase
people along biminaazhikaage vai
CLIMB ALONG: bimaandawe vai
CLOUDS GO ALONG: bimaanakwad vii
CRAWL ALONG: bimoode vai
CRY WALKING ALONG: bimademo vai
DANCE ALONG: bimishimo vai
DRAG ALONG: drag s.o. along
bimidaabaazh /bimidaabaaN-/ vta; drag
s.t. along bimidaabaadan vti
DRIFT ALONG ON CURRENT:
bimaaboode, bimaaboodemagad vii;
bimaaboono vai
DRIVE ALONG: bimibide, bimibidemagad
vii; bimibizo vai; bimidaabii'iwe vai;
drive s.o. along bimibizoni' vta; drive s.t.
along bimibizonitoon vti2; drive people
along (as in a bus) bimiwizhiwe vai
DRIVE ALONG IN A WAGON OR
SLEIGH: drive along quickly in a wagon
or sleigh bimidaabiiba'igo vai
FLOW ALONG: bimijiwan vii
FLY ALONG: bimibide, bimibidemagad vii;
bimibizo vai; bimise vai; bimise,
bimisemagad vii
FOLLOW A TRAIL ALONG: bima'adoo
vai; follow s.o.'s trail along bima'azh
/bima'aN-/ vta; follow s.t. along as a trail
bima'adoon vti2
GO ALONG: bimi-ayaa vai
GO ALONG BY BOAT: bimishkaa vai
GO ALONG SINGING: bima'amaazo vai
GO ALONG THE EDGE: bimaazhagaame
vai
GO ALONG THE SHORE: bimaazhagaame
vai
GO ALONG WITH A LIGHT:
bimaazakonenjige vai
GOING ALONG: a.n\-pv2, also ni-; bimi- pv2
HEARD DRIVING ALONG: be heard driving
along bimwewebide,
bimwewebidemagad vii; bimwewebizo
vai
HEARD SPEEDING ALONG: be heard
speeding along bimwewebide,
bimwewebidemagad vii; bimwewebizo
vai
HEARD WALKING ALONG: be heard
walking along bimweweshin vai
LEAD ALONG: lead along (as something
string-like) bimaabiigamon
/bimaabiigamo-/ vii
LEAVE TRACKS GOING ALONG:
bimikawe vai
LIE ALONG: lie along (as something stick- or
wood-like) bimaakoshin vai; bimaakosin
vii
PADDLE ALONG: bimakwazhiwe vai;
bimishkaa vai
POLE A BOAT ALONG: bima'oodoo vai;
bima'ookii vai
PUT ALONG: put s.o. along (as something
stick- or wood-like) bimaakoshim vta; put
s.t. along (as something stick- or wood-
like) bimaakosidoon vti2
RAIN GOES ALONG: bimibiisaa,
bimibiisaamagad vii
RIDE ALONG DRAWN BY HORSES:
bimiba'igo vai
RIDE ALONG ON HORSEBACK:
bimoomigo vai
RIVER FLOWS ALONG: flow along (as a
river) bimitigweyaa, bimitigweyaamagad
vii
ROAD LEADS ALONG: lead along (as a road
or trail) bimamon /bimamo-/,
bimamoomagad vii
RUN ALONG: bimibatoo vai; they run along
together bimiba'idiwag /bimiba'idi-/ vai
RUN ALONG IN FLIGHT: biminizhimo
vai; run along in flight from someone
bimiba'iwe vai
SAIL ALONG: bimaashi vai; bimaasin vii
SEND ALONG: send s.o. along biminizhikaw
vta; send people along biminaazhikaage
vai
SKATE ALONG: bimaada'e vai
SNOW GOES ALONG: bimipon /bimipo-/
vii
SPEED ALONG: bimibide, bimibidemagad
vii; bimibizo vai
STRING ALONG: string s.o. along
bimaabiigin vta; string s.t. along
bimaabiiginan vti
SWIM ALONG: bimaadagaa vai; swim along
(as a fish) bimakwazhiwe vai
TAKE ALONG: take s.o. along bimiwizh
/bimiwiN-/ vta; take s.t. along bimiwidoon
vti2; take people along bimiwizhiwe vai
TAKE ALONG FOR A RIDE: take s.o. along
for a ride bimibizoni' vta
TAKE ALONG IN A BOAT: take s.o. along
in a boat bima'oozh /bima'ooN-/ vta; take
s.t. along in a boat bima'oodoon vti2
TRAIL LEADS ALONG: lead along (as a
road or trail) bimamon /bimamo-/,
bimamoomagad vii
TRAVEL ALONG: bimi-ayaa vai; travel
along in a group (as a school offish)
bimaawadaaso vai

137 
along—apart
WADE ALONG: bimaadagaazii vai
WALK ALONG: bimose vai
WALK ALONG ON THE ICE:
bimaadagaako vai
ALONGSIDE
ALONGSIDE: alongside it zhishwajayi'ii pc
ALONGSIDE THE HOUSE:
zhishwajigamig pc
ALONGSIDE THE ROAD: zhishwajikana pc
ALPHABET
LETTER OF THE ALPHABET:
ozhibii'igan, -an ui
ALREADY
ALREADY: azhigwa/x, also zhigwa, zhigo;
already old-fashioned zhayiigwapc
ALSO
ALSO: gayepc, also ge; miinawaapc
ALTERNATELY
ALTERNATELY: memeshkwad pc
ALTHOUGH
ALTHOUGH: aanawi pc
ALWAYS
ALWAYS: apane /v; moozhagpc
AMAZED
AMAZED: be amazed maamakaadendam
vai2; be amazed at s.o. maamakaadenim
vta; be amazed at s.t. maamakaadendan
vti; be amazed at what s.o. says
maamakaazitaw vta
AMAZING
AMAZING: maaimakaaj pc; amazing!
maamakaadakamig pc; be amazing
maamakaadizi vai
CONSIDERED AMAZING: be considered
amazing maamakaadendaagwad vii
DO AMAZING THINGS: maamakaajichige
vai
AMBITIOUS
AMBITIOUS: be: ambitious gwaashkwezi vai
AMBULANCE
AMBULANCE: aakoziiwidaabaan, -ag na
AMERICAN
AMERICAN: giehi-mookomaan, -ag na
AMERICAN BITTERN
AMERICAN BITTERN: American bittern
(locally called shypoke) mooshka'osi,
-wag na
AMMUNITION
USE UP AMMUNITION: use up all of the
ammunition jaaga'e vai; jaagizige vai
AMONG
AMONG: megwe- pn
IN AMONG: in among it megwe-aya'ii pc,
also megweya'ii
AMOUNT
CERTAIN AMOUNT: a certain amount
minikpc
SOME AMOUNT: gomaapc
ANCESTOR
ANCESTOR: aanikoobijigan, -ag na
ANCHOR
ANCHOR: boonakajigan, -an ni; anchor s.t.
boonakadooin vti2
AND
AND: dash pc, also idash, -sh; gaye pc, also ge;
miinawaa pc
AND THEN: mil dash pc, also miish
ANGER
ANGER: anger s.o. nishki' vta; anger people
nishkitaa vai; they anger each other
nishki'idiwag /nishki'idi-/ vai
ACT UP IN ANGER: nishkaajitaa vai
ANGER FOR A CERTAIN REASON: anger
s.o. for a certain reason onjinawe' vta
COME IN ANGER: biijigidaazo vai
ANGRILY
BEHAVE ANGRILY: nishkaajitaa vai
ANGRY
ANGRY: be angry nishkaadizi vai; be angry at
s.o. nishkenim vta
ANGRY TO A CERTAIN EXTENT: be
angry to a certain extent apiichigidaazo
vai
FEEL ANGRY: nishkendam vai2
ANIMAL
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: awakaan, -ag na
DRAFT ANIMAL: odaabii'aagan, -ag na
WILD ANIMAL: awesiinh, -yag na
ANKLE JOINT
ANKLE JOINT: bikwaakoganaan, -an ni
ANNOUNCE
ANNOUNCE: announce (s.t.) to people
wiindamaage vai
ANNOY
ANNOY: annoy s.o. migoshkaaji' vta
ANNOYED
ANNOYED: be annoyed migoshkaadendam
vai2
ANSWER
ANSWER: nakwetam vai2; answer s.o.
nakom vta; nakwetaw vta; answer s.t.
nakodan vri; nakwetan vti; they answer
each other nakondiwag /nakondi-/ vai
ANSWER BACK: answer back to s.o.
aazhidem vta
ANT
ANT: enigoons, -ag na, also enig
ANXIOUS
ANXIOUS: be anxious ojaanimendam vai2
ANYBODY
ANYBODY: anybody animate indefinite awiya,
-g pr, oho awiiya
ANYHOW
ANYHOW: aanawi pc; bagwana/x
ANYTHING
ANYTHING: anything inanimate indefinite
gegoo pr
ANYTIME
ANYTIME: anytime dubitative amanj igo apii
pc
ANYWHERE
ANYWHERE: anywhere dubitative dibi go pc
APART
COME APART: gidiskise vai; gidiskise,
gidiskisemagad vii

apologize—arrive 
138
APOLOGIZE
APOLOGIZE: apologize to s.o. gaagiizom vta
APPEAR
APPEAR: bi-naagozi vai; bi-naagwad vii
APPEAR A CERTAIN WAY: appear a certain
way (especially as in a dream)
inaabaminaagozi vai; inaabaminaagwad
vii
APPEARANCE
CHANGE APPEARANCE: change s.o.'s ap-
pearance aanzinaago' vta; change s.t.'s ap-
pearance aanzinaagotoon vti2; change
one's own appearance aanzinaago'idizo
vai
HAVE A CERTAIN APPEARANCE:
izhinaagozi vai; izhinaagwad vii
APPEASE
APPEASE: appease s.o. gaagiizom vta
APPLE
APPLE: mishiimin, -ag na
APPLEJUICE
APPLE JUICE: mishiiminaaboo ni
APPLE TREE
APPLE TREE: mishiiminaatig, -oog na
APPLIQUE
APPLIQUE: applique piece agogwaajigan.
-an ni
APPOINT
APPOINT: appoint s.o. onagim via
APPROACH
APPROACH: approach s.o. naazikaw vta; ap-
proach s.t. naazikan vti; approach people
naazikaage vai
APPROXIMATELY
APPROXIMATELY: ingojipc, also ningoji*
APRIL
APRIL: iskigamizige-giizis na
APRON
KITCHEN APRON: inapizowin, -an ni
MAN'S APRON: man's apron (traditional
dress) aanziyaan, -an ni
ARENA
ARENA: zhooshkwaada'ewigamig, -oon ni
ARGUE
ARGUE: argue with s.o. giikaam vta; they
argue with each other giikaandiwag
/giikaandi-/ vai
ARM
ARM: my arm ninik, -an /-nik-/ nid
ACHE IN ARM: have an ache in one's arm
dewinike vai
BREAK ARM: break one's arm bookonike vai
BROKEN ARM: have a broken arm
bookonike vai
FALL AND BREAK ARM: fall and break
one's arm bookonikeshin vai
FALL AND TWIST ARM: fall and twist one's
arm biimiskonikeshin vai
HAVE SCAR ON ARM: have scar on one's
arm ojiishinike vai
LIFT ARM: lift one's arm ombinikeni vai
MOVE ARM A CERTAIN WAY: move one's
arm a certain way izhinikeni vai
NUMB ARM: have a numb arm niboowinike
vai
SORE ARM: have a sore arm gaagiijinike vai
SPRAIN ARM: sprain one's arm zeginikeshin
vai
STIFF ARM: have a stiff arm jiibadaakonike
vai; jiibajinike vai
STRONG ARM: have a strong arm
zoonginike vai
ARM GARTER
ARM GARTER: jiiskinikebizon, -an ni
WEAR ARM GARTERS: jiiskinikebizo vai
ARMPIT
ARMPIT: my armpit nining, -wiin /-ningwy-/
nid
AROUND
ALL AROUND: all around it giiwitaa-ayi'ii
pc, also giiwitaayi'ii
AROUND THE FIRE: giiwitaashkode pc
GO AROUND: giiwitaashkaa vai
LAY DOWN AROUND: lay s.o. down around
giiwitaashim vta; lay s.t. down around
giiwitaasidoon vti2
RUN AROUND: run around s.t.
giiwitaabatwaadan vti; run around
something giiwitaabatoo vai
WALK AROUND: walk around s.o.
giiwitaashkaw vta; walk around s.t.
giiwitaashkan vti; walk around something
giiwitaawose vai, also giiwitaa'ose
WALK AROUND THE EDGE:
giiwitaayaazhagaame vai
ARREST
ARREST: arrest s.o. dakon vta; arrest people
dakoniwe vai
ARRIVE
ARRIVE: dagoshin vai; dagoshinoomagad
vii: bagami-ayaa vai; bagami-ayaa,
bagami-ayaamagad vii; arrive with s.o.
dagoshim vta; arriving bagami-p?;4
ARRIVE BY BOAT: bagamishkaa vai
ARRIVE CARRYING: arrive carrying s.o.
bagamiwizh /bagamiwiN-/ vta; arrive
carrying s.t. bagamiwidoon vti2
ARRIVE CRAWLING: bagamoode vai
ARRIVE DRIVING: bagamibide,
bagamibidemagad vii; bagamibizo vai;
bagamidaabii'iwe vai
ARRIVE FLEEING: arrive fleeing from people
bagamiba'iwe vai
ARRIVE FLYING: bagamibide,
bagamibidemagad vii; bagamibizo vai;
bagamise vai; bagamise,
bagamisemagad vii
ARRIVE LAUGHING: bagamaapi vai
ARRIVE MAD: bagamigidaazo vai
ARRIVE ON HORSEBACK: bagamoomigo
vai
ARRIVE ON THE RUN: bagamibatoo vai;
they arrive on the run together
bagamiba'idiwag /bagamiba'idi-/ vai
ARRIVE PADDLING: bagamishkaa vai
ARRIVE SPEEDING: bagamibide,
bagamibidemagad vii; bagamibizo vai

139 
arrive—attract
ARRIVE SWIMMING: bagamaadagaa vai
ARRIVE WALKING: bagamose vai
ARRIVE WITH NEWS: bagamaajimo vai
ARROGANT
ARROGANT: be arrogant maminaadizi vai
ARROGANT ATTITUDE: have an arrogant
attitude maminaadendam vai2
ARROW
ARROW: bikwak, -oon ni
SHOOT WITH AN ARROW: shoot s.o. with
an arrow or other missile bimo /bimw-/
vta; shoot s.t. with an arrow or other
missile bimodan vti; shoot things with an
arrow or other missile bimojige vai
ARTHRITIS
ARTHRITIS: have arthritis okanaapine vai
ARTIST
ARTIST: mazinibii'igewinini, -wag na
AS FOR
AS FOR: gaye pc, also ge
AS IF
AS IF: indigo pc, also nindigo*
ASH
BLACK ASH: black ash (tree) aagimaak,
-wag na
WHITE ASH: white ash (tree)
baapaagimaak, -wag na
ASHAMED
ASHAMED: be ashamed agadendam vai2;
agadendaagoxi vai; be ashamed before
s.o. agajiitaw vta; be ashamed of s.o.
agadenim vta; be ashamed of s.t.
agadendan vti
MAKE ASHAMED: make s.o. ashamed agaji'
vta
ASHES
ASHES: bingwi ni; ishkode-bingwi ni
HOT ASHES: be hot ashes akakanzhekaa.
akakanzhekaamagad vii
ASHORE
BLOWN ASHORE: be blown ashore
agwaayaashi vai; agwaayaasin vii
COME ASHORE: agwaataa vai; come ashore
in a boat agwaia'o vai, also agwaa'am;
come ashore in canoe mizhagaa vai
DRAG ASHORE: drag s.o. ashore
agwaadaabaazh /agwaadaabaaN-/ vta;
drag s.t. ashore agwaadaabaadan vti; drag
something ashore agwaadaabii vai
GO ASHORE: agwaataa vai
PULL ASHORE: pull s.o. ashore agwaabizh
/agwaabiN-/ vta; pull s.t. ashore
agwaabidoon vti2
RUN ASHORE: a.gwaabatoo vai
SAIL ASHORE: agwaayaashi vai
SWIM ASHORE: agwaayaadagaa vai
TAKE ASHORE BY BOAT: take s.t. ashore
by boat agwaa 'oodoon vti2
TAKEN ASHORE: be taken ashore
agwaasijigaade, agwaasijigaademagad
vii; agwaasijigaazo vai
ASK
ASK: ask for s.t. nandodan vti; ask s.o. for
(s.t.) nandodamaw vta; ask people for
(s.t.) nandodamaage vai
ASK ALONG: ask s.o. along wiizhaam vta
ASK QUESTIONS: gagwedwe vai; ask s.o.
questions gagwejim vta; they ask each
other questions gagwejindiwag
/gagwejindi-/ vai
GO AND ASK: go and ask for s.o.
nandwewem vta; go and ask for s.t.
nandwewendan vti; go and ask s.o. (for
s.t.) nandwewendamaw vta
ASLEEP
FALL ASLEEP: gawingwashi vai
ASPHALT
ASPHALT: makade-bigiw na
ASPHALT ROAD
ASPHALT ROAD: bigii-miikana, -n ni
ASPIRIN
ASPIRIN: dewikwe-mashkikiins, -an ni
ASSEMBLE
ASSEMBLE: assemble s.o. onin vta; assemble
s.t. oninan vti; assemble things oninige vai
ASSINIBOIN
ASSINIBOIN: asinii-bwaan, -ag na
ASSOCIATE
ASSOCIATE: associate with s.o. wiisookaw
vta
ASTONISH
ASTONISH: maamakaadizi vai
ASTONISHED
ASTONISHED: be astonished
maamakaadendam vai2; be astonished at
s.o. maamakaadenim vta; be astonished
at s.t. maamakaadendan vti
ASTONISHING
ASTONISHING: maamakaaj pc; astonishing!
maamakaadakamig pc
CONSIDERED ASTONISHING: be consid-
ered astonishing maamakaadendaagwad
vii
ASTRIDE
SIT ASTRIDE: desabi vai
AT HAND
AT HAND: wenipazh pc
AT RANDOM
AT RANDOM: bagwana/v
ATTACK
ATTACK: attack s.o. mawinazh /mawinaN-/
vta; attack s.o. from hiding mookiitaw vta
ATTEMPT
ATTEMPT: goji-pv4
ATTENDANT
CEREMONIAL ATTENDANT:
oshkaabewis, -ag na
ATTENTION
ATTENTION: attention! ambe pc
ATTRACT
ATTRACT: attract s.o. zhoobi' vta

august—ax handle 
140
AUGUST
AUGUST: manoominike-giizis na; miini-
giizis na, also miinike-giizis
AUNT
AUNT: my cross aunt (father's sister) inzigos,
-ag /-zigos-/ nod; my parallel aunt
(mother's sister) ninoshenh, -yag
/-nosheny-/ nad
AUTHORITY
AUTHORITY: ogimaawiwin, -an ni
AUTOMOBILE MECHANIC
AUTOMOBILE MECHANIC:
nanaa'idaabaanewinini, -wag na;
nanaa'idaabaanikewinini, -wag na
AUTUMN
AUTUMN: be autumn dagwaagin
/dagwaagi-/ vii
LAST AUTUMN: dagwaagong/v
AVOID
AVOID TALKING: avoid talking to s.o.
boonim vta
AWAKE
AWAKE: be awake goshkozi vai
COME AWAKE: amajise vai
SHAKE AWAKE: shake s.o. awake
amajwebin vta
AWAY
BLOWN AWAY: be blown away animaashi
vai; animaasin vii
CARRY AWAY: carry s.o. away animiwizh
/animiwiN-/ vta; carry s.t. away
animiwidoon vti2
CARRY AWAY ON BACK: carry s.o. away
on one's back animoom vta; carry s.t.
away on one's back animoondan vti
CLOUDS GO AWAY: animaanakwad vii
CRAWL AWAY: animoode vai
DANCE AWAY: animishimo vai
DRAG AWAY: animidaabii vai
DRIFT AWAY: animaabogo vai;
animaaboode, animaaboodemagad vii
DRIFT AWAY ON THE WAVES: animaa'an
vii; animaa'ogo vai
DRIVE AWAY: animibide, animibidemagad
vii; animibizo vai; animidaabii'iwe vai;
drive away with horses animiba'igo vai;
drive away with s.o. (e.g., a car)
animibizoni' vta; drive away with s.t.
animibizonitoon vti2
DRIVE AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewebide, animwewebidemagad
vii; animwewebizo vai
DRIVE AWAY WITH A LIGHT:
animaazakonenjigebizo vai
FLOAT AWAY: animaabogo vai;
animaaboode, animaaboodemagad vii
FLOW AWAY: animijiwan vii
FLY AWAY: animibide, animibidemagad vii;
animibizo vai; animise vai; animise,
animisemagad vii
FLY AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewebide, animwewebidemagad
vii; animwewebizo vai
FOLLOW A TRAIL AWAY: anima'adoo vai;
follow s.o.'s trail away anima'azh
/anima'aN-/ vta; follow s.t. away as a trail
anima'adoon vti2
GO AWAY: go away! awas pc
GO AWAY IN A CANOE: animishkaa vai
GO AWAY LAUGHING: animaapi vai
GO AWAY MAD: animigidaazo vai
GO AWAY ON THE ICE: animaadagaako
vai
GO AWAY SINGING: anima'amaazo vai
GO AWAY SPEAKING: animwewidam vai2
GO AWAY WITH A LIGHT:
animaazakonenjige vai
GOING AWAY: ani- pv2, also ni-
LEAVE TRACKS GOING AWAY:
animikawe vai
PADDLE AWAY: animishkaa vai
RAIN GOES AWAY: animibiisaa,
animibiisaamagad vii
RIDE AWAY ON HORSEBACK:
animoomigo vai
RUN AWAY: animibatoo vai; run away (in
the other direction) with s.o.
animibatwaazh /animibatwaaN-/ vta; run
away (in the other direction) with s.t.
animibatwaadan vti; they run away (in the
other direction) together animiba'idiwag
/animiba'idi-/ vai
RUN AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewebatoo vai
RUN AWAY SCARED: animinizhimo vai
SAIL AWAY: animaashi vai; animaasin vii
SKATE AWAY: animaada'e vai
SPEED AWAY: animibide, animibidemagad
vii; animibizo vai
SPEED AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewebide, animwewebidemagad
vii; animwewebizo vai
SWIM AWAY: animaadagaa vai
TAKE AWAY: take s.o. away animiwizh
/animiwiN-/ vta; take s.t. away
animiwidoon vti2
TAKE AWAY BY BOAT: take s.o. away by
boat anima'oozh /anima'ooN-/ vta; take
s.t. away by boat anima'oodoon vti2
WADE AWAY: animaadagaazii vai
WALK AWAY: animose vai
WALK AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewetoo vai
AWFUL
AWFUL: gagwaanisagakamig pc
AWL
AWL: migoos, -an ni
AX
AX: waagaakwad, -oon ni
AX HANDLE
AX HANDLE: waagaakwadwaatig, -oon ni

141 
baby—badly
B
BABY
BABY: abinoojiiyens, -ag >ia, also abinoojiins;
biibii, -yag na
BABY IN A CEiADLE BOARD:
dakobinaawaswaan, -ag na
CARRY A BABY ALONG ON BACK: carry a
baby along on one's back bimoomaawaso
vai
CARRY A BABY TO A CERTAIN PLACE
ON BACK: cany a baby to a certain place
on one's back inoomaawaso vai
HAVE A BABY IN A CRADLE BOARD:
dakobinaawaso vai
BABY-SIT
BABY-SIT: bamoozhe vai
BACK
BACK: my back nipikwan, -an /-pikwan-/ nid
FALL AND BREAK BACK: fall and break
one's back bookwaawiganeshin vai
MIDDLE OF THE BACK: in the middle of
the back naawaawigan pc
SCRATCH BACK: scratch s.o.'s back
jiichiigaawiganebizh
/jiichiigaawiganebiN-/ vta
SMALL OF BACK: the small of my back
inzhiigan /-zhiigan-/ nid
SORE BACK: have a sore back
gaagiidaawigan vai
WARM BACK: warm one's back
abaawigarvezo vai
BACK
BACK: back (in time) ishkweyaang pc; back
to previous place or condition neyaab pc
BACK UP: azhetaa vai
GO BACK: azhe- pv4; azhegiiwe vai
HAND BACK: hand s.o. back azhen vta;
hand s.t. back azhenan vti
IN THE BACK: ishkweyaang pc
PULL BACK: pull s.o. back azhebizh
/azhebiN-/ vta; pull s.t. back azhebidoon
vti2
TAKE BACK: take s.o. back azhen vta; take
s.t. back azhenan vti; take (s.t.) back to
s.o. azhenamaw vta
TURN AND LOOK BACK: aabanaabi vai;
turn and look back at s.o. aabanaabam
vta; turn arid look back at s.t.
aabanaabandan vti
BACK UP
BACK UP A VEHICLE: azhebizo vai
BACKACHE
BACKACHE: have a backache dewaawigan
vai; dewipikwan vai
BACKPACK
BACKPACK: bimiwanaan, -an ni
BACKWARDS
FALL OVER BACKWARDS: aazhigijishin
vai; aazhigijisin vii
GO BACKWARDS: azheshkaa vai; azhetaa
vai
LAY OVER BACKWARDS: lay s.o. over
backwards aazhigijishim vta; lay s.t. over
backwards aazhigijisidoon vti2
PADDLE BACKWARDS: azhe'o vai
SIT FACING BACKWARDS: animikwabi
vai
THROW OVER BACKWARDS: throw s.o.
over backwards aazhigidwebin vta; throw
s.t. over backwards aazhigidwebinan vti
TURN OVER BACKWARDS: aazhigijise
vai; aazhigijise, aazhigijisemagad vii
TURN TO FACE BACKWARDS: turn s.o. to
face backwards animikon vta; turn s.t. to
face backwards animikonan vti
TURNED TO FACE BACKWARDS: be
turned to face backwards animikonigaade,
animikonigaademagad vii;
animikonigaazo vai
BACON
BACON: giikanaamozigan na
BAD
BAD: maji- pv4; maza.k\-pv4
BAD BREATH: have bad breath
maazhimaagwanaamo vai
BAD DAY: be a bad day maazhi-giizhigad vii
BAD DREAM: have a bad dream
giiwanaadingwaam vai
BAD LUCK: have bad luck maazhise vai
BAD ROAD: be bad (as a road or trail)
maanadamon /maanadamo-/vii
BAD TRAIL: be bad (as a road or trail)
maanadamon /maanadamo-/ vii
BAD VOICE: have a bad voice maanowe vai
BAD WEATHER: be bad weather niiskaadad
vii
CONSIDERED BAD: be considered bad
maanendaagwad vii
FEEL BAD: maanamanji'o vai; maanendam
vai2, also maazhendam; feel bad about s.t.
maanendan vti
HAVE A BAD FALL: aapijishin vai
LEAD A BAD LIFE: maazhi-bimaadizi vai
SMELL BAD: maazhimaagozi vai;
maazhimaagwad vii
SMELL BAD BURNING OR COOKING:
maazhimaaso vai; maazhimaate vii
SOUND BAD: hear s.o. sounding bad
maanitaw vta; hear s.t. sounding bad
maanitan vti
TASTE BAD: maazhipogozi vai;
maazhipogwad vii; taste bad (as a liquid)
maanaagamin /maanaagami-/ vii
BAD OFF
BAD OFF: be bad off maazhi-ayaa vai
CONSIDER BAD OFF: consider s.o. bad off
maanenim vta
CONSIDERED BAD OFF: be considered bad
off maanendaagozi vai
BADGER
BADGER: misakakojiish, -ag na
BADLY
BADLY: debinaak pc

badly—bashful 
142
BEHAVE BADLY: maazhi-bimaadizi vai;
maazhi-izhiwebizi vai
BAG
BAG: mashkimod, -an ni
BAG WITH CLOSEABLE TOP:
gashkibidaagan, -ag na
CEDAR BARK BAG: giishkashkimod, -an ni
CERTAIN NUMBER OF BAGS: dasooshkin
pc
CLOTH BAG: bagiwayaaneshkimod, -an ni
HALF A BAG: aabitooshkin pc
MEDICINE BAG: Mide medicine bag
midewayaan, -ag na
PAPER BAG: mazina'igani-mashkimodens,
-an ni
RICE BAG: manoomini-mashkimod, -an ni;
manoominiwazh, -an ni
BAIL
BAIL: iska'ibii vai
BAIL OUT: bail s.o. out diba' /diba'w-/ vta
BAIT
BAIT: miijimikanjigan. -an ni; bait things
miijimikanjige vai
BAKE
BAKE: bake s.o. giboz /gibozw-/ via; bake s.t.
gibozan vti; bake things gibozige vai
BAKER
BAKER: bakwezhiganikewinini, -wag na;
baker (female) bakwezhiganikewikwe, -g
na
BAKERY
BAKERY: bakwezhiganikewigamig, -oon ni
BAKING POWDER
BAKING POWDER: ombisijigaans, -an ni
BAKING SODA
BAKING SODA: ombizigan ni
BALD
BALD: be bald waabizhagindibe vai
BALD EAGLE
BALD EAGLE: migizi, -wag na
BALL
BALL: bikwaakwad, -oon ni
BALL OF TWINE OR YARN: bikoojaan, -an
ni
POOL BALL: nemaab, -iin ni
BALM OF GILEAD
BALM OF GILEAD TREE: maanazaadi,
-wag na
BALSAM FIR
BALSAM FIR: zhingob, -iig na
BALSAM POPLAR
BALSAM POPLAR: maanazaadi, -wag na
BANANA
BANANA: wewaagijiizid ni-pt
BANDAGE
BANDAGE: ziinzoopizon, -an ni
BANDOLIER BAG
BANDOLIER BAG: gashkibidaagan, -ag na,
also aazhoningwa'igan
BANK
BANK: zhooniyaawigamig, -oon ni
BANK
STEEP BANK: be a steep bank giishkadinaa.
giishkadinaamagad vii
BAPTIZE
BAPTIZE: baptize s.o. ziiga'andaw vta
BAR
BAR: minikwewigamig, -oon ni;
ziiginigewigamig, -oon ni
BAR
BAR: bar s.t. (as something stick- or wood-
like) gashkaakonan vti
BARBER
BARBER: baapaagokozhiwewinini, -wag na;
giishkikozhiwewinini, -wag na
BARBER SHOP
BARBER SHOP: baapaagokozhiwewigamig,
-oon ni
BARE
ON A BARE SURFACE: michayi'ii pc
BARE GROUND
ON BARE GROUND: mitakamig/v
SIT ON THE BARE GROUND: mitabi vai
BARE-HEADED
BARE-HEADED: be bare-headed
mitaakondibe vai
BAREFOOT
BAREFOOT: be barefoot zhaashaaginizide
vai
BARELY
BARELY: agaawaa/v,- m\ch\-pv4
BARK
BARK: migi vai; bark at s.o. migizh /migiN-/
vta; bark at s.t. migidan vti
BARK
BARK: bark (of a tree) wanagek, -wag na
INNER BARK OF BASSWOOD: wiigob, -iin
ni
BARK LODGE
BARK LODGE: wanagekogamig, -oon ni
BARK TORCH
BARK TORCH: biimashkwemaginigan, -an
ni
BARMAID
BARMAID: ziiginigewikwe, -g na
BARN
BARN: awakaanigamig, -oon ni
BARREL
BARREL: makakosag, -oon ni
BARTENDER
BARTENDER: ziiginigewinini, -wag na
BASEBALL
PLAY BASEBALL: bakitejii'ige vai
BASEBALL BAT
BASEBALL BAT: bakitejii'iganaak, -oon ni
BASEBALL PLAYER
BASEBALL PLAYER: bakitejii'igewinini,
-wag na
BASEMENT
IN THE BASEMENT: anaamisagpc
BASHFUL
BASHFUL: be bashful agaji vai

143 
bask—bear paw snowshoe
BASK
BASK: bask in the sun abaasandeke vai
BASKET
BASKET OF SPRUCE ROOT: wadabii-
makak, -oon ni
BIRCH BARK BASKET: makak, -oon ni;
wiigwasi-makak, -oon ni; birch bark
basket for maple sugar ziinzibaakwado-
makak, -oon ni
WILLOW BASKET: oziisigobimizhii-makak,
-oon ni
BASS
LARGEMOUTH BASS: ashigan, -ag na
BASSWOOD
BASSWOOD: basswood tree wiigob, -iig na;
wiigobaatig -oog na; wiigobimizh, -iig na
INNER BARK OF BASSWOOD: wiigob, -iin
ni
BASSWOOD BARK FIBER
BASSWOOD BARK FIBER: processed
basswood bark fiber asigobaan m
BAT
BASEBALL BAT: bakitejii'iganaak, -oon ni
BAT
BAT: bapakwaanaajiinh, -yag na, also
apakwaanaajiinh
BATH
TAKE A BATH: giziibiigazhe vai
BATHE
BATHE: bagizo vai
BATHROOM
BATHROOM: miiziiwigamig, -oon ni
BATHTUB
BATHTUB: bagizowin, -an ni
BATTERY
BATTERY: ishkode-makakoons, -an ni
BATTLE
BATTLE: miigaadiwin, -an ni
BAY
BAY: be a bay wiikwegamaa,
wiikwegamaamagad vii
BE
BE: be (in a certain place) ayaa vai; ayaa,
ayaamagad vii; be a certain thing aawan
vii; be a certain thing or being aawi vai
BE A CERTAIN WAY: izhi-ayaa vai; be a
certain way (as a liquid) inaagamin
/inaagami-/ vii; be a certain way (as
something mineral) inaabikad vii;
inaabikizi vai; be a certain way (as
something sheet-like) izhiigad vii; izhiigizi
vai; be a certain way (as something stick-
or wood-like) inaakozi vai; inaakwad vii;
be a certain way (as something string-like)
inaabiigad vii; inaabiigizi vai
BE IN: biinde, biindemagad vii; biinzo vai
BE IN A CERTAIN PLACE: abi vai; ate,
atemagad vii; dagon /dago-/ vii; be (in a
certain place) ayaa vai; ayaa, ayaamagad
vii
BE IN A CERTAIN STATE: with apv4be in
a certain state ayaa, ayaamagad vii; ayaa
vai
BE IN THE SKY: be in the sky (e.g., a star,
the sun, or the moon) agoojin vai
BE WITH: be with s.o. wiij'ayaaw vta, also
wiiji-ayaaw
COME TO BE: bagami-ayaa, bagami-
ayaamagad vii
SEEM TO BE A CERTAIN WAY:
inendaagwad vii
THINK TO BE IN A CERTAIN PLACE:
think s.o. to be in a certain place danenim
vta; think s.t. to be in a certain place
danendan vti
BEACH
LONG STRETCH OF SAND BEACH: be a
long stretch of sand beach
ginoodaawangaa,
ginoodaawangaamagad vii
SANDY BEACH: be a sandy beach
mitaawangaa, mitaawangaamagad vii
BEAD
BEAD: manidoominens, -ag na;
mazinigwaaso vai; bead on s.o.
mazinigwaazh /mazinigwaaN-/ vta; bead
s.t. mazinigwaadan vti
BEAD CORRECTLY: bead s.t. correctly (on
a loom) gwayakwaabidoo'an vti; bead
things correctly (on a loom)
gwayakwaabidoo'ige vai
BEAD ON A LOOM: bead s.t. on a loom
mazinaabidoo'an vti; bead things on a
loom mazinaabidoo'ige vai
MAKE A MISTAKE BEADING: make a
mistake beading s.t. on a loom
wanaabidoo'an vti; make a mistake
beading things on a loom wanaabidoo'ige
vai
BEAD LOOM
BEAD LOOM: mazinaabidoo'iganaatig,
-oon ni
BEAD WORK
BEAD WORK: item of bead work
manidoominensikaan, -ag na
BEADING NEEDLE
BEADING NEEDLE: naabidoo'igan, -an ni
BEAK
BEAK: my beak nikoonzh /-koonzh-/ nid
BEAN
BEAN: mashkodesimin, -ag na, also
mashkodiisimin
BEAN SOUP
BEAN SOUP: mashkodesiminaaboo ni
BEAR
BEAR: bear s.o. (e.g., a child) niigi" vta
BEAR ON BODY: bear s.o. on one's body
gigishkaw vta; bear s.t. on one's body
gigishkan vti
BEAR
BEAR: makwa, -g na
BEAR CUB: makoons, -ag na
BEAR PAW SNOWSHOE
BEAR PAW SNOWSHOE: makwasaagim,
-ag na

beard—bend
144
BEARD
BEARD: have a beard miishidaamikan vai
BEAT
BEAT: beat s.o. niiwezh /niiweN-/ vta
BEAT IN A CONTEST: beat s.o. in a contest
bakinaw vta; beat people in a contest
bakinaage vai
BEAT IN A GAME: beat s.o. in a game
gabenaw vta
BEAT TO DEATH: beat s.o. to death
niiwana* /niiwana'w-/ via
BEAUTIFUL
BEAUTIFUL: be beautiful miikawaadad mi;
miikawaadizi vai
BEAVER
BEAVER: amik, -wag na
HUNT BEAVER: noodamikwe vai
BEAVER HIDE
BEAVER HIDE: amikwayaan, -ag na
BEAVER LODGE
BEAVER LODGE: amikwiish, -an m
BECAUSE
BECAUSE: onji- pv3
BED
BED: nibaagan, -an ni; bed (in wigwam)
desa'on, -an ni; bed (made on the floor or
ground) apishimon, -an ni
GO TO BED: gawishimo vai
MAKE A BED: ozisijige vai, also ozhisijige;
make a bed (as in camp) apishimonike vai
PUT TO BED: put s.o. to bed nibe' vta
WET THE BED: zhigingwaam vai
BED FRAME
BED FRAME: nibaaganaatig, -oon ni
BEDROOM
BEDROOM: nibewigamig, -oon ni
BEE
BEE: aamoo, -g na
BEEHIVE
BEEHIVE: aamoo-wadiswan, -an m
BEEF
BEEF: bizhiki-wiiyaas HI, also bizhikiwi-
wiiyaas
BEER
BEER: biitewaaboo ni; zhingobaaboo ni
BEET
BEET: misko-jiis. -an ni
SUGAR BEET: wiishkobi-jiis, -an ni
BEFORE
BEFORE: jibwaa-pc/, also ji-bwaa-
AS BEFORE: neyaab pc
BEFORE THE USUAL TIME: noonde- pv4
BEFOREHAND
BEFOREHAND: giizhaapc
BEG
BEG: beg s.o. for (s.t.) nandodamaw vta; beg
people for (s.t.) nandodamaage vai
BEGGAR
BEGGAR: nendodamaageshkid na-pt
BEGIN
BEGIN: maajii- pv4; maajise vai; maajise,
maajisemagad vii
BEGINNING
IN THE BEGINNING: wayeshkad pc
BEHAVE
BEHAVE A CERTAIN WAY: izhiwebizi vai
BEHAVE ANGRILY: nishkaajitaa vai
BEHAVE BADLY: maazhi-bimaadizi vai;
maazhi-izhiwebizi vai
BEHAVE WELL: mino-izhiwebizi vai
BEHIND
BEHIND: ishkweyaang pc
BEHOLD
BEHOLD: behold! inashkepc, also nashke;
wegwaagi pc
BEING
BEING: a being aya'aa, -g pr
BELIEVABLE
BELIEVABLE: be believable debwetaagozi
vai; debwetaagwad vii
BELIEVE
BELIEVE: debwetam vai2; debweyendam
vai2; believe s.o. debwetaw vta; believe
s.t. debwetan vii
BELIEVE IN: believe in s.o. debweyenim vta;
believe in s.t. debweyendan vti
NOT BELIEVE: not believe s.t. said
aagonwetan vti; not believe what s.o. says
aagonwetaw vta
BELIEVED
BELIEVED: be believed debwetaagozi vai;
debwetaagwad vii
BELL
BELL: godotaagan, -an ni
SMALL ROUND BELL: zhinawa'oojigan,
-an ni
BELONG
BELONG: dibendaagozi vai; dibendaagwad
vii
BELONG TO A GROUP: aginzo vai
BELONGING
BELONGINGS: daniwin, -an ni
BELT
BELT: gijipizon, -an ni
BELT BUCKLE
BELT BUCKLE: gijipizonaabik, -oon ni
BENCH
BENCH: desa'on, -an ni
BEND
BEND A CERTAIN WAY: bend s.o. a certain
way inaagin vta; bend s.t. a certain way
inaaginan vti
BEND DOWN: zhagashkitaa vai
BEND INTO FORM: bend s.o. into form
onaagin vta; bend s.t. into form
onaaginan vti
BEND OVER: bend s.o. over biskin vta; bend
s.t. over biskinan vti
BEND OVER WITH HANDS: bend s.o. over
with hands biskibizh /biskibiN-/ vta; bend
s.t. over with hands biskibidoon vti2
BEND WITH HAND: bend s.o. with hand
waagin vta; bend s.t. with hand waaginan
vti

145
bend—bird
BEND WITH HANDS: bend s.o. with hands
waagibizh /waagibiN-/ vta; bend s.t. with
hands waagibidoon vti2
BENEFIT
BENEFIT: benefit s.o. debi' vta
BENT
BENT: be bent waagaa, waagaamagad vii;
waagizi vai; be bent (as something min-
eral) waagaabikad vii; waagaabikizi vai;
be bent (as something stick- or wood-like)
waagaakozi vai; waagaakwad vii
BENT A CERTAIN WAY: be bent a certain
way inaaginigaade, inaaginigaademagad
vii; inaaginigaazo vai
BENT OVER: be bent over biskaa,
biskaamagad vii; biskinigaade,
biskinigaademagad vii
BERRY
PICK BERRIES: mawinzo vai
BET
BET: ataage vai; they bet with each other
ataadiwag /ataadi-/ vai
PLACE A BET: achige vai
BETWEEN
IN BETWEEN: in between it nisawayi'ii pc
BEWARE
BEWARE: beware! (a warning based on a
premonition) baapiniziwaagan pc
BEYOND
BEYOND: awasi- pn; beyond it awasayi'ii pc
BEYOND THE FIRE: awasishkode pc
BEYOND THE MOUNTAIN: awasajiwpc
BEYOND THE WOODS: awasaakwaa fit
BIBLE
BIBLE: gagiikwe-mazina'igan, -an ni
BICYCLE
BICYCLE: ditibiwebishkigan, -ag na
BIG
BIG: gichi- pv4, also chi-; be big michaa,
michaamagad vii; mindido vai; they are
big mamaachaawan /mamaachaa-/,
mamaachaamagadoon vii;
mamaandidowag /mamaandido-/ vai; be
big (as something mineral) michaabikad
vii; michaabikizi vai; be big (as something
sheet-like) michiigad vii; michiigizi vai; be
big (as something stick- or wood-like)
michaakozi vai; michaakwad vii
APPEAR BIG: michaabaminaagwad vii
BIG EYE: have a big eye mangishkiinzhigwe
vai
BIG FOOT: have a big foot mangizide vai
BIG HAND: have a big hand mangininjii vai
BIG HEAD: have a big head mangindibe vai
BIG HILL: there is a big hill mangadinaa,
mangadinaamagad vii
MAKE BIG: make s.o. big mangi' vta;
mindido' vta; make s.t. big michaatoon
vti2
SO BIG: be so big inigini vai; inigokwaa,
inigokwaamagad vii; be so big (as some-
thing mineral) inigokwaabikad vii;
inigokwaabikizi vai; be so big (as
something sheet-like) inigokwegad vii;
inigokwegizi vai; be so big (as something
stick- or wood-like) inigokwaakozi vai;
inigokwaakwad vii; be so big (as some-
thing string-like) inigokwaabiigad vii;
inigokwaabiigizi vai
BILL
BILL: my bill nikoonzh /-koonzh-/ nid
BIND
BIND: bind s.o. dakobizh /dakobiN-/ vta;
bind s.t. dakobidoon vti2; bind things
dakobijige vai
BINDING
BINDING STICK: mikond, -ag na, also
mikwand
BINOCULARS
BINOCULARS: zhiibaayaabanjigan, -an m
BIRCH
BIRCH: birch (tree) wiigwaasi-mitig, -oog
na, also wiigwaasaatig; wiigwaas, -ag na
MANY BIRCHES: there are many birches
wiigwaasikaa, wiigwaasikaamagad vii
YELLOW BIRCH: wiinizik, -oog na
BIRCH BARK
BIRCH BARK: wiigwaas, -an ni
GATHER BIRCH BARK: maniwiigwaase
vai
REMOVE BIRCH BARK: remove birch bark
from the tree wiigwaasike vai
BIRCH BARK BASKET
BIRCH BARK BASKET: makak, -oon ni;
wiigwaasi-makak, -oon ni; birch bark
basket for maple sugar ziinzibaakwado-
makak, -oon ni
MAKE A BIRCH BARK BASKET:
makakoke vai
BIRCH BARK BOX
BIRCH BARK BOX: wiigwaasi-makak, -oon
ni
BIRCH BARK CANOE
BIRCH BARK CANOE: wiigwaasi-jiimaan,
-an ni
BIRCH BARK COVERING
BIRCH BARK COVERING:
wiigwaasabakway, -an ni
BIRCH BARK DISH
BIRCH BARK DISH: wiigwaasinaagan, -an
ni
BIRCH BARK LODGE
BIRCH BARK LODGE: wiigwaasigamig,
-oon ni
BIRCH BARK ROOF
BIRCH BARK ROOF: wiigwaasabakwaan,
-agna
BIRCH BARK ROOFING
ROLL OF BIRCH BARK ROOFING:
wiigwaasabakway, -an ni
BIRD
BIRD: bineshiinh, -yag na; bird (of large
species, e.g., hawk or eagle) binesi, -wag
na
BABY BIRD: banajaanh, -yag na
MALE BIRD: naabese, -g na

bird skin—blindfolded
146
BIRD SKIN
BIRD SKIN: bineshiinhwayaan, -ag na
BIRTH
GIVE BIRTH: ondaadiziike vai
BIRTHDAY
HAVE A BIRTHDAY: dibishkaa vai
BISON
BISON: bizhiki, -wag na; mashkode-bizhiki,
-wag na
BIT
BIT: zagidoonebijigan, -an ni
BITE
BITE: bite s.o. dakwam vta; bite s.t.
dakwandan vti; bite things dakwanjige
vai; bite people dakwange vai
BITE A PIECE OFF: bite a piece off s.o.
bakwem vta; bite a piece off s.t.
bakwendan vti
BITE THROUGH: bite s.o. through (e.g.,
something string-like) bakam vta; bite s.t.
through (e.g., something string-like)
bakandan vti; bite through s.o. cleanly
giishkam vta; bite through s.t. cleanly
giishkandan vti
TAKE A BITE: take a bite of s.o. nawadam
vta; take a bite of s.t. nawadandan vti; take
a bite of things nawadanjige vai
BITTER
BITTER: be bitter wiisagan vii, also wiisagaa;
wiisagizi vai; be bitter (as a liquid)
wiisagaagamin /wiisagaagami-/ vii
TASTE BITTER: wiisagipogozi vai;
wiisagipogwad vii
BITTERN
AMERICAN BITTERN: mooshka'osi, -wag
na
BLACK
BLACK: makade- pv4; be black makadewaa,
makadewaamagad vii; makadewizi vai;
be black (as a liquid) makadewaagamin
/makadewaagami-/ vii; be black (as
something mineral) makadewaabikad vii;
makadewaabikizi vai; be black (as
something sheet-like) makadewegad vii;
makadewegizi vai; be black (as something
stick- or wood-like) makadewaakozi vai;
makadewaakwad vii; be black (as
something string-like) makadewaabiigad
vii; makadewaabiigizi vai
BLACK HAIR: have black hair
makadewindibe vai
COLORED BLACK: be colored black
makadewaande, makadewaandemagad
vii; makadewaanzo vai
HAVE A BLACK EYE: ozhaawashkwaabi
vai
WEAR BLACK: makadewi'o vai
BLACK ASH
BLACK ASH: black ash (tree) aagimaak,
-wag na
BLACK CHERRY
BLACK CHERRY: ookwemin, -an ni
BLACK CHERRY BUSH
BLACK CHERRY BUSH:
ookweminagaawanzh. -iig na
BLACK DUCK
BLACK DUCK: makadeshib, -ag na
BLACK
BLACK PERSON: makade-wiiyaas, -ag na
BLACK WOMAN: makade-wiiyaasikwe, -g
na
BLACKBERRY
BLACKBERRY: odatagaagomin, -ag na
BLACKBERRY BUSH
BLACKBERRY BUSH:
odatagaagominagaawanzh, -iig na
BLACKBIRD
BLACKBIRD: asiginaak, -wag na
BLACKSMITH
BLACKSMITH: awashtoyaa, -g na, also
awishtoyaa
BLAME
BLAME: blame s.o. (in speech) anaamim vta;
blame people anaaminge vai; they blame
each other anaamindiwag /anaamindi-/
vai; blame oneself anaamindizo vai
BLANKET
BLANKET: waabooyaan, -an ni, also
waabowayaan; agwazhe'on, -an ni; my
blanket nikonaas, -an /-konaas-/ nid
COVER WITH BLANKETS: cover s.o. with
blankets agwazhe' vta
COVERED WITH BLANKETS: be covered
with blankets agwazhe vai
BLAST
BLAST: blast s.o. baasaabikiz
/baasaabikizw-/ vta; blast s.t.
baasaabikizan vti; blast things
baasaabikizige vai
BLAZE
BLAZE UP: miskwakone,
miskwakonemagad vii
BLEACHED
BLEACHED: be bleached waabide,
waabidemagad vii; waabizo vai
BLEED
BLEED: miskwiiwi vai
BLESS
BLESS: bless s.o. zhawenim vta
BLESSED
BLESSED: be blessed zhawendaagozi vai
BLIND
HUNTING BLIND: akandoowin, -an ni
USE A BLIND: akandoo vai
BLIND
BLIND: be blind gagiibiingwe vai
BLINDFOLD
BLINDFOLD: basangwaabapijigan, -an ni;
blindfold s.o. basangwaabapizh
/basangwaabapiN-/ vta
BLINDFOLDED
BLINDFOLDED: be blindfolded
basangwaabapizo vai

147 
blister—boat
BLISTER
BLISTER: have a blister abashkwebiigizi vai
BLISTER ON FOOT: get a blister on one's
foot abashkwebiigizideshin vai
BLISTER ON HAND: get a blister on one's
hand abash kwebiigininjiishin vai
BLIZZARD
BLIZZARD: be a blizzard biiwan vii
BLOATED
BLOATED: be bloated baasinigo vai
BLOCK
BLOCK WITH FOOT OR BODY: block s.o.
with foot or body gibishkaw vta; block s.t.
with foot or body gibishkan vti
BLOND
BLOND: be blond ozaawindibe vai
BLOOD
BLOOD: miskwi ni
BLOOD CLOT
BLOOD CLOT: wado, -wag na
BLOODSUCKER
BLOODSUCKER: ozagaskwaajime, -g na,
also zagaskwaajime
BLOODY
BLOODY: be bloody miskwiiwi vai
BLOODY NOSE: bloody s.o.'s nose
gibitaneganaam vta; have a bloody nose
miskwiiwijaane vai
BLOODY NOSE FALLING: bloody one's
nose falling gibitaneshin vai
BLOOM
BLOOM: baashkaabigwanii.
baashkaabigwaniimagad vii
BLOSSOM
BLOSSOM: b;iashkaabigwanii,
baashkaabigwaniimagad vii
BLOW
BLOW: blow on s.o. boodaazh /boodaaN-/
vta; blow on s.t. boodaadan vti; blow on
things boodaajige vai
BLOW NOSE: blow one's nose ziinikiigome
vai
BLOW UP: baashkide, baashkidemagad vii;
baashkizo vai
BLOWN
BLOWN A CERTAIN WAY: be blown a
certain way inaashi vai; inaasin vii
BLOWN ABOUT: be blown about
babaamaashi vai; babaarnaasin vii
BLOWN ALONG: be blown along bimaashi
vai; bimaasin vii
BLOWN APART: be blown apart biigwaashi
vai; biigwaasin vii
BLOWN ASHORE: be blown ashore
agwaayaashi vai; agwaayaasin vii
BLOWN AWAY: be blown away animaashi
vai; animaasin vii; webaashi vai;
webaasin vii
BLOWN FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: be
blown from a certain place ondaashi vai;
be blown from a certain place ondaasin vii
BLOWN HERE: be blown here biidaashi vai;
biidaasin vii
BLOWN IN: be blown in bagamaashi vai;
bagamaasin vii
BLOWN INSIDE: be blown inside
biindigeyaashi vai; biindigeyaasin vii
BLOWN INTO THE WATER: be blown into
the water bakobiiyaashi vai;
bakobiiyaasin vii
BLOWN OVER: be blown over gawaashi vai;
gawaasin vii
BLOWN UPWARDS: be blown upwards
ombaashi vai; ombaasin vii
BLOWOUT
BLOWOUT: have a blowout baashkijiisijige
vai
BLUE
BLUE: ozhaawashko- pv4; be blue
ozhaawashkozi vai; ozhaawashkwaa,
ozhaawashkwaamagad vii; be blue (as
something mineral) ozhaawashkwaabikad
vii; ozhaawashkwaabikizi vai; be blue (as
something sheet-like) ozhaawashkwegad
vii; ozhaawashkwegizi vai; be blue (as
something stick- or wood-like)
ozhaawashkwaakozi vai;
ozhaawashkwaakwad vii; be blue (as
something string-like)
ozhaawashkwaabiigad vii;
ozhaawashkwaabiigizi vai
WEAR BLUE: ozhaawashko'o vai
BLUE HERON
BLUE HERON: zhashagi, -wag na
BLUEJAY
BLUE JAY: diindiisi, -wag na
BLUEBERRY
BLUEBERRY: blueberries plural miinan
/miin-/ ni
BLUEBERRY PLANT
BLUEBERRY PLANT: miinagaawanzh, -iig
na
BLUEBERRY SAUCE
BLUEBERRY SAUCE: miini-
baashkiminasigan ni
BLUEBIRD
BLUEBIRD: ozhaawashko-bineshiinh, -yag
na
BLUSH
BLUSH: miskwiingwese vai
BOARD
BOARD: nabagisag, -oog na
BOARD
BOARD: boozi vai
BOAT
BOAT: jiimaan, -an ni
ARRIVE BY BOAT: bagamishkaa vai
COME IN A BOAT: biidaasamishkaa vai
GO ABOUT IN A BOAT: babaamishkaa vai
GO HOME BY BOAT: giiwe'o vai
LONG BOAT: be a long boat ginoonagad vii
MAKE A BOAT: jiimaanike vai
MIDDLE OF A BOAT: in the middle of a
boat naawoonag pc
NARROW BOAT: be narrow (as a boat)
agaasadeyoonagad vii

boat—brakes
148
POLE A BOAT: gaandakii'ige vai;
gaandakii'o vai
POLE A BOAT ALONG: bima'ookii vai
SHORT BOAT: be short (as a boat)
dakoonagad vii
UNDER A BOAT: anaamoonag pc
WIDE BOAT: be wide (as a boat)
mangadeyoonagad vii
WOODEN BOAT: mitigo-jiimaan, -an ni
BOBBER
BOBBER: deteba'agonjichigan, -an ni
BOBCAT
BOBCAT: gidagaa-bizhiw, -ag na
BODY
BODY: my body niiyaw, -an /-iiyaw-/ nid
GOOD BODY: have a good body
minwaabewizi vai
INSIDE BODY: inside the body biinjinapc
BOIL
BOIL: onde, ondemagad vii; onzo vai; boil
s.o. onzo /onzw-/ vta; boil s.t. onzan vti
BOIL DOWN: iskigamide, iskigamidemagad
vii; iskigamizo vai; boil s.t. down
iskigamizan vti; boil things down (e.g.,
maple sap) iskigamizige vai
BOIL OVER: ziigigamide,
ziigigamidemagad vii; ziigigamizo vai
BOIL TO SUGAR: ombigamizige vai; boil
s.t. to sugar ombigamizan vti
COOK BY BOILING: cook s.o. by boiling
gabaashim vta; cook s.t. by boiling
gabaatoon vti2
FINISH BOILING: giizhigamide,
giizhigamidemagad vii; finish boiling
things giizhigamizige vai
FINISH BOILING SAP: ishkwaagamizige
vai
MAKE NOISE BOILING: madwegamide,
madwegamidemagad vii; madwegamizo
vai
WHISTLE FROM BOILING:
gwiishkoshwewegamide,
gwiishkoshwewegamidemagad vii;
gwiishkoshwewegamizo vai
BONE
BONE: my bone nikan, -an /-kan-/ nid
STRONG BONES: have strong bones
zoongigane vai
BOOK
BOOK: mazina'igan, -an ni
PRAYER BOOK: anama'e-mazina'igan, -an
ni
SCHOOLBOOK: gikinoo'amaadii-
mazina'igan ni
BORN
BORN: be born niigi vai; ondaadizi vai
BORROW
BORROW: borrow (s.t.) from people
adaawange vai+o; borrow (s.t.) from s.o.
adaawam vta
BOSS
BOSS: ogimaa, -g na
BOTH
BOTH: eyiizh pc; nayenzh pc
AT BOTH HANDS: eyiidawininj pc
ON BOTH SIDES: on both sides of it
edawayi'ii pc
BOTHER
BOTHER: bother s.o. babaamenim vta;
migoshkaaji' vta; bother s.t.
babaamendan vti
BOTTLE
BOTTLE: omooday, -an ni
BOUGH
CEDAR BOUGH: giizhikaandag, -oog na
FIR BOUGH: zhingobaandag, -oog na
PINE BOUGH: zhingwaakwaandag, -oog na
BOUNCE
BOUNCE: gwaashkwesin vii
BOUND
BOUND: be bound dakobide,
dakobidemagad vii; dakobizo vai
BOW
BOW: mitigwaab, -iig na
BOWL
BOWL: boozikinaagan, -an ni
BOWSTRING
BOWSTRING: achaab, -iin ni
BOX
BOX: makak, -oon ni
BIRCH BARK BOX: wiigwaasi-makak, -oon
ni
CARDBOARD BOX: mazina'igani-makak,
-oon ni
MAKE A BOX: makakoke vai
WOODEN BOX: mitigo-makak, -oon ni
BOX
BOX: box s.o. gagwedaganaam vta; they box
each other gagwedaganaandiwag
/gagwedaganaandi-/ vai
BOXER
BOXER: gagwedaganewinini, -wag na
BOY
BOY: gwiiwizens, -ag na; be a boy
gwiiwizensiwi vai
ADOLESCENT BOY: oshkinawe, -g na; be
an adolescent boy oshkinawewi vai
BRACE AND BIT
BRACE AND BIT: biiminigan, -an ni
BRACELET
BRACELET: jiiskinikebizon, -an ni
WEAR A BRACELET: jiiskinikebizo vai
BRAID
BRAID: okaadenigan, -an ni; braid s.o.'s hair
okaaden vta; braid s.t. okaadenan vii;
braid things okaadenige vai
HAVE BRAIDS: okaadenige vai
BRAIDED
BRAIDED: be braided okaadenigaade,
okaadenigaademagad vii
BRAIDED RUG
BRAIDED RUG: okaadenigan, -an ni
BRAIN
BRAIN: my brain niinindib /-iinindib-/ nid
BRAKES
BRAKES: nagaawebishkigan, -an ni

149 
brakes—bring
APPLY THE BRAKES: nagaawebishkige vai
BRANCH
BRANCH: wadikwan, -an ni
RIVER BRANCHES: branch (as a river)
baketigweyaa, baketigweyaamagad vii
BRASS
BRASS: (piece of) brass ozaawaabik. -oon ni;
be brass ozaawaabikad vii; ozaawaabikizi
vai
BRASSIERE
BRASSIERE: aasodoodooshimebizon. -an ni
BRAVE
BRAVE: be brave zoongide'e vai
BREAD
BREAD: bakwezhigan, -ag na; bread cooked
over an open fire abwaajigan, -ag na
BREAD BAKED UNDER THE ASHES:
ningwa'abwaan, -ag na
FRY BREAD: zaasakokwaan, -ag na
MAKE BREAD: bakwezhiganike vai
BREAD BOX
BREAD BOX: bakwezhigani-makak, -oon ni
BREAK
BREAK: biigoshkaa vai; biigoshkaa,
biigoshkaamagad vii
BREAK APART: break apart (e.g., something
string-like) bakise vai; bakise,
bakisemagad vii
BREAK APART FROM RUBBING: break
apart from rubbing (e.g., something string-
like) bakiboode, bakiboodemagad vii;
bakiboozo vai
BREAK ARM: break one's arm bookonike vai
BREAK BY DROPPING: break s.o. by drop-
ping biigoshim vta; break s.t. by dropping
biigosidooiti vti2; niigosidoon vti2
BREAK BY HAND: break s.o. by hand biigon
vta; break s.t. by hand biigonan vti
BREAK BY HEAT: biigode, biigodemagad
vii; biigozo vai; niigode, niigodemagad
vii; niigozo vai
BREAK IN TWO: bookoshkaa vai;
bookoshkaia, bookoshkaamagad vii
BREAK IN TWO BY FOOT OR BODY:
break s.o. in two by foot or body
bookoshkaiw vta; break s.t. in two by foot
or body bookoshkan vti
BREAK IN TWO BY HITTING: break s.o. in
two by hitting bookoganaam vta; break
s.t. in two by hitting bookoganaandan vti
BREAK IN TWO WITH HANDS: break s.o.
in two with hands bookobizh /bookobiN-/
vta; break s.t. in two with hands
bookobidoon vti2
BREAK LEG: break one's leg bookogaade vai
BREAK OFF: break s.o. off (e.g., something
string-like) bakibizh /bakibiN-/ vta; break
s.t. off (e.g., something string-like)
bakibidoon vti2
BREAK ON IMPACT: biigoshin vai; biigosin
vii; niigoshin vai; niigosin vii
BREAK UP: break s.t. up (as ground)
biigwakamigibidoon vti2
BREAK USING SOMETHING: break s.o.
using something biigwa' /biigwa'w-/ vta;
break s.t. using something biigwa'an vti
FALL AND BREAK ARM: fall and break
one's arm bookonikeshin vai
FALL AND BREAK BACK: fall and break
one's back bookwaawiganeshin vai
FALL AND BREAK LEG: fall and break
one's leg bookogaadeshin vai
BREAK
TAKE A BREAK: gibichiitaa vai
BREAKFAST
BREAKFAST: gigizhebaa-wiisiniwin ni
EAT BREAKFAST: gigizhebaa-wiisini vai;
eat s.t. for breakfast gigizhebaa-miijin vti3
BREAST
BREAST: my breast indoodooshim. -ag
/-doodooshim-/ nod
BREAST FEED
BREAST FEED: breast feed s.o. nooni' vta
BREATH
BAD BREATH: have bad breath
maazhimaagwanaamo vai
DRAW BREATH IN: ikwanaamo vai
RECOVER ONE'S BREATH: nasanaamo
vai
SHORT OF BREATH: be short of breath
akwanaamo vai
TAKE SHORT BREATHS: akwanaamo vai
BREATHE
BREATHE: bagidanaamo vai
STOP BREATHING: ishkwaanaamo vai
BREECH CLOUT
BREECH CLOUT: aanziyaan, -an ni
BREEZE
GOOD BREEZE: there is a good breeze
minwaanimad vii
BRIDGE
BRIDGE: aazhogan, -an ni; foot bridge
aazhawaandawaagan, -an ni
BRIDLE
BRIDLE: zagidoonebijigan, -an ni
BRIGHT
BRIGHT: be bright waaseyaa,
waaseyaamagad vii; be bright (as
something sheet-like) waaseyiigad vii;
waaseyiigizi vai
BRIGHT INSIDE: be bright inside waasete,
waasetemagad vii
BRIGHT LEAVES: there are bright leaves
waatebagaa, waatebagaamagad vii
BRING
BRING: bring s.o. biizh /biiN-/ vta; bring s.t.
biidoon vti2; bring (s.t.) for s.o. biidaw
vta, also biidamaw
BRING FIREWOOD INSIDE: biindigenise
vai
BRING HERE IN A BOAT: biida'oodoon
vti2; bring s.o. here in a boat biida'oozh
/biida'ooN-/ vta
BRING INSIDE: bring s.o. inside biindigazh
/biindigaN-/ vta; bring s.t. inside
biindigadoon vti2

bring—built
ISO
BRING TOGETHER: bring s.t. together
maawandoonan vti
BRITTLE
BRITTLE: be brittle gaapan vii, also gaapaa;
gaapizi vai
BROKE
BROKE: be broke (out of money) biigoshkaa
vai
BROKEN
BROKEN: be broken biigoshkaa vai;
biigoshkaa, biigoshkaamagad vii;
niigoshkaa, niigoshkaamagad vii
BROKEN ARM: have a broken arm
bookonike vai
BROKEN IN TWO: be broken in two
bookoshkaa vai; bookoshkaa,
bookoshkaamagad vii
BROKEN LEG: have a broken leg
bookogaade vai
HAVE A BROKEN NOSE: bookojaane vai
BROKEN GLASS
BROKEN GLASS: broken glass (as from a
bottle) omoodayaabik, -oon m
BROOCH
BROOCH: zagaakwa'on, -ag na
BROOM
BROOM: jiigada'igan, -an ni; jiishada'igan,
-an in
BROTH
BROTH: wiiyaasaaboo ni
WILD RICE BROTH: manoominaaboo ni
BROTHER
BROTHER: my (male's) brother niijikiwenh,
-yag /-iijikiweny-/ nod; my (male's) brother
ritual use niikaan, -ag /-iikaan-/ nad;
niikaanis, -ag /-iikaanis-/ nad; my sibling
of the opposite sex (brother or sister)
indawemaa, -g /-dawemaaw-/ nad
OLDER BROTHER: my older brother
nisayenh, -yag /-sayeny-/ nad
YOUNGER BROTHER: my younger brother
nishiime, -yag /-shiimey-/ nad
BROTHER-IN-LAW
BROTHER-IN-LAW: my (female's) brother-
in-law minim, -oog /-iinimw-/ nad; my
(male's) brother-in-law niitaa, -g /-iitaaw-/
nad
BROUGHT
BROUGHT: be brought biijigaade,
biijigaademagad vii; biijigaazo vai
BROWN
BROWN: ozaawi- pv4; be brown ozaawaa,
ozaawaamagad vii; ozaawizi vai; be
brown (as something mineral)
ozaawaabikad vii; ozaawaabikizi vai; be
brown (as something sheet-like)
ozaawegad vii; ozaawegizi vai; be brown
(as something stick- or wood-like)
ozaawaakozi vai; ozaawaakwad vii; be
brown (as something string-like)
ozaawaabiigad vii; ozaawaabiigizi vai
BROWN BY FIRE: brown s.t. by fire
ozaawaakizan vti
COLORED BROWN: be colored brown
ozaawaande, ozaawaandemagad vii;
ozaawaanzo vai
HAVE BROWN HAIR: ozaawindibe vai
TOAST BROWN: toast s.t. brown
ozaawaakizan vti
WEAR BROWN: ozaawi'o vai
BRUISED
BRUISED FACE: have a bruised face
ozhaawashkwaanagiingwe vai
BRUSH
BRUSH: brush s.o. using something (as some-
thing sheet-like) bawega' /bawega'w-/ vta;
brush s.t. using something (as something
sheet-like) bawega'an vti
BRUSH SNOW: brush snow off s.o. by hand
bawaagonen vta; brush snow off s.o. using
something bawaagone* /bawaagone'w-/
vta; brush snow off s.t. by hand
bawaagonenan vti; brush snow off s.t.
using something bawaagone'an vti
BRUSH TEETH: brush one's teeth
giziiyaabide'o vai; giziiyaabide'odizo vai
PAINT BRUSH: zhizhoobii'iganaatig, -oon
ni
SCRUB BRUSH: mimigosaga'igan, -an ni
BRUSH
IN THE BRUSH: megwekob pc
BUBBLE
BUBBLE: biisitaagan, -an ni
BUCK
BUCK: ayaabe, -g na
BUCKLE
BELT BUCKLE: gijipizonaabik, -oon ni
BUCKSKIN DRESS
BUCKSKIN DRESS: bashkweginagooday,
-an ni
BUD
LEAVES BUD: zaagibagaa,
zaagibagaamagad vii
BUFFALO
BUFFALO: bizhiki, -wag na; mashkode-
bizhiki, -wag na
BUG
BUG: manidoons, -ag na
MANY BUGS: there are many bugs
manidoonsikaa, manidoonsikaamagad
vii
BUILD
BUILD: build s.o. ozhi' vta; build s.t.
ozhitoon vti2; build (s.t.) for s.o.
ozhitamaw vta; ozhitaw vta
BUILD A HOUSE: waakaa'ige vai; build a
house for s.o. ozhigaw vta
BUILD A LODGE: ozhige vai
FINISH BUILDING A DWELLING:
giizhige vai
BUILDING
BUILDING: waakaa'igan, -an ni
BUILT
BUILT: be built ozhichigaade,
ozhichigaademagad vii; ozhichigaazo vai

151
bulb—but
BULB
BULB: obikwaaj, -iin nid
BULL
BULL: doonoo, -g na
BULL SNAKE
BULL SNAKE: newe, -g na
BULLET
BULLET: anwi, -in m
TWENTY-TWO BULLET: anwiins, -an m
BULLHEAD
BULLHEAD: awaazisii, -g na, oho owaazisii,
wawaazisii
BUMP
BUMP: bump into s.o. bitaakoshkaw vta;
bump into s.t. bitaakoshkan vti; bump
something bitaakoshin vai; bitaakosin mi
BUMP DOWN OFF: bump s.o. down off
diitibishkaw vta; bump s.t. down off
diitibishkan vti
BUMP HEAD: bump one's head
bitaakondibeshin vai
BUNCH
TIE IN A BUNCH: tie s.o. in a bunch
okwapizh /okwapiN-/ vta; tie s.t. in a
bunch okwapidoon vti2
TIED IN A BUNCH: be tied in a bunch
okwapide, okwapidemagad vii;
okwapizo vai
BUNDLE
BUNDLE: gashkibijigan, -an m
TIE IN A BUNDLE: tie s.o. in a bundle
gashkapizh /gashkapiN-/ ma; tie s.t. in a
bundle gashkapidoon vti2
WRAP AND TIE IN A BUNDLE: wrap and
tie s.o. in a bundle gashkibizh /gashkibiN-
/ vta; wrap and tie s.t. in a bundle
gashkibidoon vti2; wrap and tie things in
bundle gashkibijige vai
WRAPPED AND TIED IN A BUNDLE: be
wrapped and tied in a bundle gashkibide,
gashkibidemagad vii; gashkibijigaade,
gashkibijigiiademagad vii;
gashkibijigaazo vai
BURBOT
BURBOT: mizay, -ag na
BURIED
BURIED: be buried (of a person)
bagidenjigaazo vai; ningwa'igaazo vai
BURIED IN A CERTAIN PLACE: be buried
in a certain place dazhishin vai
BURN
BURN: zakide zakidemagad vii; zakizo vai;
burn s.o. zakiz /zakizw-/ vta; burn s.t.
zakizan vti; burn things zakizige vai; burn
oneself jaagizodizo vai
BURN A CERTAIN WAY: inaakide,
inaakidemagad vii; inaakizo vai; burn s.o.
a certain way inaakiz /inaakizw-/ vta; burn
s.t. a certain way inaakizan vti
BURN A HOLE: burn a hole in s.o.
bagwaakiz /bagwaakizw-/ vta; burn a hole
in s.t. bagwaakizan vti
BURN AS MEDICINE: burn s.t. as medicine
nookwezan vti; burn things as medicine
nookwezige vai
BURN TO THE PAN: agwaabikide,
agwaabikidemagad vii; agwaabikizo vai;
burn s.o. to the pan agwaabikiz
/agwaabikizw-/ vta; burn s.t. to the pan
agwaabikizan vti
BURN UP: jaagaakide, jaagaakidemagad vii;
jaagaakizo vai; jaagide, jaagidemagad
vii; jaagizo vai; bum s.o. up jaagaakiz
/jaagaakizw-/ vta; jaagiz /jaagizw-/ vta;
burn s.t. up jaagaakizan vti; jaagizan vti
BURNED
HAVE A HOLE BURNED IN: bagwaakide,
bagwaakidemagad vii; bagwaakizo vai
BURP
BURP: aagade vai; megade vai
BURP GREASE: biinzibii vai
BURROW
BURROW: waanzh, -an ni
BURST
BURST: burst s.o. using something baashka*
/baashka'w-/ vta; burst s.t. using some-
thing baashka'an vti
BURST ON IMPACT: burst s.o. on impact
baashkishim vta; burst s.t. on impact
baashkisidoon vti2
BURST OPEN: biigojiishkaa vai;
biigojiishkaa, biigojiishkaamagad vii
BURST OPEN USING SOMETHING: burst
s.o. open using something baashkijii'
/baashkijii'w-/ vta; burst s.t. open using
something baashkijii'an vti
BURST OUT LAUGHING: baashkaapi vai
BURY
BURY: bury s.o. (e.g., a person) bagidenim
vta; bury s.o. ningwa* /ningwa'w-/ vta;
bury s.t. ningwa'an vti
BUSH
IN THE BUSH: noopimingpc
BUSHEL
CERTAIN NUMBER OF BUSHELS: a
certain number of bushels daso-
diba'iminaan pc
BUSHY
BUSHY: be bushy biigwawe vai
BUSINESS
DO BUSINESS: babaamizi vai
GO ABOUT ON BUSINESS: go about on
one's business babaamizi vai
BUSTLE
DANCE BUSTLE: bimoonjigan, -an ni
BUSY
BUSY: ojaanimi- pv4; be busy ojaanimizi vai;
ondamizi vai; be busy (in some work or
activity) ojaanimitaa vai
KEPT BUSY IN AN ACTIVITY: be kept
busy in an activity ondamitaa vai
KEPT BUSY IN WORK: be kept busy in
work ondamanokii vai
BUT
BUT: aanawi pc

butter—Canada goose 
152
BUTTER
BUTTER: doodooshaaboo-bimide ni;
ozaawi-bimide m
BUTTERFLY
BUTTERFLY: memengwaa, -g na
BUTTON
BUTTON: gibadoonh, -yag na, also
gibodoonh
BUTTON UP: button s.o. up zagaakwa'
/zagaakwa'w-/ via; button up oneself
zagaakwa'odizo vai
BUY
BUY: buy (s.t.) adaawe vai+o; buy (s.t.) for
oneself adaawetamaazo vai; buy (s.t.) for
s.o. adaawetamaw vta; buy (s.t.) from s.o.
adaam vta
BUY FOOD: miijimadaawe vai
BY
BY: jngi-pn; by it jiigayi'iipc
BY A DOOR: jiigishkwaand pc
BY A FIRE: jiigishkode pc
BY A HOUSE: jiigigamig pc
BY A MEADOW: jiigashkosiw/u
BY A ROAD: by a road or trail jiigikanapc
BY A TRAIL: by a road or trail jiigikana^c
BY A TREE: jiigaatigpc
BY A WALL: jiigaatigpc
GOING BY: bimi-pv2
BY ONESELF
BY ONESELF: dibinawepc
BYPASS
BYPASS: bypass s.o. bakekazh /bakekaN-/
vta; bypass people bakekazhiwe vai
c
CABBAGE
CABBAGE: gichi-aniibiish, -an ni
CABIN
LOG CABIN: mitigo-waakaa'igan, -an ni
CACHE
CACHE: asanjigoowin, -an ni; cache (s.t.)
asanjigo vai+o
CAFE
CAFE: wiisiniiwigamig, -oon ni
CAKE
CAKE: waashkobizid bakwezhigan, -ag na-
pt; wiishkobi-bakwezhigan, -ag na
CALENDAR
CALENDAR: giizisoo-mazina'igan, -an ni
CALF
CALF: bizhikiins, -ag na
CALF
CALF: my calf ninaan, -ag /-naan-/ nad
CALFHIDE
CALFHIDE: bizhikiinsiwayaan, -ag na
CALICO
CALICO: gidagiigin, -oon ni
CALL
CALL: call s.o. nandom vta
CALL A CERTAIN WAY: call s.o. a certain
way izhi-wiinzh /izhi-wiinN-/ vta; call s.t. a
certain way izhi-wiindan vti
CALL IN INDIAN: call s.o. in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaazh
/anishinaabewinikaaN-/ vta; call s.t. in
Indian (Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaadan
vti
CALL IN OJIBWE: call s.o. in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaazh
/anishinaabewinikaaN-/ vta; call s.t. in
Indian (Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaadan
vti
CALL ON THE PHONE: call s.o. on the
phone ganoozh /ganooN-/ vta
CALL OUT: biibaagi vai; call out to s.o.
biibaagim vta; call out to s.t. biibaagindan
vti
MAKE A CHARACTERISTIC CALL: make
a characteristic call (e.g., neigh, moo)
noondaagozi vai; make a characteristic
call (neigh, etc.) inwe vai
CALLED
CALLED A CERTAIN WAY: be called a
certain way izhi-wiinde, izhi-
wiindemagad vii; izhi-wiinzo vai
CALLED IN INDIAN: be called in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaade,
anishinaabewinikaademagad vii;
anishinaabewinikaazo vai
CALLED IN OJIBWE: be called in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaade,
anishinaabewinikaademagad vii;
anishinaabewinikaazo vai
CALM
CALM: be calm awibaa, awibaamagad vii
CALM WEATHER: be calm weather
anwaatin vii
CAMEL
CAMEL: bekwaawigang na-pt
CAMERA
CAMERA: mazinaakizigan, -an ni
CAMP
CAMP: gabeshi vai
CAMPSITE
CAMPSITE: gabeshiwin, -an ni
CAN
CAN: modal daa- pvl
CAN
CAN: biiwaabikoons, -an ni; can s.t.
gibaakobidoon vti2
CAN OPENER
CAN OPENER: baakaakozhigan, -an ni
CAN'T DO IT
CAN'T DO IT: can't do it! gaawesapc
CANADA
CANADA: Zhaaganaashiiwaki m
CANADA GOOSE
CANADA GOOSE: nika, -g na

153 
candy—carry
CANDY
CANDY: ziinzibaakwadoons, -an m
CANE
CANE: zaka'ori, -an ni
USE A CANE: zaka'o vai
CANNED GOODS
CANNED GOODS: gibaakobijigan, -an ni
CANNIBAL
WINTER CANNIBAL MONSTER: windigo:
winter cannibal monster wiindigoo, -g na
CANOE
CANOE: jiimaan, -an ni
ALUMINUM CANOE: biiwaabiko-jiimaan,
-an ni
BIRCH BARK CANOE: wiigwaasi-jiimaan,
-an ni
GO BY CANOE: jiime vai
MAKE A CANOE: atoono vai; jiimaanike
vai
WOODEN CANOE: mitigo-jiimaan, -an ni
CANOE RIB
CANOE RIB: waaginaa, -g na
CANOPY
CANOPY: agwanogaan, -an ni
CANVAS
CANVAS: babagiwayaanegamigwegin, -oon
ni
CANVAS SHOE
CANVAS SHOE: babagiwayaanekizin, -an
ni, also bagiwayaanekizin
CAPSIZE
CAPSIZE: gwanabishkaa vai
CAPTIVE
TAKE CAPTIVES: makandwe vai;
nawadiniwe vai
CAR
CAR: odaabaan, -ag na;
waasamoowidaabaan, -ag na; car old
fashioned ziilkaa, -g na
HAVE A BROKEN-DOWN CAR:
biigodaabaane vai
POLICE CAR: dakoniwewidaabaan, -ag na
RACE CAR: gagwejikazhiwewidaabaan, -ag
na
REPAIR A CAR: nanaa'idaabaane vai
CARCASS
CARCASS: zhiigozhigan, -an ni
CARD
CARD: playing card ataadiwin, -ag na
CLUB SUITE CARD: danens, -ag na
CUT CARDS: bakwenige vai
DIAMOND SUITE CARD: gaanoo, -g na
HEART SUITE CARD: giiwoon, -ag na, also
giiyoon
SPADE SUITE CARD: biig, -wag na
CARDBOARD BOX
CARDBOARD BOX: mazina'igani-makak,
-oon ni
CARDINAL
CARDINAL: misko-bineshiinh, -yag na
CARE
CARE: care for s.o. bamenim vta; care for s.t.
bamendan vti
CAREFREE
CAREFREE: be carefree naangide'e vai
CAREFUL
CAREFUL: be careful ayaangwaamizi vai
CAREFULLY
CAREFULLY: wawiinge pc; weweni pc
CARELESSLY
CARELESSLY: debinaakpc
CARGO
LOAD CARGO: boozitaaso vai; load s.t. as
cargo boozitoon vti2; load (s.t.) with cargo
for s.o. boozitaw vta
CARIBOU
CARIBOU: adik, -wag na
CARNIVAL
CARNIVAL: mamaandaagochigewin, -an ni
CARPENTER
CARPENTER: mookodaasowinini, -wag na;
waakaa'igewinini, -wag na
CARRIED
CARRIED TO A CERTAIN PLACE: be
carried to a certain place izhiwijigaade,
izhiwijigaademagad vii; izhiwijigaazo vai
CARROT
CARROT: okaadaak, -oon ni;
ozaawikaadaak, -oon ni
CARRY
ABLE TO CARRY: be able to carry s.o.
gashkiwizh /gashkiwiN-/ vta; be able to
carry s.t. gashkiwidoon vti2
ARRIVE CARRYING: arrive carrying s.o.
bagamiwizh /bagamiwiN-/ vta; arrive
carrying s.t. bagamiwidoon vti2
CARRY A BABY ALONG ON BACK: carry a
baby along on one's back bimoomaawaso
vai
CARRY A BABY TO A CERTAIN PLACE
ON BACK: carry a baby to a certain place
on one's back inoomaawaso vai
CARRY A BIG PACK: mangiwane vai
CARRY A PACK ALONG: bimiwane vai
CARRY ABOUT: carry s.o. about
babaamiwizh /babaamiwiN-/ vta; carry
s.t. about babaamiwidoon vri2
CARRY ACROSS: carry s.o. across
aazhogewizh /aazhogewiN-/ vta; carry s.t.
across aazhogewidoon vti2
CARRY ALONG: carry s.o. along bimiwizh
/bimiwiN-/ vta; carry s.t. along
bimiwidoon vti2; carry things along
bimiwijige vai
CARRY ALONG ON BACK: carry s.o. along
on one's back bimoom vta; carry s.t. along
on one's back bimoondan vti
CARRY AWAY: carry s.o. away animiwizh
/animiwiN-/ vta; carry s.t. away
animiwidoon vti2
CARRY AWAY ON BACK: carry s.o. away
on one's back animoom vta; carry s.t.
away on one's back animoondan vti
CARRY FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: carry
s.o. from a certain place onjiwizh

carry—ceremony
154
/onjiwiN-/ vta; carry s.t. from a certain
place onjiwidoon vti2
CARRY HOME: carry s.o. home giiwewizh
/giiwewiN-/ ma; carry s.t. home
giiwewidoon vti2; carry (s.t.) home for s.o.
giiwewidaw vta
CARRY IN MOUTH: carry s.o. in mouth
niimam vta; carry s.t. in mouth
niimandan vti
CARRY INLAND: carry s.o. inland gopiwizh
/gopiwiN-/ vta; carry s.t. inland
gopiwidoon vti2
CARRY OFF ON BACK: carry s.o. off on
one's back maadoom vta; carry s.t. off on
one's back maadoondan vti
CARRY ON BACK FROM A CERTAIN
PLACE: carry s.o. on back from a certain
place ondoom vta; carry s.t. on back from
a certain place ondoondan vti
CARRY OVER A PORTAGE: carry things
over a portage gakiiwenige vai
CARRY TO A CERTAIN PLACE: carry s.o.
to a certain place izhiwizh /izhiwiN-/ vta;
carry s.t. to a certain place izhiwidoon vti2
CARRY TO A CERTAIN PLACE ON
BACK: carry s.o. to a certain place on
one's back inoom vta; carry s.t. to a cer-
tain place on one's back inoondan vti
CARRY TO THE SHORE: carry s.o. to the
shore madaabiiwizh /madaabiiwiN-/ vta;
carry s.t. to the shore madaabiiwidoon
vti2
CARRY USING SOMETHING: carry s.o.
using something niima* /niima'w-/ vta;
carry s.t. using something niima'an vti
HARDLY BE ABLE TO CARRY THE
PACK: hardly be able to carry a pack
bwaawane vai
LIFT AND CARRY: lift and carry s.o.
ombiwizh /ombiwiN-/ vta; lift and carry
s.t. ombiwidoon vti2
CARVE
CARVE: mookodaaso vai
CARVER
CARVER: mookodaasowinini, -wag na
CASH
CASH: gwayako-zhooniyaa na
CASINO
CASINO: endazhi-ataading ni-pt
CASKET
CASKET: jiibegamig, -oon ra
CASS LAKE
CASS LAKE: Gaa-miskwaawaakokaag place
CAST
CAST SUGAR CONES: ziiga'ige vai
CAT
CAT: gaazhagens, -ag na
CATASTROPHE
CATASTROPHE: there is a catastrophe
nichiiwad vii
CATCH
CATCH: catch s.o. debibizh /debibiN-/ vta;
catch s.t. debibidoon vti2; catch (s.t.) for
s.o. debibidaw vta
CATCH A DISEASE: mizizi vai
CATCH A RIDE: catch a ride with s.o.
boozinodaw vta
CATCH WITH HANDS: catch s.o. with
hands nakwebizh /nakwebiN-/ vta; catch
s.t. with hands nakwebidoon vti2; catch
things with hands nakwebijige vai
CATCH FIRE
CATCH FIRE: biskane, biskanemagad vii;
nawadide, nawadidemagad vii; nawadizo
vai
CATCH UP
CATCH UP: catch up to s.o. adim vta; catch
up to s.t. adindan vti
CATCH UP IN A BOAT: catch up to s.o. in a
boat adima' /adima'w-/ vta
CATCHER
CATCHER: catcher (in baseball)
nakwebijigewinini, -wag na
CATFISH
CATFISH: maanameg, -wag na
CATSUP
CATSUP: oginii-dagonigan ra
CATTAIL
CATTAIL: apakweshkway, -ag na
CATTAIL MAT: apakweshkway, -ag na
CAUGHT
CAUGHT IN A NET: be caught in a net
biinda'am vai2
CAUSE
CAUSE: cause s.o. to do something izhi* vta;
cause s.t. to izhitoon vti2
CAUTION
CAUTION: caution s.o. ayaangwaamim vta
CAUTIOUS
CAUTIOUS: be cautious ayaangwaamizi vai
CAVE
CAVE: waanzh, -an ra"
CEDAR
RED CEDAR: miskwaawaak, -oog na
WHITE CEDAR: giizhik, -ag na
CEDAR BARK BAG
CEDAR BARK BAG: giishkashkimod, -an ra
CEDAR BOUGH
CEDAR BOUGH: giizhikaandag, -oog na
CEDAR WAXWING
CEDAR WAXWING: zegibanwaanishiinh,
-yag na
CELLAR
CELLAR: moonikaan, -an ra'
CEMETERY
CEMETERY: jiibayaki, -in ra"
CENSE
CENSE: cense s.o. abaabas /abaabasw-/ vta;
cense s.t. abaabasan vti; cense oneself
abaabaso vai;
CENT
CENT: miskwaabikoons, -ag na;
ozaawaabikoons, -ag na
CEREMONY
CONDUCT A CEREMONY: manidooke vai
GIVE A CEREMONY: zagaswe'iwe vai

155
certain—chest
CERTAIN
CERTAIN: be certain gwayakwendam vai2;
it is certain booch pc
CERTAIN EVENT: be a certain event
inakamigad vii
CERTAINLY
CERTAINLY: gegetpc; mii nange^c
CHAFF
CHAFF: chaff fi'om wild rice plural mazaanag
/mazaan-/ na
CHAIN
CHAIN OF LAKES: be a chain of lakes
aanikegamaa, aanikegamaamagad vii
CHAIR
CHAIR: apabiwin, -an ni
ROCKING CHAIR: didibise-apabiwin, -an
ni; wewebizoo-apabiwin, -an ni
CHAIRMAN
CHAIRMAN: eshpabid na-pt
CHANGE
CHANGE: aanji- pv4; change s.o. aanji' ma;
change s.o. with foot or body (e.g., clothes)
aanzikaw via; change s.t. aanjitoon vti2;
change s.t. with foot or body (e.g., clothes)
aanzikan vti
CHANGE APPEARANCE: change one's own
appearance aanzinaago'idizo vai; change
s.o.'s appearance aanzinaago' vta; change
s.t.'s appearance aanzinaagotoon vti2
CHANGE CLOTHES: change one's clothes
aanzikonaye vai; change s.o. with foot or
body (e.g., clothes) aanzikaw vta; change
s.o.'s clothes aanzikonaye' vta; change s.t.
with foot or body (e.g., clothes) aanzikan
vti
CHANGE COUNTRIES: aandakii vai
CHANGE DRESS: change one's dress
aandagoode vai
CHANGE LAWS: aandaakonige vai
CHANGE LIFE: change one's life aanji-
bimaadizi vai
CHANGE MIND: change one's mind
aanizhiitam vai2; gwekendam vai
CHANGE PLANS: aandaakonige vai
CHANGE SEAT: aandabi vai
CHANGE
LOOSE CHANGE: bigishki-zhooniyaans,
-ag na
CHANGED
LOOK CHANGED: aanzinaagozi vai;
aanzinaagwad vii
CHANNEL
CHANNEL: there is a channel between lakes
wabigamaa, wabigamaamagad vii
CHAPPED
CHAPPED: be chapped gagiipizi vai
CHAPPED FACE: have a chapped face
gagiipiingwe vai
CHAPPED LIPS: have chapped lips
gagiipidoon vai
CHARACTER
CERTAIN CHARACTER: have a certain
character inaadizi vai
CHARCOAL
CHARCOAL: akakanzhe ni
CHARGE
CHARGE A HIGH PRICE: ishpagindaaso
vai; charge a high price for s.t.
ishpagindan vti
CHASE
CHASE ABOUT: chase s.o. about
babaaminizha' /babaaminizha'w-/ vta;
chase s.t. about babaaminizha'an vti;
chase things about babaaminizha'ige vai
CHASE ALONG: chase s.o. along biminizha'
/biminizha'w-/ vta; biminizhikaw vta;
chase s.t. along biminizha'an vti; chase
things along biminizha'ige vai; chase
people along biminaazhikaage vai
CHASE INSIDE: chase s.o. inside
biindigenaazhikaw vta; biindigenizhikaw
vta
CHASE OFF: chase s.o. off maajinizhikaw
vta
CHASE OUT OF THE WAY: chase s.o. out
of the way ikonaazhikaw vta
CHASE OUTSIDE: chase s.o. outside
zaagijinizhikaw vta
CHASE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: chase s.o.
to a certain place izhinaazhikaw vta;
izhinizhikaw vta
CHAUFFEUR
CHAUFFEUR: bimiwizhiwewinini, -wag na
CHEAP
CHEAP: be cheap wendad vii; wendaginde,
wendagindemagad vii; wendaginzo vai;
wendizi vai; wenipanad vii
CHEAT
CHEAT: cheat s.o. wayezhim vta; cheat
people wayezhinge vai
CHECK
CHECK BY TASTING: check s.o. by tasting
gojipozh /gojipw-/ vta; check s.t. by tasting
gojipidan vti
CHECK SNARES: check one's snares
naadagoodoo vai
CHECK TRAPS: check one's traps
naadasoonaagane vai
CHECK UP: check up on s.o. dibaabam vta
CHECK
CHECK: jeko-mazina'igan, -an ni
CHECKERS
PLAY CHECKERS: zhooshkonige vai
CHEEK
CHEEK: my cheek ninow, -an /-now-/ nid
RED CHEEK: have a red cheek miskwanowe
vai
CHERRY
BLACK CHERRY: ookwemin, -an ni
CHEST
CHEST: my chest nikaakigan, -an
/-kaakigan-/ nid
CHEST PAINS: have chest pains while
breathing jakanaamo vai
MIDDLE OF THE CHEST: in the middle of
the chest naawaakigan pc

chest of drawers—cinnamon
156
CHEST OF DRAWERS
CHEST OF DRAWERS: wiikobijigan, -an ni
CHEW
CHEW: chew s.o. zhaashaagwam vta; chew
s.t. zhaashaagwandan vti; chew things
zhaashaagwanjige vai
CHEW GUM: zhaashaagwamikiwe vai
CHEW ON: chew on s.o. jiichiigwam vta;
chew on s.t. jiichiigwandan vti; chew on
things jiichiigwanjige vai
CHEW SNUFF OR TOBACCO: biindaakwe
vai
CHEW TO BITS: chew s.o. to bits
zhishigwam vta; chew s.t. to bits
zhishigwandan vti
CHEW TOBACCO: agwanenjige vai
CHEWING GUM
CHEWING GUM: bigiins, -ag na
CHICKADEE
CHICKADEE: gijigijigaaneshiinh; -yag na
CHICKEN
CHICKEN: baaka'aakwenh. -yag na
CHICKEN COOP
CHICKEN COOP: baaka'aakwenhwigamig,
-oon ni
CHICKEN SOUP
CHICKEN SOUP: baaka'aakwenhwaaboo
ni
CHIEF
CHIEF: ogimaa, -g na; be a chief ogimaawi
vai
MAKE CHIEF: make s.o. chief ogimaakaw
vta
WIFE OF CHIEF OR LEADER:
ogimaakwe, -g na
CHILD
CHILD: abinoojiinh, -yag na; be a child
abinoojiinyiwi vai; my child niniijaanis,
-ag /-niijaanis-/ Had
ELDEST CHILD: nitamoozhaan, -ag na
HAVE A CHILD: oniijaanisi vai; have a small
child oniijaanisensi vai
PRETEND TO BE A CHILD:
abinoojiinyikaazo vai
TAKE CARE OF A CHILD: bamoozhe vai;
ganawendaawaso vai
YOUNGEST CHILD: ishkwejaagan, -ag na
CHILL
GET A CHILL: dakaji vai
CHILLED
CHILLED: be chilled dakamanji'o vai
GET CHILLED EASILY: wakewaji vai
CHIN
CHIN: my chin indaamikan, -an /-daamikan-
Inid
CHINESE
CHINESE: aniibiishaabookewinini, -wag na;
be Chinese aniibilshaabookewininilwi vai
CHIP
CHIP: biiwega'igan, -an ni
CHIPMUNK
CHIPMUNK: agongos, -ag na
CHISEL
ICE CHISEL: eshkan, -an ni
CHOKE
CHOKE: choke on food bakwenishkaago vai;
choke on something stuck in one's throat
ana'o vai; choke s.o. gibinewen vta
CHOKE WHILE DRINKING: bakwenibii
vai
CHOKECHERRY
CHOKECHERRY: asasawemin, -an ni
CHOKECHERRY BUSH
CHOKECHERRY BUSH:
asasaweminagaawanzh, -Kg na
CHOOSE
CHOOSE: choose s.o. onaabam vta; choose
s.t. onaabandan vti; choose things
onaabanjige vai
CHOP
CHOP A PIECE OFF: chop a piece off s.o. (as
something of wood) bakwega'
/bakwega'w-/ vta; chop a piece off s.t. (as
something of wood) bakwega'an vti
CHOP DOWN: chop s.o. down gawa'
/gawa'w-/ vta; chop s.t. down gawa'an vti
CHOP FINE: chop s.o. fine biisa' /biisa'w-/
vta; chop s.t. fine biisa'an vti
CHOP INTO SMALL PIECES: chop s.o. into
small pieces (as something of wood)
baasiga' /baasiga'w-/ vta; chop s.t. into
small pieces (as something of wood)
baasiga'an vti
CHOP OFF: chop s.o. off giishka' /giishka'w-/
vta; chop s.t. off giishka'an vti
CHOP OFF WITH AX: chop s.o. off with ax
giishkiga* /giishkiga'w-/ vta; chop s.t. off
with ax giishkiga'an vti
CHOP POINTED: chop s.o. pointed
bajiishkiga' /bajiishkiga'w-/ vta; chop s.t.
pointed bajiishkiga'an vti
CHOPPED
CHOPPED DOWN: be chopped down
gawa'igaade, gawa'igaademagad vii;
gawa'igaazo vai
CHOSE
CHOSE: be chosen onaabanjigaade,
onaabanjigaademagad vii
CHOSEN
CHOSEN: be chosen onaabanjigaazo vai
CHRISTIAN
CHRISTIAN: anama'e- pv4, also aname-; be
Christian anami'aa vai
CHRISTMAS
CHRISTMAS: be Christmas niibaa-anama'e-
giizhigad vii
CHURCH
CHURCH: anama'ewigamig, -oon ni, also
anamewigamig
CIGARETTE
CIGARETTE: asemaawipwaagaans, -ag na,
also asemaa-opwaagaans; opwaagaans,
-agraa
CINNAMON
CINNAMON: meskwanagekozid na-pt

157 
circle—clothesline
CIRCLE
DRAW A CIRCLE: waawiyebii'ige vai
CIRCULAR
CIRCULAR: be circular waawiyeyaa,
waawiyeyaamagad vii; waawiyezi vai
CIRCUS
CIRCUS: marnaandaagochigewin, -an ni
CITY
CITY: gichi-oodena, -wan ni
CLAM
CLAM: es, -ag na
CLAN
CLAN: my clan indoodem, -ag /-doodem-/
nad
CLAP
CLAP HANDS: clap one's hands
bapasininjii'odizo vai
CLAW
CLAW: my claw nishkanzh, -iig /-shkanzhy-/
nad
CLAY
CLAY: waabigan na
MADE OF CLAY: be made of clay
waabiganikaade, waabiganikaademagad
vii
WHITE CLAY: waabaabigan na
CLEAN
CLEAN: be clean biinad vii; biinizi vai; be
clean (as a liquid) biinaagamin
/biinaaganni-/ vii; clean s.o. biini' vta;
clean s.t. biinitoon vti2; clean (s.t.) for s.o.
biinitaw vta; clean things biinichige vai
CLEAN A FISH: bakazhaawe vai
CLEAN HAND: have a clean hand biinininjii
vai
CLEANED
CLEANED: be cleaned biinichigaade,
biinichigaademagad vii; biinichigaazo vai
CLEANER
CLEANER: biinichigewinini, -wag na;
cleaner (female) biinichigewikwe, -g na
CLEAR
CLEAR LAND: mazhii'ige vai
CLEAR OFF: clear off after a storm
aabaakawad vii; ice clears off the lake
baakibii'an vii
CLEAR SKY: be clear sky mizhakwad vii
CLEARING
CUT-OVER CLEARING: mazhii'igan, -an ni
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
CLEARING: agaamaakwaa pc
CLEARLY
SEE CLEARLY: bagakaabi vai; see s.o.
clearly bagakaabam vta; see s.t. clearly
bagakaabandan vti
CLEAVER
CLEAVER: giishkada'igan, -an ni
CLERK
CLERK: clerk (female) ozhibii'igewikwe, -g
na; clerk (male) ozhibii'igewinini, -wag na
CLIFF
CLIFF: be a cliff giishkadinaa,
giishkadiriaamagad vii
ROCK CLIFF: aazhibik, -oon ni; there is a
rock cliff giishkaazhibikaa,
giishkaazhibikaamagad vii
CLIMB
CLIMB ACROSS: aazhawaandawe vai
CLIMB ALONG: bimaandawe vai
CLIMB DOWN: niisaandawe vai; climb
down fast niisaandawebizo vai
CLIMB HERE: biidaandawe vai
CLIMB OVER: baazhidaandawe vai
CLIMB TO CERTAIN PLACE: climb to a
certain place inaandawe vai
CLIMB UP: akwaandawe vai
CLIMB UP FAST: akwaandawebatoo vai;
climb up fast (e.g., in an elevator)
akwaandawebizo vai
CLING
CLING: minjimii vai; cling (as to something
stick- or wood-like) minjimaakwii vai
CLOCK
CLOCK: diba'igiiziswaan, -ag na
CLOSE
CLOSE: besho pc; be close beshowad vii
APPEAR TO BE CLOSE: beshonaagozi vai;
beshonaagwad vii
THINK TO BE CLOSE: think s.t. to be close
beshwendan vti
CLOSET
CLOSET: ataasowin, -an ni
CLOT
BLOOD CLOT: wado, -wag na
CLOTH
CLOTH: babagiwayaaniigin. -oon ni, also
bagiwayaaniigin
CLOTH BAG: bagiwayaaneshkimod, -an ni
COTTON CLOTH: gidagiigin, -oon ni
WHITE CLOTH: waabishkiigin, -oon ni
CLOTHES
CLOTHES: item of clothing biizikiigan, -an ni
CHANGE CLOTHES: change one's clothes
aanzikonaye vai; change s.o. with foot or
body (e.g., clothes) aanzikaw vta; change
s.o.'s clothes aanzikonaye' vta; change s.t.
with foot or body (e.g., clothes) aanzikan
vti
PUT ON CLOTHES: put on one's clothes
biizikonaye vai
TAKE OFF CLOTHES: take off one's clothes
giizikonaye vai; take s.o. off the body
(e.g., clothes) giizikaw vta; take s.t. off the
body (e.g., clothes) giizikan vti
WASH CLOTHES: giziibiiga'ige vai
WEAR NEW CLOTHES: oshki'o vai
CLOTHES IRON
CLOTHES IRON: zhooshkwega'igan, -an ni
CLOTHES WRINGER
CLOTHES WRINGER: ziinaakwa'igan, -an
ni
CLOTHESLINE
CLOTHESLINE: agoojiganeyaab, -iin ni
CLOTHESLINE POLE: agoojiganaatig, -
oon ni

clothespin—come 
158
CLOTHESPIN
CLOTHESPIN: ziinaakwa'igan, -an ni
CLOTHING
CHILDREN'S CLOTHING: item of chil-
dren's clothing abinoojiinh-biizikaagan,
-an ni
ITEM OF CLOTHING: biizikiigan, -an ni
MEN'S CLOTHING: item of men's clothing
ininii-biizikiigan in
WOMEN'S CLOTHING: item of women's
clothing ikwe-biizikiigan ni
CLOUD
CLOUD: aanakwad, -oon ni
CLOUDS APPROACH: biidaanakwad vii
CLOUDS GO ALONG: bimaanakwad vii
CLOUDS GO AWAY: animaanakwad vii
CLOUDS MOVE ABOUT:
babaamaanakwad vii
CLOUDS SEEN THROUGH: clouds can be
seen through waaseyaanakwad vii
DARK CLOUDS: there are dark clouds
makadeyaanakwad vii
RED CLOUDS: be red clouds
miskwaanakwad vii
STORM CLOUDS: there are storm clouds
zegaanakwad vii
WHITE CLOUDS: there are white clouds
waabishkaanakwad vii
CLOUDY
CLOUDY: be cloudy ningwaanakwad vii
CLUB
CLUB SUITE CARD: danens, -ag na
CLUB
BALL-HEADED CLUB: ball-headed club
bikwaakwado-bagamaagan, -an ni
WAR CLUB: war club bagamaagan, -an ni
COAL
COAL: akakanzhe ni
COALS
COALS: akakanzhe ni; be coals
akakanzhekaa. akakanzhekaamagad vii
COAT
COAT: babiinzikawaagan, -an ni
PUT ON COAT: put on one's coat
biichibabiinzikawaagane vai
TAKE OFF COAT: take off one's coat
giichibabiinzikawaagane vai
WEAR A COAT: gigibabiinzikawaagane vai
COFFEE
COFFEE: makade-mashkikiwaaboo ni;
gaapii ni
COIN
COIN: zhooniyaans, -ag na;
zhooniyaawaabik, -oog na
COLD
COLD: be cold (as a liquid) dakaagamin
/dakaagami-/ vii
CAN'T TAKE THE COLD: wakewaji vai
COLD HAND: have a cold hand dakininjii vai
COLD HOUSE: be cold (as a house or room)
dakate, dakatemagad vii
COLD RAIN: be cold rain dakibiisaa,
dakibiisaamagad vii
COLD ROOM: be cold (as a house or room)
dakate, dakatemagad ni
COLD WATER: dakib ni
COLD WEATHER: be cold (weather)
gisinaa, gisinaamagad vii
COLD WIND: be a cold wind dakaanimad vii
FEEL COLD: biingeji vai; dakamanji'o vai;
giikaji vai
HAVE A COLD: dakaji vai
WAKE FROM BEING COLD: amadaji vai
COLD
GET A COLD: mizhaakigwe vai
HAVE A COLD: agigokaa vai
rOLT.AP.SP.
COLLAPSE FROM OVERWORK:
gawanokii vai
COLLAR
COLLAR: apigwayawegwaajigan, -an ni
COLLECT
COLLECT: collect s.o. asigin vta; maawanji'
vta; collect s.t. asiginan vti;
maawanjitoon vti2
COLLECT MONEY AS A DONATION:
asigizhooniyaawe vai
COLLEGE
COLLEGE: gabe-gikendaasoowigamig, -oon
ni
COLLISION
COLLISION: they have a collision
bitaakoshkodaadiwag
/bitaakoshkodaadi-/ vai
COLOR
GOOD COLOR: be a good color minwaande,
minwaandemagad vii; minwaanzo vai
COLORED
COLORED A CERTAIN WAY: be colored a
certain way inaande, inaandemagad vii;
inaanzo vai
COMB
COMB: binaakwaan, -an ni; comb one's hair
binaakwe'o vai; nazikwe'o vai; comb s.o.
binaakwe' /binaakwe'w-/ vta; nazikwe'
/nazikwe'w-/ vta
COME
COME: bi-izhaa vai; come (as time) ojijise,
ojijisemagad vii
COME AS WIND FROM A CERTAIN
PLACE: come as wind from a certain
direction ondaanimad vii
COME ASHORE: agwaataa vai; come ashore
in a boat agwaa'o vai, also agwaa'am;
come ashore in canoe mizhagaa vai
COME FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondaadad vii; ondaadizi vai; onjibaa vai;
onjii vai; come from a certain place (as
smoke) ondaabate, ondaabatemagad vii
COME FROM A CERTAIN PLACE
CRYING: ondademo vai
COME HERE: come here! ondaas pc;
ondaashaan pc
COME IN: come into where s.o. is biindigaw
vta
COME IN A BOAT: biidaasamishkaa vai
COME IN ANGER: biijigidaazo vai

159
come—control
COME IN FEAR: biidaanimizi vat
COME INSIDE: biindige vai
COME INTO VIEW: bi-naagozi vai; hi-
naagwad vii
COME LAUGHING: biidaapi vai
COME LEAVING TRACKS: biijikawe vai
COME MAKING NOISE: come making noise
(e.g., thunder) biidwewidam vai2
COME OUT OF THE WOODS:
bapaakwa'am vai2
COME OUT OVER A HILL: zaagajiwe vai
COME SPEAKING: biidwewidam vai2
COME SUDDENLY INTO VIEW: come
suddenly into view as from around a corner
zaagewe vai
COME TELLING NEWS: biidaajimo vai
COME TO AN END: ishkwaase,
ishkwaasemagad vii
COME TO BE: bagami-ayaa, bagami-
ayaamagad vii
COME TO PASS: bagami-ayaa, bagami-
ayaamagacl vii
COME UP: come up to the surface of the
water moosihkamo vai
COME UP TO: come up to s.o. odish /odiS-/
ma; come up to s.t. oditan vti
COME WITH A LIGHT:
biidaazakwanenjige vai
RAIN COMES: biijibiisaa, biijibiisaamagad
vii
COME ON
COME ON: come on! ambe pc; daga pc;
naasanaa pc
COME TO
COME TO: aabaakawizi vai; mikawi vai
COMEDY
COMEDY: be a comedy gagiibaadaatese,
gagiibaadaatesemagad vii
COMFORTABLY
LIE COMFORTABLY: minoshin vai
SIT COMFORTABLY: minwabi vai
COMICAL
COMICAL: wawiyazh pc
THINK COMICAL: think s.o. comical
wawiyaderiim vta
COMING UP TO
COMING UP TO IN TIME: ani- pv2, also ni-
COMMISSION
COMMISSION: anookii vai; commission s.o.
anoozh /ariooN-/ vta
COMMODITY FOOD
COMMODITY FOOD: ashandiwin, -an ra
COMMODITY STORE
COMMODITY STORE: ashangewigamig,
-oon ni
COMMON PIN
COMMON PIN: oshtigwaanzhaabonigan,
-an ni
COMPANION
COMPANION: wiijiiwaagan, -ag na; my
companion niwiidigemaagan, -ag
/-wiidigemaagan-/ na
COMPANY
IN COMPANV WITH: wiiji- pv4
COMPASS
COMPASS: compass (drawing instrument)
waawiyebii'igan, -an ni
COMPLETE
COMPLETE: giizhi-jwl
COMPLETELY
COMPLETELY: wawiinge pc; wcnda- pv4
COMPUTER
COMPUTER: mazinaabikiwebinigan, -an ra
CONCRETE
MADE OF CONCRETE: be made of
concrete waabiganikaade,
waabiganikaademagad vii
CONCRETE ROAD
CONCRETE ROAD: asinii-miikana, -n ni
CONFUSE
CONFUSE: confuse s.o. by speech wanim vta
CONFUSED
CONFUSED: be confused
giiwashkweyendam vai2; wanaanimizi
vai
CONQUER
CONQUER: conquer s.o. mamaazhi* vta;
conquer s.t. mamaazhitoon vti2
CONSCIOUSNESS
REGAIN CONSCIOUSNESS: mikawi vai
CONSEQUENTLY
CONSEQUENTLY: indawaajpc
CONSERVATION OFFICER
CONSERVATION OFFICER: wiiyaasi-
dakoniwewinini, -wag na
CONSIDER
CONSIDER: maaminonendam vai2;
naanaagadawendam vai2; consider s.o.
maaminonenim vta; naanaagadawenim
vta; consider s.t. maaminonendan vti;
naanaagadawendan vti
CONSIDERATION
GIVE TOO MUCH CONSIDERATION:
onraamendam vaiZ
CONSTIPATED
CONSTIPATED: be constipated
gibishaganzhii vai
CONSTRICT
CONSTRICT: wiibwaa, wiibwaamagad vii
CONTEST
BEAT IN A CONTEST: beat s.o. in a contest
bakinaw vta; beat people in a contest
bakinaage vai
CONTINUALLY
CONTINUALLY: apanepc, aabiji-p»4
CONTRADICT
CONTRADICT: aagonwetam vai2;
contradict s.o. aagonwetaw vta;
contradict s.t. aagonwetan vti
CONTRARY
ACT CONTRARY TO INSTRUCTIONS:
act contrary to s.o.'s instructions
gagaanzitaw vta
CONTROL
CONTROL: control s.o. dibenim vta; control
s.t. dibendan vti

controlled—cost
160
CONTROLLED
CONTROLLED: be controlled dibendaagozi
vai; dibendaagwad vii
CONVENE
CONVENE A COUNCIL: zagaswe'iwe vai
CONVERSE
CONVERSE: converse with s.o. gaganoozh
/gaganooN-/ via; they converse with each
other gaganoonidiwag /gaganoonidi-/ vai
CONVINCE
CONVINCE: convince s.o. gagaanzom vta
COOK
COOK: cook (female) jiibaakwewikwe, -g na;
cook (male) jiibaakwewinini, -wag na;
giizizekwe vai; jiibaakwe vai; cook s.o.
jiibaakwaazh /jiibaakwaaN-/ vta; cook s.t.
jiibaakwaadan vti; cook (s.t.) for s.o.
giizizamaw vta
COOK A CERTAIN WAY: cook (something)
a certain way inizekwe vai; cook s.o. a
certain way iniz /inizw-/ vta; cook s.t. a
certain way inizan vti
COOK BY BOILING: cook s.o. by boiling
gabaashim vta; cook s.t. by boiling
gabaatoon vti2
COOK IN A HURRY: ojaanimizekwe vai
COOK ON THE COALS: cook (s.t.) on the
coals akakanzhebwe vai+o
COOK OVER A FIRE: cook (s.t.) over a fire
abwe vai+o; cook s.o. over a fire abwaazh
/abwaaN-/ vta; cook s.t. over a fire
abwaadan vti
COOK TENDER: cook s.o. tender nookiz
/nookizw-/ vta; cook s.t. tender nookizan
vti
COOK UNDER THE ASHES: cook (s.t.)
under the ashes ningwa'abwe vai+o
COOK WELL: minozekwe vai; cook s.o. well
minoz /minozw-/ vta; cook s.t. well
minozan vti
COOK WITH: cook s.o. with something else
dagoz /dagozw-/ vta; cook s.t. with
something else dagozan vti
DONE COOKING: be done cooking giizhide,
giizhidemagad vii; giizizo vai, also
giizhizo
FINISH COOKING: finish cooking s.o. giiziz
/giizizw-/ vta; finish cooking s.t. giizizan
vti
COOK SHACK
COOK SHACK: jiibaakwewigamig, -oon ni
COOKED
COOKED TENDER: be cooked tender
nookide, nookidemagad vii; nookizo vai
COOKED WITH: be cooked with something
else dagode, dagodemagad vii; dagozo
vai
INCOMPLETELY COOKED: be
incompletely cooked ashkide,
ashkidemagad vii; ashkizo vai
WELL COOKED: be well cooked minode,
minodemagad vii; minozo vai
COOKIE
COOKIE: bakwezhigaans, -ag na
COOKING POT
COOKING POT: jiibaakwewakik, -oog na
COOL
COOL: dakise vai; dakise, dakisemagad vii;
be cool (of a thing) dakaa, dakaamagad
vii; dakizi vai
COOL OFF: dakishin vai; dakisin vii; cool off
(as a liquid) dakaagamisin vii
COOL WEATHER: be cool (weather)
dakaayaa, dakaayaamagad vii, also daki-
ayaa
SET TO COOL: set s.o. to cool dakishim vta;
set s.t. to cool dakisidoon vti2
COOLED
COOLED BY THE WIND: be cooled by the
wind dakaashi vai; dakaasin vii
COOP
CHICKEN COOP: baaka'aakwenhwigamig,
-oon ni
COOT
COOT: aajigade, -g na
COPPER
COPPER: (piece of) copper miskwaabik ni
COPY
COPY IN WRITING: copy s.t. in writing
naasaabibii'an vti; copy things in writing
naasaabibii'ige vai
CORN
CORN: mandaamin, -ag na
EAR OF CORN: mandaaminaak, -oon ni
KERNEL OF CORN: mandaamin, -ag na
CORNFIELD
CORNFIELD: mandaamini-gitigaan, -an ni
CORNMEAL
CORNMEAL: biisiboojigan na
CORN SOUP
CORN SOUP: mandaaminaaboo ni
CORNER
CORNER OF A ROOM: be a corner of a
room jaangate, jaangatemagad vii
CORNSTALK
CORNSTALK: mandaaminashk, -oon ni
CORRECT
CORRECT: gwayakpc; correct? naayanh />c
CORRECTLY
CORRECTLY: weweni pc
BEAD CORRECTLY: bead s.t. correctly (on
a loom) gwayakwaabidoo'an vti; bead
things correctly (on a loom)
gwayakwaabidoo'ige vai
LIE CORRECTLY: gwayakoshin vai;
gwayakosin mi
SPEAK CORRECTLY: gwayakowe vai
THINK CORRECTLY: gwayakwendam
vai2
THREAD CORRECTLY: thread s.t. correctly
gwayakwaabidoo'an vti
WRITE CORRECTLY: gwayakobii'ige vai;
write s.t. correctly gwayakobii*an vti
COST
HAVE A CERTAIN COST: inaginde,
inagindemagad vii; inaginzo vai

161 
cottage—crack
COTTAGE
COTTAGE: niibinishiiwigamig, -oon ni
COTTON
COTTON CLOTH: babagiwayaaniigin,
-oon ni, a/so bagiwayaaniigin; gidagiigin,
-oon ni
COTTONTAIL RABBIT
COTTONTAIL RABBIT: manidoo-
waabooz, -oog na
COUCH
COUCH: genwaakwak apabiwin ni;
ginwaako-apabiwin, -an ni
COUGH
COUGH: ozo'iodam vai2
COUGH MEDICINE
COUGH MEDICINE: ozosodamoo-
mashkiki ni
COULD
COULD: could modal daa- pvl
COUNCIL
CONVENE A COUNCIL: zagaswe'iwe vai
COUNCIL MEETING: they have a council
meeting zagaswe'idiwag /zagaswe'idi-/
vai
COUNCILLOR
COUNCILLOR: gaagiigidoowinini, -wag na;
giigidoowinini, -wag na; wegimaawabid
na-pt; zagaswe'idiiwinini, -wag na
COUNT
COUNT: agindaaso vai; count s.o. agim vta;
count s.t. aigindan vti; count (s.t.) for s.o.
agindamaw vta; count (s.t.) for people
agindamaage vai
COUNT IN: count s.o. in dagwagim vta;
count s.t. in dagwagindan vti
COUNT OVER: aandaginzo vai; count s.o.
over aandagim vta; count s.t. over
aandagindan vti
COUNTED
COUNTED: be counted aginjigaade,
aginjigaademagad vii; aginjigaazo vai;
aginzo vai
COUNTED IN: be counted in dagwaginde,
dagwagindemagad vii; dagwaginzo vai
COUNTRY
COUNTRY: aki, -in ni
CHANGE COUNTRIES: aandakii vai
RETURN TO OWN COUNTRY: return to
one's own country giiwekii vai
COURAGEOUS
COURAGEOUS: be courageous mangide'e
vai
COURT
IN COURT: be in court onaakonige vai
COURT MATTER
COURT MATTER: be a court matter
dibaakonigaade vai
COURTHOUSE
COURTHOUSE: dibaakonigewigamig. -oon
ni
COUSIN
CROSS-COUSIN: my (female's) female cross-
cousin (mother's brother's daughter or
father's sister's daughter) indaangoshenh,
-yag /-daangosheny-/ nad; my (male's)
male cross-cousin (male's father's sister's
son or male's mother's brother's son)
niitaawis, -ag /-iitaawis-/ nad; my cross-
cousin of the opposite sex niinimoshenh,
-yag /-iinimosheny-/ nad
PARALLEL COUSIN: my older male parallel
cousin nisayenh, -yag /-sayeny-/ nad; my
older female parallel cousin nimisenh, -yag
/-miseny-/ nad; my parallel cousin of the
opposite sex indawemaa, -g
/-dawemaaw-/ nad; my younger parallel
cousin nishiime, -yag /-shiimey-/ nad
COVER
COVER: cover s.o. badagwana'
/badagwana'w-/ vta; cover s.t.
badagwana'an vti; cover things
badagwana'ige vai
COVER WITH BLANKETS: cover s.o. with
blankets agwazhe' vta
COVER WITH BODY: cover s.o. with body
badagoshkaw vta; cover s.t. with body
badagoshkan vti
SHARE COVER WITH: share a cover with
s.o. wiidagwazhem vta
COVERED
COVERED: be covered badagwana'igaade,
badagwana'igaademagad vii;
badagwana'igaazo vai
COVERED WITH BLANKETS: be covered
with blankets agwazhe vai
LIE WITH FACE COVERED: lie with one's
face covered badagwiingweshin vai
COVERING
COVERING: agwazhe'on, -an ni
COW
COW: bizhiki, -wag na
COWARDLY
COWARDLY: be cowardly zhaagode'e vai
COWHIDE
COWHIDE: bizhikiwayaan, -ag na
CRAB
CRAB: ashaageshiinh, -yag na
CRACK
CRACK: crack (e.g., glass or china) baasikaa,
baasikaamagad vii; crack on impact
baasishin vai; baasisin vii; crack s.o.
baasishim vta; crack s.t. baasisidoon vti2
CRACK APART: daashkikaa,
daashkikaamagad vii
CRACK BY HEAT: crack s.o. by heat baasiz
/baasizw-/ vta; crack s.t. by heat baasizan
vti
CRACK FROM HEAT: baaside,
baasidemagad vii; baasizo vai
CRACK IN THE ICE: there is a crack in the
ice daashkikwadin vii
CRACK USING SOMETHING: crack s.o.
using something baasa' /baasa'w-/ vta;
crack s.t. using something baasa'an vti;
crack things using something baasa'ige vai
FALL AND CRACK HEAD: fall and crack
one's head baasindibeshin vai

crack—cry
162
HEARD CRACKING: be heard cracking (as
ice) madwekwadin vii
CRACKER
CRACKER: bakwezhigaans. -ag na
CRACKLINGS
CRACKLINGS: zaasigan, -ag na
CRADLE BOARD
CRADLE BOARD: dikinaagan, -an ni
BABY IN A CRADLE BOARD:
dakobinaawaswaan, -ag na
HAVE A BABY IN A CRADLE BOARD:
dakobinaawaso vai
IN CRADLE BOARD: be in a cradle board
dakobizo vai
CRADLE BOARD FOOTREST
CRADLE BOARD FOOTREST:
apizideyaakwa'igan, -an ni
CRADLE BOARD WRAPPER
CRADLE BOARD WRAPPER: dikineyaab,
-iin ni
CRAFT
CRAFT: anokaajigan, -an m
CRANBERRY
HIGHBUSH CRANBERRY: aniibiimin, -an
ni
LOWBUSH CRANBERRY: mashkiigimin,
-ag na
CRANBERRY BUSH
HIGHBUSH CRANBERRY BUSH:
aniibiiminagaawanzh, -iig na
LOWBUSH CRANBERRY BUSH:
mashkiigiminagaawanzh, -iin ni
CRANE
SANDHILL CRANE: ajijaak, -wag na
CRAPPIE
CRAPPIE: gidagagwadaashi, -wag na
CRATE
CRATE: mitigo-makak, -oon ni
CRAWL
ARRIVE CRAWLING: bagamoode vai
CRAWL A CERTAIN WAY: inoode vai
CRAWL ABOUT: babaamoode vai
CRAWL ALONG: bimoode vai
CRAWL AWAY: animoode vai
CRAWL FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondoode vai
CRAWL HERE: biidoode vai
CRAWL IN: biindoode vii
CRAWL IN A TIGHT PLACE: zhegoode
vai
CRAWL OFF: maadoode vai
CRAWL OUT: zaagidoode vai
CRAWL TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inoode
vai
CRAYFISH
CRAYFISH: ashaageshiinh, -yag na
CRAZY
CRAZY: be crazy giiwanaadizi vai
CREAK
CREAK: giziibwewe vai; giziibwewe,
giziibwewemagad vii; giziibweweshkaa
vai; giziibweweshkaa,
giziibweweshkaamagad vii
CREAK IN THE WIND: giziibweweyaashi
vai; giziibweweyaasin vii
CREDIT
GET CREDIT: mazina'ige vai; get credit
from s.o. mazina'amaw vta
CREE
CREE: omashkiigoo, -g na
SPEAK CREE: omashkiigoomo vai
CREEK
CREEK: ziibiins, -an ni
CREEP
CREEP AWAY: giimaadoode vai
CRISP
BURNT CRISP: be burnt crisp
onzaamaakide, onzaamaakidemagad vii;
onzaamaakizo vai
CROOKED KNIFE
CROOKED KNIFE: waagikomaan, -an ni
CROSS
CROSS: aarhideyaatig, -oog na
CROSSCUT SAW
CROSSCUT SAW: giishkiboojigan, -an ni
CROSSED
SIT WITH LEGS CROSSED:
aazhoogaadebi vai
CROW
CROW: aandeg, -wag na
CRUMBLE
CRUMBLE: crumble s.o. biisibizh /biisibiN-/
vta; crumble s.t. biisibidoon vti2
CRUNCH
CRUNCH IN MOUTH: crunch s.o. in mouth
gaapam vta; crunch s.t. in mouth
gaapandan vti; crunch things in mouth
gaapanjige vai
CRUSH
CRUSH BY FOOT OR BODY: crush s.o. by
foot or body zhishigoshkaw vta; crush s.t.
by foot or body zhishigoshkan vti
CRUSH WITH HANDS: crush s.o. with
hands zhishigobizh /zhishigobiN-/ vta;
crush s.t. with hands zhishigobidoon vti2
CRUST
CRUST ON THE SNOW: mere is a crust on
the snow onaabanad vii
CRUTCH
CRUTCH: aajiningwa'on. -an ni; edawi-
zaka'on, -an ni
USE CRUTCHES: edawi-zaka'o vai
CRY
CRY: mawi vai; cry for s.o. mawim vta; cry
for s.t. mawindan vti
COME FROM A CERTAIN PLACE
CRYING: ondademo vai
CRY A CERTAIN WAY: inademo vai
CRY A LITTLE: mawiinsiwi vai
CRY FOR A CERTAIN REASON:
ondademo vai
CRY TO GO ALONG: mookawaakii vai
CRY WALKING ALONG: bimademo vai
GO ABOUT CRYING: babaamademo vai
GO TO A CERTAIN PLACE CRYING:
inademo vai

163 
cry—cute
MAKE CRY: make s.o. cry moo' vta
PRETEND TO CRY: mawiikaazo vat
STOP CRYING: giishkowe vai
CRYBABY
CRYBABY: be a crybaby mawishki vai
CUB
BEAR CUB: makoons. -ag no.
CUCUMBER
CUCUMBER: bipakoombens, -an ni
CUFF
MOCCASIN CUFF: apiganegwaajigan, -an
ni, also apigwanegwaason, -an
CULTURE HERO
CULTURE HERO: name of aadizookaan
character viewed as culture hero and
trickster Wenabozho na, also
Nenabozho*
CUP
CUP: onaagaans, -an ni
CUPBOARD
CUPBOARD: ataasowin, -an ni
CUPFUL
CERTAIN NUMBER OF CUPFULS: a
certain number of cupfuls dasonaagaans
pc
CURE
CURE OVER A FIRE: cure s.o. over a fire
abwewas /abwewasw-/ vta; cure s.t. over a
fire abwewasan vti; cure things over a fire
abwewasige vai
CURL
CURL HAIR BY HEAT: curl s.o.'s hair by
heat babiizigaakiz /babiizigaakizw-/ vta
CURLY
CURLY HAIR: have curly hair babiizigindibe
vai
CURRENT
DRIFT ALONG ON CURRENT:
bimaaboode, bimaaboodemagad vii;
bimaaboono vai
DRIFT OFF ON THE CURRENT:
maadaaboode, maadaaboodemagad vii;
maadaaboono vai
CURTAIN
CURTAIN: gibiiga'igan, -an ni
CURTAINED
CURTAINED: be curtained gibiiga'igaade,
gibiiga'igaademagad vii
CUSHION
CUSHION: apisijigan, -an ni
CUSTOM
HAVE A CERTAIN CUSTOM: izhitwaa vai
IT WAS THE CUSTOM TO: it was the
custom to... ikopCj also ko
CUT
CUT: cut things giishkizhige vai; cut oneself
giishkizhodizo vai
CUT A CERTAIN WAY: cut s.o. a certain
way inizh /inizhw-/ vta; cut s.t. a certain
way inizhain vti
CUT A PIECE OFF: cut a piece off s.o.
bakwezh /bakwezhw-/ vta; cut a piece off
s.t. bakwezhan vti
CUT ACCIDENTALLY: cut s.o. accidentally
bitizh /bitizhw-/ vta; cut s.t. accidentally
bitizhan vti
CUT CARDS: bakwenige vai
CUT FIREWOOD: manise vai; cut s.t. as
firewood manisaadan vti; cut (s.t.) as
firewood for s.o. manisaw vta
CUT FRINGE: cut fringe in s.o. niisiiwezh
/niisiiwezhw-/ vta; cut fringe in s.t.
niisiiwezhan vti
CUT HAIR: giishkikozhiwe vai
CUT INTO STRIPS: cut s.t. into strips
baanizhan vti
CUT LONG: cut s.o. long (as something
string-like) ginwaabiigizh
/ginwaabiigizhw-/ vta; cut s.t. long (as
something string-like) ginwaabiigizhan vti
CUT MEAT INTO STRIPS: cut meat into
strips for preservation baanizhaawe vai
CUT NAILS: cut one's own nails
giishkiganzhiikonidizo vai
CUT OFF: cut s.o. off giishkizh /giishkizhw-/
vta; cut s.t. off giishkizhan vti; cut things
off giishkizhige vai
CUT OUT: cut s.o. out mamizh /mamizhw-/
vta; cut s.t. out mannizhan vti
CUT SHORT: cut s.o. short (as something
string-like) dakwaabiigizh
/dakwaabiigizhw-/ vta; cut s.t. short (as
something string-like) dakwaabiigizhan vti
CUT STRAIGHT: cut s.o. straight
gwayakozh /gwayakozhw-/ vta; cut s.t.
straight gwayakozhan vti
CUT THROUGH: cut through s.o. giishkizh
/giishkizhw-/ vta; giishkizhan vti
CUT TIMBER: giishka'aakwe vai
CUT TO PIECES: cut s.o. to pieces
bigishkizh /bigishkizhw-/ vta; cut s.t. to
pieces bigishkizhan vti
CUT TO SHAPE: cut s.o. to shape onikozh
/onikoN-/ vta; cut s.t. to shape onikodan
vti
GET CUT FALLING: giishkishin vai
MAKE A CUT: make a cut on s.o. beshizh
/beshizhw-/ vta; make a cut on s.t.
beshizhan vti
CUTE
CUTE: be cute wawiyadendaagwad vii
CONSIDERED CUTE: be considered cute
wawiyadendaagozi vai
LOOK CUTE: wawiyazhinaagozi vai;
wawiyazhinaagwad vii
SOUND CUTE: wawiyazhitaagozi vai;
wawiyazhitaagwad vii
THINK CUTE: think s.o. cute wawiyadenim
vta

dakota—dawn
164
D
DAKOTA
DAKOTA: Dakota (Sioux) bwaan, -ag na
DAKOTA WOMAN: bwaanikwe, -g na
SPEAK DAKOTA: bwaanimo vai; speak
Dakota to s.o. bwaanimotaw vta
DAM
DAM: gibaakwa'igan, -an ni; dam s.o.
gibaakwa' /gibaakwa'w-/ vta; dam s.t.
gibaakwa'an vti; dam things gibaakwa'ige
vai
DAMAGE
DAMAGE: damage s.o. banaaji' vta; damage
s.t. banaajitoon vti2
DAMAGE WITH HANDS: damage s.o. with
hands banaajibizh /banaajibiN-/ vta;
damage s.t. with hands banaajibidoon vti2
DAMAGED
DAMAGED: be damaged banaadad vii;
banaadizi vai
DAMMED
DAMMED: be shut (as or as with something
stick- or wood-like) gibaakwa'igaade,
gibaakwa'igaademagad vii
DAMP
DAMP: be damp zhakaa, zhakaamagad vii;
zhakizi vai; be damp (as something sheet-
like) zhakiigad vii; zhakiigizi vai
DANCE
DANCE: niimi vai; dance a war dance
bwaanzhii-niimi vai; dance for s.o.
niimikaw vta; they dance niimi'idiwag
/niimi'idi-/ vai; they dance a war dance
bwaanzhii-niimi'idiwag/bwaanzhii-
niimi'idi-/ vai; war dance bwaanzhii-
niimi'idiwin, -an ni; dance for people (for a
purpose) niimikaage vai
DANCE ABOUT: babaamishimo vai
DANCE ALONG: bimishimo vai
DANCE AWAY: animishimo vai
DANCE IN A CERTAIN PLACE:
dazhishimo vai
DANCE INSIDE: dance inside (as in a Grand
Entry) biindigeshimo vai
DANCE THE WOMEN'S DANCE: ikwe-
niimi vai; they dance the women's dance
ikwe-niimi'idiwag /ikwe-niimi'idi-/ vai
DANCE WITH: dance with s.o.
wiijishimotaw vta
GIVE A DANCE: niimi'iwe vai
MAKE DANCE: make s.o. dance niimi' vta
WOMEN'S DANCE: ikwe-niimi'idiwin, -an
ni
DANCE BELL
DANCE BELL: zhinawa'oojigan, -an ni
DANCE BUSTLE
DANCE BUSTLE: bimoonjigan, -an ni
DANCE HALL
DANCE HALL: niimi'idiiwigamig, -oon ni
DANCE OUTFIT
DANCE OUTFIT: bwaanzhiiwi'on, -an ni
WEAR A DANCE OUTFIT: bwaanzhiiwi'o
vai
DANCE SONG
DANCE SONG: niimi'idii-nagamon, -an ni
DANDRUFF
DANDRUFF: wiinishagaandibaan m
DANGER
DANGER: be danger aanimad vii
THINK TO BE IN DANGER: think s.o. to be
in danger naniizaanenim vta
DANGEROUS
DANGEROUS: be dangerous naniizaanad
vii; naniizaanizi vai
CONSIDER DANGEROUS: consider s.o.
dangerous naniizaanenim vta; consider
s.t. dangerous naniizaanendan vti
CONSIDERED DANGEROUS: be
considered dangerous
naniizaanendaagwad vii; zegendaagozi
vai; zegendaagwad vii
DARK
DARK: be dark bishagiishkaa,
bishagiishkaamagad vii; dibiki-ayaa vai;
makadewaa, makadewaamagad vii;
makadewizi vai; be dark (as a liquid)
makadewaagamin /makadewaagami-/ vii
DARK AS NIGHT: be dark as night gashkii-
dibik-ayaa, gashkii-dibik-ayaamagad vii
DARK AT NIGHT: be very dark at night
gashkii-dibikad vii
DARK COLORED: be dark colored
bishagiishkaande,
bishagiishkaandemagad vii;
bishagiishkaanzo vai
DARK HOUSE: be dark (as in a room or
house) dibikate, dibikatemagad vii
DARK INDOORS: be dark indoors
bishagiishkate, bishagiishkatemagad vii
DARK ROOM: be dark (as in a room or
house) dibikate, dibikatemagad vii
DARKENED
DARKENED: be darkened (e.g. the moon or
sun in an eclipse) aateyaabikishin vai
DATE
CERTAIN DATE: be a certain date daso-
giizhigad vii
CERTAIN DATE OF THE MONTH: be a
certain date of the month inaginzo vai
DAUGHTER
DAUGHTER: my daughter indaanis, -ag
/-daanis-/ nad, also indaan
HAVE A DAUGHTER: odaani vai; odaanisi
vai
DAUGHTER-IN-LAW
DAUGHTER-IN-LAW: na'aanganikwe. -g
na
DAWN
DAWN: be dawn waaban vii
DAWN COMES: biidaaban vii
LIGHT AT DAWN: be light at dawn
waaseyaaban vii

165
dawn—deflate
WORK UNTIL DAWN: waabananokii vai
DAY
DAY: giizhig ni; be day giizhigad i-n
ABSENT A CERTAIN NUMBER OF
DAYS: be absent a certain number of days
dasogonendi vai
ALL DAY: gabe-giizhik pc
BAD DAY: be a bad day maazhi-giizhigad vii
CERTAIN DAY OF THE MONTH: be a
certain day of the month dasogonagizi vai
CERTAIN DAY OF THE WEEK: be a
certain day of the week izhi-giizhigad vii
CERTAIN NUMBER OF DAYS: a certain
number of days daso-giizhik/ic; dasogon
pc; be a certain number of days
dasogonagad vii
CERTAIN NUMBER OF DAYS OLD: be a
certain number of days old dasogonagizi
vai
DAY AFTER TOMORROW: awas-waabang
pc
DAY BEFORE YESTERDAY: awasonaago
pc
EVERY DAY: endaso-giizhikpc
GONE A CERTAIN NUMBER OF DAYS:
be gone a certain number of days
dasogonendi vai
NICE DAY: be a nice day mino-giizhigad vii
SO LATE IN THE DAY: be so late in the day
apiichi-giizhigad vii
THE FIRST DAY: be the first day (of a
mondi) maadaginzo vai
DAYBREAK
DAYBREAK: be daybreak biidaaban vii
DEAD
DEAD: be dead nibo vai
HAVE A FEAST HONORING THE DEAD:
jiibenaake vai
DEAF
DEAF: be deaf gagiibishe vai; be deaf (in one
ear) gibishe vai
DEAL
DEAL: deal cards oninige vai; deal s.o. (e.g.,
cards) onin vta
DEATH
BEAT TO DEATH: beat s.o. to death
niiwana' /niiwana'w-/ vta
HAVE A DEATH IN FAMILY: have a death
in one's family nibooke vai
DEBT
GO COLLECT A DEBT: naadazina'ige vai
GO INTO DEBT: mazina'ige vai
DECEIVE
DECEIVE: deceive s.o. wayezhim vta; de-
ceive s.o. in speech giiwanim vta; deceive
people wayezhinge vai
DECEMBER
DECEMBER: manidoo-giizisoons na
DECEPTIVE
DECEPTIVE: be deceptive in speech
giiwanimo vai
DECIDE
DECIDE: inendam vai2; decide what to do
onendam vai2
DECIDE A CERTAIN WAY: decide a certain
way about s.t. inaakonan vti; decide about
s.o. a certain way inaakon vta; decide
things a certain way inaakonige vai
DECIDE AGAINST: aanizhiitam vai2
DECIDE ON: decide on s.o. onagim vta;
onaakon vta; decide on s.t. onaakonan vti
DECIDED
DECIDED IN A CERTAIN WAY: be
decided in a certain way inaakonigaade,
inaakonigaademagad vii
DECISION
IT'S YOUR DECISION: booshke pc, also
booshke giniin
DECORATE
DECORATE: decorate s.o. wawezhi' vta;
decorate s.t. wawezhitoon vti2; decorate
things wawezhichige vai
DECORATED
DECORATED: zazegaa/ic, be decorated
wawezhichigaade,
wawezhichigaademagad vii;
wawezhichigaazo vai
DECOY
DUCK DECOY: zhiishiibikojigan, -ag na
FISH DECOY: okeyaw, -ag na
DECREED
DECREED A CERTAIN WAY: be decreed a
certain way inaakonigaade,
inaakonigaademagad vii
DEED
DEED: izhichigewin, -an ni
DEEP
DEEP: be deep (of a body of water) dimii,
dimiimagad vii
DEEP SNOW: be deep snow ishpaagonagaa,
ishpaagonagaamagad vii
DEEP TO A CERTAIN EXTENT: be deep
to a certain extent akwiindimaa,
akwiindimaamagad vii
DEER
DEER: waawaashkeshi, -wag na
DEER HIDE
DEER HIDE: waawaashkeshiwayaan, -ag na
DEER MEAT
DEER MEAT: waawaashkeshiwi-wiiyaas ni
DEFEAT
DEFEAT: defeat s.o. zhaagooji* vta; defeat
s.o. in speech zhaagoozom vta; defeat s.t.
zhaagoojitoon vti2; defeat people
zhaagooji'iwe vai
DEFEAT IN A CONTEST OR GAME:
defeat s.o. in a contest or game niiwezh
/niiweN-/ vta; defeat people in a contest or
game niiwezhiwe vai
DEFECATE
DEFECATE: miizii vai
DEFLATE
DEFLATE: deflate s.t. zhiigoojiinan vti

dejected—dig
166
DEJECTED
DEJECTED: be dejected osidaawendam vai2
DEN
DEN: waanzh, -an ni
DENIAL
DENIAL: exclamation of denial ine pc
DENIM
DENIM: giboodiyegwaazoniigin, -oon ni
DENSE
DENSE: be dense mashkawaa,
mashkawaamagad vii; mashkawizi vai
DENTAL PICTOGRAPH
DENTAL PICTOGRAPH: dental pictograph
on birch bark mazinibaganjigan, -an ni
MAKE A DENTAL PICTOGRAPH: make a
dental pictograph on birch bark
mazinibaganjige vai
DENTIST
DENTIST: wiibidaa-mashkikiiwinini, -wag
na
DENY
DENY: aagonwetam vai2; deny s.t.
aagonwetan vti; deny what s.o. says
aagonwetaw vta
DEPART
DEPART: maajaa vai, also ani-maajaa
DEPEND
DEPEND ON: depend on (s.t.) apenimo
vai+o; depend on s.o. apenimonodaw vta,
also apenimodaw; depend on s.t.
apenimonodan vti
DEPRESSED
FEEL DEPRESSED: maanendam vai2, also
maazhendam; niisaanendam vai
DEPTH
DETERMINE THE DEPTH: debakii'ige vai
LIE TO A CERTAIN DEPTH: apiichishin
vai; apiichisin vii
DEPTHS
IN THE DEPTHS OF A BODY OF
WATER: anaamiindim pc
DESIGN
DESIGN: mazinibii'igan, -an ni
HAVE A DESIGN: mazinishin vai; mazinisin
vii
DESIRABLE
DESIRABLE: be desirable nandawendaagozi
vai; nandawendaagwad vii
DESIRE
DESIRE: misawendam vai2; nandawendam
vai2; desire s.o. agaawaazh /agaawaaN-/
vta; misawenim via; nandawenim vta;
desire s.t. agaawaadan vti; misawendan
vti; nandawendan vti; desire things
misawenjige vai
STRONGLY DESIRE: ondendam vai2
DESIRES
HAVE INTENSE FEELINGS OR DESIRES:
aakwendam vai2
DESK
DESK: apibii'igan, -an ni; ozhibii'ige-
adoopowin, -an ni
DESPAIR
DESPAIR: banaadendam vai2; despair of s.o.
banaadenim vta; despair of s.t.
banaadendan vti
DESPITE
DESPITE: aanawi pc
DESTINY
HAVE A CERTAIN DESTINY: inendaagozi
vai
DESTROY
DESTROY: destroy s.t. nishwanaajitoon
vti2; destroy s.o. nrshwanaaji' vta; destroy
things nishwanaajichige vai
DETERGENT
LIQUID DETERGENT:
giziibiiginaaganewaaboo ni
DETOUR
DETOUR: wiimaashkaa vai
DEUCE
DEUCE: niizhoobii'igan, -ag na
DEVIL
DEVIL: maji-manidoo, -g na
DEW
DEW: there is dew mindookad vii
DEW-CLAW GAME
DEW-CLAW GAME: dew-claw game plural
biipiinjigana'onag na
DIABETES
HAVE DIABETES: ziinzibaakwadowaapine
vai, also ziinzibaakwadwaapine
DIAMOND
DIAMOND SUITE CARD: gaanoo, -g na
DIAPER
DIAPER: aanziyaan, -an ni
DIARRHEA
HAVE DIARRHEA: zhaabokaawizi vai
DIE
DIE: nibo vai
DIE FROM A FALL: aapijishin vai
DIE IN A CERTAIN PLACE: dapine vai
DIE IN AN ACCIDENT: niiwanishin vai
DIFFERENT
DIFFERENT: bakaan pc; be different
bakaanad vii; bakaanizi vai
ALL DIFFERENT: bebakaan pc
DIFFICULT
DIFFICULT: be difficult zanagad vii;
zanagizi vai
CONSIDER DIFFICULT: consider s.o. dif-
ficult zanagenim vta; consider s.t. difficult
zanagendan vti; consider things difficult
zanagendam vai2
MAKE IT DIFFICULT: make it difficult for
s.o. zanagi* vta
DIG
DIG: dig for s.o. nandwaanikaazh
/nandwaanikaaN-/ vta; dig for s.t.
nandwaanikaadan vti
DIG A HOLE: waanike vai
DIG UP: dig up s.o. moona' /moona'w-/ vta;
dig up s.t. moona'an vti; dig up things
moona'ige vai

167
dime—disobedient
DIME
DIME: bezhizhooniyaans, -ag na;
zhooniyaans, -ag na
DINNER
EAT DINNER: eat dinner (noon meal)
naawakwe-wiisini vai; eat s.t. for dinner
(noon meal) naawakwe-miijin vti3
DINNER PLATE
DINNER PLATE!: desinaagan, -an m
DIP
DIP: dip s.o. gondaabiigin vta; dip s.t
gondaabiiginan vti
DIP IN: dip s.t. in jekaagaminan vti
DIP UP: dip up things gwaaba'ige vai
DIPPER
DIPPER: gwaaba'igan, -an ni
DIRECT
DIRECT: dibishkoo pc
DIRECTION
IN THE DIRECTION OF: gakeyaapc, also
akeyaa, keyaa, nakakeyaa*
DIRECTOR
DIRECTOR: odaakewigimaa, -g na, also
odaake-ogimaa
DIRT
DIRT: wiiyagasenh ni
DIRTY
DIRTY: be dirty wiinad irii; wiinizi vai; be
dirty (as a liquid) wiinaagamin
/wiinaagami-/ vii
DIRTY HAND: have a dirty hand wiinininjii
vai
DIRTY SCALP: have a dirty scalp
wiinishagaandibe vai
MAKE DIRTY: make s.o. dirty wiini' -oca;
make s.t. dirty wiinitoon vti2; make things
dirty wiinichige vai
TELL A DIRTY STORY: wiinaajimo vai
DISAGREE
DISAGREE: disagree with s.o. (of something
consumed) inverse forms of: maanikaw- vta
DISAGREEABLE
CONSIDER DISAGREEABLE: consider s.o.
disagreeable maanenim vta; consider s.t.
disagreeable maanendan vti
CONSIDERED DISAGREEABLE: be con-
sidered disagreeable maanendaagozi vai;
maanendaagwad vii
DISAPPEARED
DISAPPEARED: disappeared! weniban pc
DISAPPOINTED
DISAPPOINTED: be disappointed
minjinawezi vai
DISAPPROVE
DISAPPROVE: disapprove of s.o. zhiingenim
vta; disapprove of s.t. zhiingendan vti;
they disapprove of each other
zhiingenindiwag /zhiingenindi-/ vai
DISAPPROVED
DISAPPROVED OF: be disapproved of
zhiingendaagozi vai; zhiingendaagwad
vii
DISBELIEVE
DISBELIEVE: disbelieve s.o. aagonweyenim
vta
DISCOMFORT
WALK WITH DISCOMFORT: maanose vai
DISCONNECT
DISCONNECT: disconnect s.o. gidiskin vta;
disconnect s.t. gidiskinan vti
DISCONNECT WITH HANDS: disconnect
s.o. with hands gidiskibizh /gidiskibiN-/
vta; disconnect s.t. with hands
gidiskibidoon vti2
DISCOURAGE
DISCOURAGE: discourage s.o. aanishim vta
DISEASE
DISEASE: aakoziwin, -an ni
CATCH A DISEASE: mizizi vai
DISEMBARK
DISEMBARK: gabaa vai; disembark s.o.
gabaa' vta
TELL TO DISEMBARK: tell s.o. to
disembark gabaanaazha'
/gabaanaazha'w-/ vta
DISEMBOWEL
DISEMBOWEL: disembowel s.o.
gijinagizhiin vta
DISGUSTING
CONSIDER DISGUSTING: consider s.o.
disgusting gagwaanisagenim vta; consider
s.t. disgusting gagwaanisagendan vti
CONSIDERED DISGUSTING: be consid-
ered disgusting gagwaanisagendaagozi
vai; gagwaanisagendaagwad vii
DISH
DISH: onaagan, -an ni
BIRCH BARK DISH: wiigwaasinaagan, -an
ni
WASH DISHES: giziibiiginaagane vai
WIPE DISHES: gaasiinaagane vai
WOODEN DISH: mitigonaagan, -an ni
DISH GAME
PLAY THE DISH GAME: bagese vai
DISH PAN
DISH PAN: gichi-onaagan ni
DISH TOWEL
DISH TOWEL: giziiyaabika'igan, -an ni
DISLIKE
DISLIKE: dislike s.o. aanawenim vta;
zhiingenim vta; dislike s.t. aanawendan
vti; zhiingendan vti; they dislike each other
zhiingenindiwag /zhiingenindi-/ vai; dis-
like things aanawenjige vai
DISLIKED
DISLIKED: be disliked aanawendaagozi vai;
aanawendaagwad vii; zhiingendaagozi
vai; zhiingendaagwad vii
DISMANTLE
DISMANTLE: dismantle s.o. biigon vta;
dismantle s.t. biigonan vti
DISOBEDIENT
DISOBEDIENT: be disobedient
zhazhiibitam vai2

disperse—dollar
168
DISPERSE
DISPERSE: bitwise vai; biiwise,
biiwisemagad vii
DISRESPECT
SHOW DISRESPECT: show disrespect for
s.o. baapinodaw via
DISSATISFIED
DISSATISFIED: be dissatisfied (with what
has been given) mindawe vai
DISTANCE
CERTAIN DISTANCE: be a certain distance
apiichaa, apiichaamagad mi
HEARD SPEAKING AT A DISTANCE: be
heard speaking at a distance debwewidam
vai2
SOME DISTANCE: gomaapii pc
DISTANT
DISTANT: waasa^c
DISTANT SIGHT: be a distant sight
naawinaagozi vai; naawinaagwad vii
DISTRACT
DISTRACT: distract s.o. wanishkwe' vta
DISTRACTED
DISTRACTED: be distracted
wanishkweyendam vai
DISTRESS
IN DISTRESS: be in distress aanimizi vai
DISTRIBUTE
DISTRIBUTE: maada'ookii vai; distribute
(s.t.) to s.o. maada'oozh /maada'ooN-/
vta; they distribute (s.t.) to each other
maada*oonidiwag /maada'oonidi-/ vai
DISTURB
DISTURB BY SPEECH: disturb s.o. by
speech wanishkwem vta
DISTURB SLEEP: disturb s.o.'s sleep wapaa'
vta
DISTURBANCE
DISTURBANCE: be a disturbance aanimad
vii
DISTURBED
DISTURBED: be disturbed ishkendam vai2;
be disturbed in one's mind
mamiidaawendam vai2
DIVE
DIVE: googii vai
DIVIDE
RIVER DIVIDES: divide (as a river)
baketigweyaa, baketigweyaamagad vii
DIVORCE
DIVORCE: they divorce each other
webinidiwag /webinidi-/ vai
DIZZY
DIZZY: be di2zy giiwashkwe vai;
giiwashkweyaabandam vai2
MAKE DIZZY: make s.o. dizzy (especially of a
substance) inverse forms of:
giiwashkweshkaw- vta
DO
DO: do something doodam vai2; do some-
thing to s.o. doodaw vta; do something to
s.t. doodan vti; diey do something to each
other doodaadiwag /doodaadi-/ vai; do
something to oneself doodaadizo vai;
doodaazo vai
DO A CERTAIN THING: inakamigizi vai
DO A CERTAIN WAY: do things a certain
way izhichige vai
DO AMAZING THINGS: maamakaajichige
vai
DO EXACTLY: wawiingechige vai
DO GOOD: do good things minochige vai
DO IN VAIN: aanawewizi vai
DO RIGHT: do things right gwayakochige
vai
DO SKILFULLY: wawiingechige vai
DO WELL: do things well minochige vai
FREQUENTLY DO: mtaa.-pv4
MAKE DO: make s.o. do something izhi' vta
NOT KNOW WHAT TO DO: gwiinawi-
doodam vail
TRY TO DO: try to do s.t. wiikwajitoon vti2
UNABLE TO DO: be unable to do something
bwaanawi'o vai; be unable to do s.t.
bwaanawitoon vti2; be unable to do some-
thing to s.o. bwaanawi' vta
DOCK
DOCK: niminaaweyaandawaagan, -an ni
DOCTOR
DOCTOR: mashkikiiwinini, -wag na; doctor
(female) mashkikiiwininiikwe:, -g na;
doctor s.o. mashkikiikaazh
/mashkikiikaaN-/ vta; nanaandawi' vta;
doctor people nanaandawi'iwe vai
DOCUMENT
DOCUMENT: mazina'igan, -an ni
DODGE
DODGE: dabazi vai, also dabazii*
DOE
DOE: oniijaaniw, -ag na
DOG
DOG: animosh, -ag na; my dog inday, -ag
/-day-/ nod
FEMALE DOG: gishkishenh, -yag na
HAVE A DOG: odayi vai
HUNTING DOG: giiwosewasim, -oog na,
also giiyosewasim
MALE DOG: naabesim, -oog na
DOGFISH
DOGFISH: zhigwameg, -wag na
DOGWOOD
DOGWOOD: red osier (locally known as
dogwood) miskwaabiimizh, -iig na
DOING
WAY OF DOING: izhichigewin, -an ni
DOLL
DOLL: mazinichigan, -ag na;
odaminwaagan, -ag na
DOLL OF HAY OR GRASS:
mazinashkibijigan, -ag na
DOLL OF PROCESSED BASSWOOD
BARK FIBER: asigobaani-mazinichigan,
-agmz
DOLLAR
CERTAIN NUMBER OF DOLLARS: a
certain number of dollars daswaabik/>£

169
dollar—dream
EIGHT DOLLARS: ishwaaswaabik pc, also
nishwaaswaabik*
FIVE DOLLARS: naanwaabik pc
FOUR DOLLARS: niiwaabikpc
NINE DOLLARS: zhaangaswaabik pc
ONE DOLLAR: bezhigwaabik pc
SEVEN DOLLARS: niizhwaaswaabik pc
SIX DOLLARS: ingodwaaswaabik/x, also
ningodwaaswaabik*
TEN DOLLARS midaaswaabikpc
THREE DOLLARS: niswaabikp.
TWO DOLLARS: niizhwaabik pc
DOMESTIC ANIMAL
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: awakaan, -ag na
DON'T
DON'T: gego pc
DON'T BOTHER: maanoo pi
DON'T CARE: maanoo/n
DON'T EVER: gego wiikaapc
DON'T IN ANY WAY: gego ganage pc
I DON'T KNOW WHAT: I don't know what
inanimate dubitative wegodogwen, -an pr
JUST DON'T: gego binapc
YOU DON'T HAVE TO: gaawiin memwech
pc
DONATION
COLLECT MONEY AS A DONATION:
asigizhooniyaawe vai
DOOR
DOOR: ishkwaandem, -an ni
BY A DOOR: jiigishkwaand pc
LODGE DOOR COVER: gibishkwaande'on,
-an ni
DOUBTS
HAVE DOUBTS: have doubts about s.o.
zhaagwenim via
DOUGHNUT
DOUGHNUT: bookadinigan, -ag na, also
bwaakadinigaazod
DOVE
DOVE: omiimii, -g na
DOWN
DOWN: down from it niisayi'ii pc
CLIMB DOWN: niisaandawe vai; climb
down fast niisaandawebizo vai
KNOCK DOWN OFF WITH HANDS:
knock s.o. down off something with hands
diitibibizh /diitibibiN-/ vta; knock s.t.
down off something with hands
diitibibidoon vti2
PULL DOWN: pull s.o. down niisibizh
/niisibiN-/ vta; pull s.t. down niisibidoon
vti2
RUN DOWN: niisaandawebatoo vai
TEAR DOWN: tear s.o. down niisibizh
/niisibiN-/ vta; tear s.t. down niisibidoon
vti2
DOWNHILL
GO DOWNHILL: niisaakiiwe vai
RUN DOWNHILL: niisaakiiwebatoo vai
DOWNSTAIRS
GO DOWNSTAIRS: niisaandawe vai
DOWNSTREAM
DOWNSTREAM: niisaajiwan pc
DOZE
DOZE: bishkongwashi vai
DRAFT ANIMAL
DRAFT ANIMAL: odaabii'aagan, -ag na
DRAG
DRAG: drag (something) odaabii vai; drag
s.o. odaabaazh /odaabaaN-/ vta; drag s.t.
odaabaadan vti
DRAG ALONG: drag s.o. along
bimidaabaazh /bimidaabaaN-/ vta; drag
s.t. along bimidaabaadan vti
DRAG ASHORE: drag s.o. ashore
agwaadaabaazh /agwaadaabaaN-/ vta;
drag s.t. ashore agwaadaabaadan vti; drag
something ashore agwaadaabii vai
DRAG AWAY: animidaabii vai
DRAG HERE: biijidaabii vai; drag s.o. here
biijidaabaazh /biijidaabaaN-/ vta; drag s.t.
here biijidaabaadan vti
DRAG INTO THE WATER: drag s.o. into
the water bakobiidaabaazh
/bakobiidaabaaN-/ vta; drag s.t. into the
water bakobiidaabaadan vti
DRAG TO A CERTAIN PLACE: drag s.o. to
a certain place izhidaabaazh
/izhidaabaaN-/ vta; drag s.t. to a certain
place izhidaabaadan vti
DRAGONFLY
DRAGONFLY: oboodashkwaanishiinh, -yag
na
DRAIN
DRAIN DRY: drain s.t. dry iskandan vti
DRAPES
DRAPES: gibiiga'igan, -an ni
DRAW
DRAW WITH MOUTH: draw on s.o. with
mouth (e.g., a pipe) wiikwam vta; draw on
s.t. with mouth wiikwandan vti; draw on
things with mouth wiikwanjige vai
DRAW WATER
DRAW WATER: gwaaba'ibii vai
DRAW
DRAW: draw s.o. mazinibii* /mazinibii'w-/
vta; draw s.t. mazinibii'an vti; draw things
mazinibii'ige vai
DRAW A CIRCLE: waawiyebii'ige vai
DRAWING
DRAWING: mazinibii'igan, -an ni
DRAWKNIFE
DRAWKNIFE: mookojigan, -an ni
DRAWSTRING
DRAWSTRING: giboobijiganeyaab, -iin ni
DREAM
DREAM: dream of s.o. bawaazh /bawaaN-/
vta; dream of s.t. bawaadan vti; have
dreams bawaajige vai
BAD DREAM: have a bad dream
giiwanaadingwaam vai
DREAM A CERTAIN WAY: inaabandam
vai2

dream—drive
170
SCARY DREAM: have a scary dream
zegaabandam vai2
SEE A CERTAIN WAY AS ESI A DREAM:
see s.o. a certain way as in a dream
inaabam via; see s.t. a certain way as in a
dream inaabandan vti
DRESS
DRESS: majigoode, -yan ni; my dress
ingoodaas, -an /-goodaas-/ mJ
BUCKSKIN DRESS: buckskin dress
bashkweginagooday, -an ni
CHANGE DRESS: change one's dress
aandagoode vai
JINGLE DRESS: ziibaaska'iganagooday, -an
ni
PUT ON DRESS: put on one's dress
biitagoode vai
TAKE OFF DRESS: take off one's dress
giitagoode vai
DRESS
DRESS: biizikonaye vai; dress s.o.
biizikonaye* vta
DRESS A CERTAIN WAY: inikonaye vai;
izhi'o vai
DRESS IN A NEW OUTFIT: oshkikonaye
vai
DRESS IN RED: miskwaakonaye vai
DRESS UP: wawezhi'o vai; zazegaa'o vai;
dress s.o. up wawezhi' vta
DRESS WARMLY: giizhoo'o vai
DRESS WELL: mino'o vai
DRESSED
DRESSED: be dressed biizikonaye vai
DRESSED UP: zazegaapc; be dressed up
nanaa'ii vai
DRESSED-UP
DRESSED-UP MAN: zazegaa-inini, -wag na
DRESSED-UP WOMAN: zazegaa-ikwe,
-wag na
DRESSER
DRESSER: wiikobijigan, -an m
DRIED
DRIED: baate-/>:4. be dried baasigaade,
baasigaademagad vii; baasigaazo vai
DRIED OUT: be dried out gaaskide,
gaaskidemagad vii; gaaskizo vai
DRIFT
DRIFT ALONG ON CURRENT:
bimaaboode, bimaaboodemagad vii;
bimaaboono vai
DRIFT AWAY: animaabogo vai;
animaaboode, animaaboodemagad vii
DRIFT AWAY ON THE WAVES: animaa'an
vii; animaa'ogo vai
DRIFT OFF ON THE CURRENT:
maadaaboode, maadaaboodemagad vii;
maadaaboono vai
DRIFT OFF ON THE WAVES: maadaa'an
vii; maadaa'ogo vai
DRILL
DRILL: bagone'igan, -an ni; drill s.o. bagone*
/bagone'w-/ vta; drill s.t. bagone'an vti
DRINK
DRINK: drink (s.t.) minikwe vai+o
CHOKE WHILE DRINKING: bakwenibii
vai
DRINK AND BE MERRY: minobii vai
DRINK QUICKLY: drink s.t. quickly
ziikaapidan vti
DRINK TOO MUCH: onzaamibii vai
GIVE A DRINK: give s.o. a drink mina' vta
GIVE TOO MUCH TO DRINK: give s.o. too
much to drink onzaamibazh
/onzaamibaN-/ vta
LOOK FOR A DRINK: nandoobii vai
UNABLE TO FIND A DRINK: be unable to
find a drink gwiinobii vai
DRINKING GLASS
DRINKING GLASS: mikwamiiwinaagaans,
-an ni
DRINKING VESSEL
DRINKING VESSEL: minikwaajigan, -an ni
DRIP
DRIP: onjigaa, onjigaamagad vii
DRIP DOWN: bangigaa, bangigaamagad vii
DRIP FAST: gizhiigaa, gizhiigaamagad vii
START TO DRIP: maajigaa,
maajigaamagad vii
DRIVE
DRIVE: odaabii'iwe vai; drive s.o. (e.g., a
draft animal or a car) odaabii' vta
ARRIVE DRIVING: bagamibide,
bagamibidemagad vii; bagamibizo vai;
bagamidaabii'iwe vai
DRIVE ABOUT: babaamibide,
babaamibidemagad vii; babaamibizo
vai; babaamidaabii'iwe vai
DRIVE ACROSS: aazhogebizo vai;
aazhogedaabii'iwe vai; aazhoodaabii'iwe
vai
DRIVE ALONG: bimibide, bimibidemagad
vii; bimibizo vai; bimidaabii'iwe vai;
drive s.o. along bimibizoni' vta; drive s.t.
along bimibizonitoon vti2; drive people
along (as in a bus) bimiwizhiwe vai
DRIVE ALONG IN A WAGON OR
SLEIGH: drive along quickly in a wagon
or sleigh bimidaabiiba'igo vai
DRIVE ALONG THE SHORE: jiigewebizo
vai; jiigewedaabii'iwe vai
DRIVE AT A CERTAIN SPEED:
apiichibide, apiichibidemagad vii;
apiichibizo vai
DRIVE AT NIGHT: niibaabizo vai
DRIVE AWAY: animibide, animibidemagad
vii; animibizo vai; animidaabii'iwe vai;
drive away with horses animiba'igo vai;
drive away with s.o. (e.g., a car)
animibizoni' vta; drive away with s.t.
animibizonitoon vti2
DRIVE AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewebide, animwewebidemagad
vii; animwewebizo vai
DRIVE AWAY WITH A LIGHT:
animaazakonenjigebizo vai
DRIVE FAST: gizhiibizo vai; gizhiidaabii'iwe
vai

171
drive—dust
DRIVE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjibide. onjibidemagad mi; onjibizo vai;
onjidaabii'iwe vai
DRIVE HERE: biijibide, biijibidemagad mi;
biijibizo vai; biijidaabii'iwe vai
DRIVE HERE WITH A LIGHT:
biidaazakonebizo vai
DRIVE HOME: giiwedaabii'iwe vai
DRIVE IN: drive in biinjibide,
biinjibidema.gad vii; biinjibizo vai
DRIVE INSIDE: biindigebide,
biindigebidemagad vii; biindigebizo vai
DRIVE OFF: maajidaabii'iwe vai;
maajiibide, maajiibidemagad vii;
maajiibizo vai; drive off in a wagon
maajidaabiiba'igo vai
DRIVE OFF DRAWN BY HORSES:
maajiiba'igo vai
DRIVE OFF TO THE SIDE: bakebide,
bakebidemagad vii; bakebizo vai
DRIVE SLOWLY: bejibide, bejibidemagad
vii; bejibizo vai
DRIVE SUDDENLY INTO VIEW:
zaagewebidcj, zaagewebidemagad vii;
zaagewebizo vai
DRIVE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: ipide,
ipidemagad vii; ipizo vai; izhidaabii'iwe
vai; drive s.o. to a certain place ipizoni'
vta; drive s.t. to a certain place ipizonitoon
vti2
GET LOST DRIVING: wanibizo vai
HEARD DRIVING ALONG: be heard driving
along bimwewebide,
bimwewebidemagad vii; bimwewebizo
vai
HEARD DRIVING HERE: be heard driving
here biidwewebide, biidwewebidemagad
vii; biidwewcibizo vai
STOP DRIVING: noogibide,
noogibidemagad vii; noogibizo vai
TURN DRIVING: gwekibizo vai
DRIVE GAME
DRIVE GAME: apagajinaazhikaage vai;
drive game for s.o. apagajinaazhikamaw
via: drive s.o. as game apagajinaazhikaw
vta
DRIVER
DRIVER: odaabiii'iwewinini, -wag na
TAXI DRIVER: bimiwizhiwewinini, -wag na
DRIVER'S LICENSE
DRIVER'S LICENSE: odaabii'iwe-
mazina'igaans, -an ni
DROP
DROP: drop s.o. bangishim vta; drop s.t.
bangisidoon vti2
LET DROP: let s.o. drop banin vta; let s.t.
drop baninan vti
LET DROP FROM MOUTH: let s.o. drop
from one's mouth bagidam vta; let s.t.
drop from one's mouth bagidandan vti
DROP-OFF
DROP-OFF: there is a drop-off
giishkaamikaa, giishkaamikaamagad vii
DROWN
DROWN: gibwanaabaawe vai
DRUGGIST
DRUGGIST: mashkikii-adaawewinini, -wag
na, also mashkikiiwi-adaawewinini
DRUGSTORE
DRUGSTORE: mashkikii-adaawewigamig,
-oon in, also mashkikiiwi-adaawewigamig
DRUM
DRUM: dewe'igan, -ag na; drum on s.o.
madwe' /madwe'w-/ vta; drum on s.t.
madwe'an vti
MIDE DRUM: mitigwakik, -oog na
POUND ON DRUM: baaga'akokwe vai
DRUMSTICK
DRUMSTICK: dewe'iganaak, -oon na, also
dewe'iganaatig; drumstick for hand drum
baaga'akokwaan, -an tn
DRUNK
DRUNK: be drunk giiwashkwebii vai
MAKE DRUNK: make s.o. drunk
giiwashkwebazh /giiwashkwebaN-/ vta
DRY
DRY: be dry baaso vai; baate, baatemagad
vii; bengozi vai; bengwan vii; dry s.o.
baas /baasw-/ vta; dry s.o. using something
bengwa' /bengwa'w-/ vta; dry s.t. baasan
vti; dry s.t. using something bengwa'an vti
DRAIN DRY: drain s.t. dry iskandan vti
DRY BY SMOKING: dry s.o. by smoking
gaaskiz /gaaskizw-/ vta; dry s.t. by
smoking gaaskizan vti
DRY UP: dry up (of a body of water) iskate,
iskatemagad vii
DRY WOOD
DRY WOOD: mishiiwaatig, -oon ni
DRYING RACK
DRYING RACK: drying rack for strips of
meat over a fire abwaanaak, -oon ni
DUCK
DUCK: zhiishiib, -ag na
HUNT DUCKS: nandawishibe vai
DUCK DECOY
DUCK DECOY: zhiishiibikojigan, -ag na
DULL
DULL: be dull ashiwaa, ashiwaamagad vii
DULUTH
DULUTH: Onigamiinsing p/aa-
DUMB
DUMB: be dumb bagwanawizi vai
DUMP
DUMP: ziigwebinigan, -an ni
DUMPLING
DUMPLING: napodin, -ag na
MAKE DUMPLINGS: napodinike vai
DUMPLING SOUP
DUMPLING SOUP: bisigadanaaboo ni
DURING
DURING: megwaapc
DUST
DUST: wiiyagasenh ni

dwarf—edge
172
DWARF
HAIRY-FACED BANK-DWELLING
DWARF SPIRIT: memegwesi, -wag na
DYE
DYE: atisigan, -an ni, also adisigan; dye s.o.
atis /atisw-/ vta, also adis; dye s.t. atisan
vti, also adisan; dye things atisige vai, also
adisige
DYNAMITE
DYNAMITE: baasaabikizigan, -an ni
E
EAGER
EAGER: be eager gwaashkwezi vai;
wewiibendam vai; be eager to do s.t.
ojaanimitoon vti2
EAGLE
BALD EAGLE: migizi, -wag na
GOLDEN EAGLE: giniw, -ag na
EAR
EAR: my ear nitawag, -an /-tawag-/ nid
INFECTED EAR: have an infected ear
miniiwitawage vai
INSIDE EAR: inside an ear biinjitawag pc
EAR DROPS
EAR DROPS: ziiginishaan, -an ni
EAR OF CORN
EAR OF CORN: mandaaminaak, -oon ni
EARLY
EARLY: wayiibapc, also wiiba
EARLY IN THE MORNING: gichi-gigizheb
pc
EARLY IN THE NIGHT: be early in the
night oshki-dibikad vii
EARMUFF
EARMUFF: giizhootawage'on, -ag na
WEAR EARMUFFS: giizhootawage'o vai
EARN
EARN: gashkichige vai; earn s.o. (e.g.5
money) gashki' vta; earn s.t. dibendan vti
EARN FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: ondizi
vai
EARN MONEY: zhooniyaake vai
EARRING
EARRING: naabishebizon, -an ni
WEAR EARRINGS: naanaabishebizo vai
EARTH
EARTH: aki, -in ni; be the earth akiiwan vii
EARTH LODGE
EARTH LODGE: akiiwe-wiigiwaam, -an ni
EASILY
EASILY: wenipazh pc
GET EASILY: get s.o. easily wenipazhi' vta;
get s.t. easily wenipazhitoon vti2
EAST
EAST: east: where the dawn comes from
conjunct <>/ ondaaban: wendaabang vii
IN THE EAST: waabanong /)t
TO THE EAST: waabanong/,t
EAST WIND
EAST WIND: waabani-noodin ni
EASY
EASY: be easy wendad vii; wendizi vai;
wenipanad vii; wenipanizi vai
CONSIDER EASY: consider s.t. easy
wenipanendan vti
EASY GOING: be easygoing bekaadizi vai
GO EASY: go easy on s.o. manaaji* vta; go
easy on s.t. manaajitoon vti2; go easy!
na'egaaj pc
EAT
EAT: wiisini vai; eat s.o. amo /amw-/ vta; eat
s.t. miijin vti3
EAT A CERTAIN WAY: inanjige vai
EAT BREAKFAST: gigizhebaa-wiisini vai;
eat s.t. for breakfast gigizhebaa-miijin vti3
EAT DINNER: eat dinner (noon meal)
naawakwe-wiisini vai; eat s.t. for dinner
(noon meal) naawakwe-miijin vti3
EAT ENOUGH: debisinii vai; eat enough of
s.t. de-miijin vti3
EAT IN A CERTAIN PLACE: dananjige vai
EAT LUNCH: eat lunch (noon meal)
naawakwe-wiisini vai; eat s.t. for lunch
(noon meal) naawakwe-miijin vti3
EAT SECRETLY: eat things secretly
giimoodanjige vai
EAT SUPPER: onaagoshi-wiisini vai; eat s.t.
for supper onaagoshi-miijin vti3
EAT UP: eat everything up gidaanawe vai; eat
up s.t. gidaan /gidaam-/ vti3; eat up s.o.
gidamo /gidamw-/ vta
EAT WELL: minwanjige vai
EAT WITH: eat with s.o. wiidoopam vta; eat
with people wiidoopange vai
EAT WITH FINGERS: eat with one's fingers
michininjiikanjige vai
EAT WITH SOMETHING ELSE: eat things
with something else (e.g., butter with
bread) apanjige vai
HEARD EATING: be heard eating
madwenjige vai
LEAVE BEHIND UNEATEN: leave s.o.
behind uneaten ishkwam vta; leave s.t.
behind uneaten ishkwandan vti
START EATING: maadanjige vai
EAVESDROP
EAVESDROP: eavesdrop on s.o. giimitaw vta
ECHO
ECHO: baswewe vai; baswewe,
baswewemagad vii
ECLIPSE
IN ECLIPSE: be in eclipse makadewaabikizi
vai
EDGE
WALK AROUND THE EDGE:
giiwitaayaazhagaame vai

173 
educated—-elevator
EDUCATED
EDUCATED: be educated gikendaaso vai
EDUCATION
EDUCATION BY PREACHING AND
EXHORTATION: gagiikimaawasowin m
EELPOUT
EELPOUT: miiay, -ag na
EFFORT
MAKE AN EFFORT: goji'ewizi vai
WITH EFFORT: enigokpc
EGG
EGG: waawan, -oon ni
FISH EGG: waak, -wan ni
LAY AN EGG: boonam vai2
EGGBEATER
EGGBEATER: waninawe'igan, -an ni
EIGHT
EIGHT: ishwaaswi nm, also nishwaaswi*;
ishwaaso- pv4, also nishwaaso-*; eight
(card) ishwaasoobii'igan, -ag na, also
nishwaasoobii'igan*; they are eight
ishwaachinoon /ishwaachin-/ vii, also
nishwaachinoon*; ishwaachiwag
/ishwaachi-/ vai, also nishwaachiwag*
AND EIGHT: ashi-ishwaaso- pv4, also ashi-
nishwaaso-*; ashi-ishwaaswi nm, also
ashi-nishwaaswi*
EIGHT ACRES: ishwaaso-diba'igaans pc,
also nishwaaso-diba'igaans*
EIGHT DAYS: ishwaaso-giizhik/K, also
nishwaaso-giizhik*; ishwaasogon pc, also
nishwaasogon*; be eight days
ishwaasogonagad vii, also
nishwaasogonagad*
EIGHT DAYS OLD: be eight days old
ishwaasogonagizi vai, also
nishwaasogonagizi*
EIGHT DOLLARS: ishwaaswaabik pc, also
nishwaaswaabik*
EIGHT EACH: eyishwaaswi nm, also
nenishwaaswi*
EIGHT FEET: ishwaasozid pc, also
nishwaasoziid*
EIGHT HOURS: ishwaaso-diba'igan pc, also
nishwaaso-diba'igan*
EIGHT HUNDRED: ishwaaswaak nm, also
nishwaaswaak*
EIGHT INCHES: ishwaasoninj pc, also
nishwaasoninj*
EIGHT MILES: ishwaaso-diba'igan pc, also
nishwaaso-diba'igan*
EIGHT MINUTES: ishwaaso-diba'igaans pc,
also nishwaaso-diba'igaans*
EIGHT MONTHS: ishwaaso-giizis pc, also
nishwaaso-giizis*
EIGHT NIGHTS: ishwaaso-dibik pc, also
nishwaaso-dibik*
EIGHT O'CLOCK: be eight o'clock
ishwaaso-diba'iganed vii, also nishwaaso-
diba'iganed*
EIGHT PAIRS: ishwaaswewaan pc, also
nishwaaswewaan*
EIGHT SETS: ishwaaswewaan pc, also
nishwaaswewaan*
EIGHT THOUSAND: ishwaasosagoons nm,
also nishwaasosagoons*
EIGHT TIMES: ishwaaching pc, also
nishwaaching*
EIGHT WEEKS: ishwaaso-anama'e-giizhik
pc, also nishwaaso-anama'e-giizhik*; be
eight weeks ishwaaso-anama'e-giizhigad
vii, also nishwaaso-anama'e-giizhigad*
EIGHT YEARS: ishwaaso-biboon pc, also
nishwaaso-biboon*; be eight years
ishwaaso-biboonagad vii, also nishwaaso-
biboonagad*
EIGHT YEARS OLD: be eight years old
ishwaaso-biboonagizi vai, also nishwaaso-
biboonagizi*
EIGHTEEN
EIGHTEEN: ashi-ishwaaswi nm, also ashi-
nishwaaswi*; midaaswi ashi-ishwaaswi
nm, also midaaswi ashi-nishwaaswi*
EIGHTH
THE EIGHTH DAY OF THE MONTH: be
the eighth day of the month
ishwaasogonagizi vai, also
nishwaasogonagizi*
EIGHTY
EIGHTY: ishwaasimidana nm, also
nishwaasimidana*
EJACULATE
EJACULATE: baashkizige vai
ELATED
ELATED: be elated onzaamenimo vai
ELBOW
ELBOW: my elbow indooskwan, -an
/-dooskwan-/ nid
SORE ELBOW: have a sore elbow
gaagiijidooskwan vai
ELDER
ELDER: gichi-aya'aa, -g na
ELDERLY
ELDERLY: be elderly gikaa vai
ELDEST
ELDEST CHILD: nitamoozhaan, -ag na
THE ELDEST: be the eldest (of siblings)
zaziikizi vai
ELECTION DAY
ELECTION DAY: be election day
biinjwebinigewi-giizhigad vii
ELECTRIC
ELECTRIC: waasamoo- pv4
ELECTRIC LAMP
ELECTRIC LAMP: waasamoo-
waazakonenjigan, -an ni
ELECTRICIAN
ELECTRICIAN: waasamoo-anokiiwinini,
-wag na
ELECTRICITY
ELECTRICITY: waasamowin ni
ELEPHANT
ELEPHANT: jejiibajikii, -g na
ELEVATOR
ELEVATOR: akwaandawaagan, -an ni;
akwaandawebizon, -an ni

eleven—erase
174
ELEVEN
ELEVEN: ashi-bezhig inn: midaaswi ashi-
bezhig nm; ashi-bezhigo- pv4
ELK
ELK: omashkooz, -oog na
ELM
ELM: aniib, -iig na
SLIPPERY ELM: ozhaashigob, -iig na
EMBARK
EMBARK: boozi vai
EMBARRASS
EMBARRASS: embarrass s.o. agaji' ma
EMBARRASS BY SPEECH: embarrass s.o.
by speech agazom vta
EMBARRASSED
EMBARRASSED: be embarrassed
agadendaagozi vai; be embarrassed by
s.o. agadenim vta
EMBARRASSING
EMBARRASSING: be embarrassing
agadendaagwad vii
EMBRACE
EMBRACE: embrace s.o. gikinjigwen vta;
giishkijiin vta; they embrace each other
giishkijiinidiwag /giishkijiinidi-/ vai
EMBROIDER
EMBROIDER: mazinigwaaso vai; embroider
s.o. mazinigwaazh /mazinigwaaN-/ vta;
embroider s.t. mazinigwaadan vti
EMERGE
EMERGE FROM SURFACE: mookii vai
EMERGE FROM THE WATER: mookibii
vai
EMPLOYED
EMPLOYED IN A CERTAIN WAY: be
employed in a certain way inaabadad vii;
inaabadizi vai
EMPTIED
EMPTIED: be emptied zhiigonigaade,
zhiigonigaademagad vii; zhiigonigaazo
vai
EMPTY
EMPTY: be empty bizhishigozi vai;
bizhishigwaa, bizhishigwaamagad vii;
empty s.o. zhiigon vta; empty s.t.
zhiigonan vti; empty things zhiigonige vai
ENCIRCLE
ENCIRCLE: giiwitaashkaa vai
END
AT THE END: at the end of it ishkwe-ayi'ii
pc, also iskweya'ii
AT THE END OF AN ACTIVITY: be at the
end of an activity ishkwaataa vai
AT THE END OF THE ROAD: at the end of
the road or trail gabekana pc
AT THE END OF THE TRAIL: at the end of
the road or trail gabekana pc
COME TO AN END: ishkwaase,
ishkwaasemagad vii; wayekwaase,
wayekwaasemagad vii
GO TO THE END: gabeshkaa vai; go to the
end of s.t. gabeshkan vti
HANG AT THE END: ishkwegoode,
ishkwegoodemagad vii; ishkwegoojin
vai; hang s.o. at the end ishkwegoozh
/ishkwegooN-/ vta; hang s.t. at the end
ishkwegoodoon vti2
LIE AT THE END: ishkweshin vai;
ishkwesin vii
LIVE ON THE END OF TOWN: live at the
end of town ishkwege vai
SIT AT THE END: ishkwebi vai
STAND AT THE END: ishkwegaabawi vai
ENERGETIC
ENERGETIC: be energetic gwaashkwezi vai
ENGAGED
ENGAGED IN AN ACTIVITY TO A
CERTAIN EXTENT: be engaged in an
activity to a certain extent apiichitaa vai
ENGAGED
ENGAGED: be engaged asho-wiidige vai;
they are engaged to each other asho-
wiidigendiwag /asho-wiidigendi-/ vai
ENGINE
ENGINE: mayaajiibizod na-pt
ENGLISH
SPEAK ENGLISH: gichi-mookomaanimo
vai; zhaaganaashiimo vai; speak English
to s.o. zhaaganaashiimotaw vta
WRITE IN ENGLISH:
zhaaganaashiiwibii'ige vai; write in
English to s.o. zhaaganaashiiwibii'amaw
vta; write s.t. in English
zhaaganaashiiwibii'an vti
ENGLISHMAN
ENGLISHMAN: zhaaganaash, -ag na, also
zhaaganaashi, -wag
ENOUGH
ENOUGH: de- pv4; gwech pc; be enough
debise vai; debise, debisemagad vii
EAT ENOUGH: debisinii vai; eat enough of
s.t. de-miijin vti3
HAVE ENOUGH: debizi vai; have enough of
s.o. debisa' vta; have enough of s.t.
debisatoon vti2; have enough of things
debisachige vai
HAVE ENOUGH TO GIVE: have enough to
give away deba'ookii vai; have enough to
give to or feed s.o. deba'oozh /deba*ooN-/
vta
THINK THERE IS ENOUGH:
debisewendam vai2
ENTER
ENTER: biindige vai; enter into where s.o. is
biindigaw vta
ENVELOPE
ENVELOPE: mashkimodens, -an ni;
maajiibii'ige-mashkimodens, -an ni
ENVY
ENVY: envy s.o. ondenim vta
EQUAL
EQUAL: dibishkoo pc
ERASE
ERASE: erase s.t. gaasiibii'an vti; erase things
gaasiibii'ige vai

175
eraser—extricate
ERASER
ERASER: gaasiibii'igan, -ag na
ERROR
IN ERROR: vtsmi-pv4
ESCAPE
ESCAPE: giimii vai; escape from s.o. gii' vta;
ozhim vta; escape from people gii'iwe vai
ESPECIALLY
ESPECIALLY: memindagepc
EUROPE
IN EUROPE: agaamakiing pc
EVEN
EVEN: dibishkoo pc
KEEP UP EVEN: keep up even with s.o. dibi*
vta
EVEN THOUGH
EVEN THOUGH: awanjish pc
EVENING
EVENING: be evening onaagoshin
/onaagoshi-/ vii
ALL EVENING: gabe-onaagosh pc
EVENT
CERTAIN EVENT: be a certain event
inakamigad vii; izhiwebad vii
HAVE AN EVENT IN A CERTAIN PLACE:
danakamigizi vai
EVENTUALLY
EVENTUALLY: gegapiipc
EVER
EVER: wiikaa pc
DON'T EVER: gego wiikaa pc
EVERY
EVERY: akinapr, oho kina, gakina; daso- pv3
EVERY DAY: endaso-giizhik pc
EVERY MONTH: endaso-giizis pc
EVERY MORNING: endaso-gigizheb pc
EVERY NIGHT: endaso-dibik pc
EVERY ONCE IN A WHILE: aayaapii pc
EVERYTHING
EVERYTHING: akina gegoo pr, also kina
gegoo, gakina gegoo
EVERYWHERE;
EVERYWHERE: miziwe pc; be everywhere
miziweshkaa, miziweshkaamagad vii
GO EVERYWHERE: miziweshkaa,
miziweshkaamagad vii
EVICT
EVICT: evict s.o. zaagidin vta
EVICTED
EVICTED: be evicted ikonigaazo vai
EVIL
EVIL: be evil maji-manidoowaadizi vai
EVIL MANITOU: maji-manidoo, -g na
LEAD AN EVIL LIFE: maji-izhiwebizi vai
EXACTLY
EXACTLY: memwech pc
DO EXACTLY: wawiingechige vai
EXCESSIVELY
EXCESSIVELY: onzaam^c
EXCHANGE
EXCHANGE: exchange s.o. meshkwadoon
vta; exchange s.t. meshkwadoonan vti;
exchange things meshkwadoonige vai
IN EXCHANGE: meshkwad pc
EXCITE
EXCITE: excite s.o. ombi' vta
EXCITED
EXCITED: be excited baapinakamigizi vai;
ombendam vai2
EXCITING
EXCITING: be exciting minawaanigwad vii
EXCREMENT
EXCREMENT: moo, -wan ni
EXHALE
EXHALE: bagidanaamo vai; nasanaamo vai
EXHAUSTED
EXHAUSTED: be exhausted noondeshin vai
EXHIBITION
EXHIBITION: waabanda'iwewin, -an ni
EXHORTATION
EDUCATION BY PREACHING AND
EXHORTATION: gagiikimaawasowin ni
EXIT
EXIT: zaaga'am vai2
EXOTIC
EXOTIC: mayagi-/w4
EXPECT
EXPECT: akawaabi vai; expect s.o. to come
akawaabam vta; expect s.t. to come
akawaabandan vti
EXPECT TO BE IN A CERTAIN PLACE:
expect s.o. to be in a certain place
danenim vta; expect s.t. to be in a certain
place danendan vti
EXPLAIN
EXPLAIN: explain (s.t.) to s.o.
waawiindamaw vta; explain (s.t.) to
people waawiindamaage vai
EXPLAINED
EXPLAINED: be explained waawiinjigaade,
waawiinjigaademagad vii
EXPLODE
EXPLODE: baashkide, baashkidemagad vii;
baashkizo vai
EXTENT
CERTAIN EXTENT: a certain extent apiichi-
pv3
WHOLE EXTENT OF: gabe-pv4
EXTINGUISH
EXTINGUISH: extinguish s.t. aate'an vti
EXTINGUISHED
EXTINGUISHED: be extinguished aate,
aatemagad vii
APPEAR TO BE EXTINGUISHED: appear
to be extinguished (e.g., the moon or sun
in an eclipse) aatenaagozi vai
EXTREMELY
EXTREMELY: onzaampc
EXTRICATE
EXTRICATE: extricate s.o. giichigon vta; ex-
tricate s.t. giichigonan vti

eye—fall
176
EYE
EYE: my eye nishkiinzhig, -oon
/-shkiinzhigw-/ nid
BIG EYE: have a big eye mangishkiinzhigwe
vai
HAVE A BLACK EYE: ozhaawashkwaabi
vai
HAVE SOMETHING IN EYE: have some-
thing in one's eye binzini vai
OPEN EYES: open one's eyes dooskaabi vai
SHUT EYES: shut one's eyes basangwaabi
vai
SWOLLEN EYES: have swollen eyes
baagishkiinzhigwe vai
EYE DROPS
EYE DROPS: ziiginiingwaan m
EYEGLASSES
EYEGLASSES: eyeglasses plural
oshkiinzhigokaajiganan ni, also
oshkiinzhikokaanan
EYEBROW
EYEBROW HAIR: my eyebrow hair
nimaamaa, -yag /-maamaay-/ nad
EYELASH
EYELASH: miishaabiwinaan, -an ni
EYESIGHT
GOOD EYESIGHT: have good eyesight
minwaabi vai
F
FACE
FACE: rny face indengway, -an /-dengway-/
nid
ACNE ON FACE: have acne on one's face
moosewiingwe vai
BROAD FACE: have a broad face
mangadengwe vai
BRUISED FACE: have a bruised face
ozhaawashkwaanagiingwe vai
CHAPPED FACE: have a chapped face
gagiipiingwe vai
FALL ON FACE: fall on one's face
ajijiingwese vai
HAVE SCAR ON FACE: have scar on one's
face ojiishiingwe vai
LIE WITH FACE COVERED: lie with one's
face covered badagwiingweshin vai
NARROW FACE: have a narrow face
agaasadengwe vai
SCABS ON FACE: have scabs on one's face
omigiingwe vai
SLAP ON FACE: slap s.o. on the face
basiingwe* /basiingwe'w-/ vta
SWOLLEN FACE: have a swollen face
baagiingwe vai
WASH FACE: wash one's face giziibiigiingwe
vai
WIPE FACE: wipe one's face with something
giziingwe'o vai
WRINKLED FACE: have a wrinkled face
oziigiingwe vai
FACE POWDER
FACE POWDER: waabishkiingwechigan ni
USE FACE POWDER: waabishkiingwechige
vai
FACE DOWN
FALL FACE DOWN: animikose vai;
animikose, animikosemagad vii
LAY FACE DOWN: lay s.o. face down
animikoshim vta; lay s.t. face down
animikosidoon vti2
LIE FACE DOWN: animikoshin vai;
animikosin vii
TURN FACE DOWN: turn s.o. face down
animikon vta; turn s.t. face down
animikonan vti
TURNED FACE DOWN: be turned face
down animikonigaade,
animikonigaademagad vii;
animikonigaazo vai
FACE UP
LAY FACE UP: lay s.o. face up aazhigijishim
vta; lay s.t. face up aazhigijisidoon vti2
LIE FACE UP: aazhigijishin vai; aazhigijisin
vii
TURN FACE UP: aazhigijise vai; aazhigijise,
aazhigijisemagad vii
FACTORY
FACTORY: anokiiwigamig, -oon ni
FADE
FADE: fade from light waabaaso vai;
waabaate, waabaatemagad vii
FADED
FADED: be faded waabide, waabidemagad
vii; waabizo vai
FAIL
FAIL TO SEE: fail to see s.o. gwiinawaabam
vta; fail to see s.t. gwiinawaabandan vti
FAINT
FAINT: wanendamaa vai
FALL
FALL: bangishin vai; bangisin vii; fall (as a
leaf) binaakwii vai
DIE FROM A FALL: aapijishin vai
FALL AND BREAK ARM: fall and break
one's arm bookonikeshin vai
FALL AND BREAK BACK: fall and break
one's back bookwaawiganeshin vai
FALL AND BREAK LEG: fall and break
one's leg bookogaadeshin vai
FALL AND CRACK HEAD: fall and crack
one's head baasindibeshin vai
FALL AND TWIST ARM: fall and twist one's
arm biimiskonikeshin vai
FALL DOWN AGAINST: apangishin vai;
apangisin vii
FALL DOWN HARD: bakiteshin vai
FALL FACE DOWN: animikose vai;
animikose, animikosemagad vii

177
fall—feast
FALL FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjibide, onjibidemagad vii; onjibizo vai
FALL HEAD FIRST: ajijibizo vai
FALL IN: biinjibide, biinjibidemagad vii;
biinjibizo vai; biinjise vai; biinjise,
biinjisemagad vii
FALL INTO THE WATER: bakobiise vai;
bakobiise, bakobiisemagad vii
FALL OFF A HORSE: banoomigo vai
FALL ON FACE: fall on one's face
ajijiingwese vai
FALL ON THE SIDE: opimese vai
FALL OUT OF A BOAT: gidoonagise vai
FALL OVER: gawise vai; gawise,
gawisemagad vii; fall over (as something
stick- or wood-like) gawaakose vai;
gawaakose, gawaakosemagad vii
FALL OVER BACKWARDS: aazhigijishin
vai; aazhigijisin vii
FALL THROUGH THE ICE: dwaashin vai
HAVE A BAD FALL: aapijishin vai
HEARD FALLING: be heard falling on the
floor madwesagishin vai; be heard going
along and falling bimweweshin vai
SLIP AND FALL: ozhaashishin vai
SLIP AND FALL ON THE ICE:
ozhaashikoshin vai
FALL
FALL: be fall dagwaagin /dagwaagi-/ vii
FALL BEFORE LAST: awas-dagwaagong pc
LAST FALL: dagwaagongpc
SPEND THE FALL: spend the fall
somewhere dagwaagishi vai
FALSE TEETH
FALSE TEETH: false teeth plural
wiibidaakaajiganan ni, also
wiibidaakaanan
FAMILIAR
FAMILIAR: be familiar with s.o. nagadenim
vta; be familiar with s.t. nagadendan vti
FAN
FAN: fan s.o. wewese' /wewese'w-/ vta; fan
things wewese'ige vai; fan oneself
wewese'idizo vai
HAND FAN: wewese'igan, -an ni
ROTARY FAN: gizhibaayaasijigan, -an ni
FAN BELT
FAN BELT: apikaans, -an ni; gijipizonens ni
FAR
FAR: waasa pc; be far waasawad vii
AS FAR AS: ako- pv3
SO FAR ALONG IN AN ACTIVITY: be so
far along in an activity apiichitaa vai
FARE
FARE A CERTAIN WAY: izhiwebizi vai
FARM
FARM: gitigaan, -an ni; gitige vai
FARMER
FARMER: gitigewinini, -wag na
FART
FART: boogidi vai
FAST
FAST: be fast wajepii vai
CLIMB UP FAST: akwaandawebatoo vai
DRIP FAST: gizhiigaa, gizhiigaamagad vii
DRIVE FAST: gizhiibizo vai; gizhiidaabii'iwe
vai
FLOW FAST: gizhiijiwan vti
FLY FAST: gizhiibide, gizhiibidemagad vii;
gizhiibizo vai; gizhiise vai; gizhiise,
gizhiisemagad vti
GO AS FAST AS POSSIBLE: apiizikaa vai
GO FAST: gizhiikaa vai
GROW FAST: gizhiigi vai; gizhiigin vti
LEAK FAST: gizhiigaa, gizhiigaamagad vii
MOVE FAST: gizhiibide, gizhiibidemagad
vii; gizhiibizo vai
PADDLE FAST: gizhiikaakwazhiwe vai
RUN FAST: gizhiibatoo vai; gizhiikaabatoo
vai
SPEED FAST: gizhiibide, gizhiibidemagad
vii; gizhiibizo vai
WIND BLOWS FAST: gizhiiyaanimad vti
FAST
FAST FOR A VISION: gii'igoshimo vai
UNDERGO A PUBERTY FAST: makadeke
vai
FASTEN
FASTEN: fasten s.o. zagaakwa'
/zagaakwa'w-/ vta; fasten s.t.
zagaakwa'an vti; fasten things
zagaakwa'ige vai
FASTEN TOGETHER: fasten s.o. together
zaga* /zaga'w-/ vta; fasten s.t. together
zaga'an vti
FASTENED
FASTENED: be fastened zagaakwa'igaade,
zagaakwa'igaademagad vii;
zagaakwa'igaazo vai
FAT
FAT: wiinin ni; be fat wiinino vai
FATHER
FATHER: my father imbaabaa, -yag
/-baabaay-/ nod; indede, -yag /-dedey-/
nod; my father old-fashioned noos, -ag
/-oos-/ nod
FATHER-IN-LAW
FATHER-IN-LAW: my father-in-law inzinis,
-ag /-zinis-/ nod
FATIGUED
FATIGUED: be fatigued noondeshin vai
FAWN
FAWN: gidagaakoons, -ag na
FEAR
FEAR: fear s.o. goshi /goS-/ vta; fear s.t.
gotan vti
COME IN FEAR: biidaanimizi vai
HAVE FEAR: gotaaji vai
FEARFUL
FEARFUL: be fearful zegendam vai2
FEAST
GIVE A FEAST: wiikonge vai
HAVE A FEAST: they have a feast
wiikondiwag /wiikondi-/ vai
HAVE A FEAST HONORING THE DEAD:
jiibenaake vai

feast—fill 
178
INVITE TO A FEAST: invite s.o. to a feast
(especially as part of a religious ceremony)
wiikom via; invite people to a feast (espe-
cially as part of a religious ceremony)
wiikonge vai
FEATHER
FEATHER: miigwan, -ag na
STICK IN A FEATHER: stick a feather in
one's hair or hat badakibine'o vai
FEATHER HEADDRESS
FEATHER HEADDRESS: miigwani-
wiiwakwaan, -an m
FEBRUARY
FEBRUARY: namebini-giizis na
FECES
FECES: moo, -wan ni
FEED
FEED: feed (s.t.) to s.o. asham vta; feed
people ashange vai
FEEL
FEEL: feel s.o. mikoojiin vta; feel s.o. in or on
one's body moozhi' vta; feel s.t.
mikoojiinan vti; feel s.t. in or on one's
body moozhitoon vti2
FEEL A CERTAIN WAY: inamanji'o vai;
inendam vai2
FEEL ABOUT TO A CERTAIN EXTENT:
feel about s.o. to a certain extent apiitenim
vta
FEEL BAD: maanamanji'o vai; maanendam
vai2, also maazhendam; feel bad about s.t.
maanendan vti
FEEL COLD: biingeji vai; dakamanji'o vai;
giikaji vai
FEEL DEPRESSED: maanendam vail, also
maazhendam
FEEL FOR: feel for s.o. mikoojiin ma;
nandoojiin vta; feel for s.t. mikoojiinan
vti; nandoojiinan vti; feel for things
nandoojiinige vai
FEEL GOOD: minwamanji'o vai
FEEL NUMB: giikimanizi vai
FEEL OUT OF SORTS: maazhendam vai2
FEEL SATISFIED: debisewendam vai2
FEEL STRANGE: mayagendam vai2
FEEL TIRED: ayekwamanji'o vai
FEELINGS
HAVE INTENSE FEELINGS OR DESIRES:
aakwendam vai2
FELL
FELL: fell s.o. gawa' /gawa'w-/ vta; fell s.t.
gawa'an vti
FELLOW
FELLOW: my fellow niiji-pra
FELLOW MAN: my fellow man niijiinini nod
FENCE
FENCE: minjikanaakobijigan, -an m
FERRY
FERRY ACROSS: ferry s.o. across
aazhawa'oozh /aazhawa'ooN-/ vta; ferry
s.t. across aazhawa'oodoon vti2
FESTIVITIES
FESTIVITIES: there are festivities
baapinakamigad vii
FETCH
FETCH: fetch s.o. naazh /naaN-/ vta; fetch
s.t. naadin vti3; fetch (s.t.) for s.o. naadaw
vta
FETCHED
FETCHED: be fetched naajigaade,
naajigaademagad vii; naajigaazo vai
FEVER
HAVE A FEVER: gizhizo vai
FEW
FEW: bangii pc; be few bangiiwagad vii;
bangiiwagizi vai
VERY FEW: be very few bangiishenhwagad
vii; bangiishenhwagizi vai
FIDDLE
FIDDLE: naazhaabii'igan, -an HI
FIELD
FIELD: gitigaan, -an ni
CORNFIELD: mandaamini-gitigaan, -an ni
FIERCE
FIERCE: be fierce aakwaadizi vai
FIFTEEN
FIFTEEN: ashi-naanan nm; midaaswi ashi-
naanan nm
FIFTH
THE FIFTH DAY OF THE MONTH: be the
fifth day of the month naanogonagizi vai
FIFTY
FIFTY: naanimidana nm
FIGHT
FIGHT: miigaazo vai; fight s.o. miigaazh
/miigaaN-/ vta; they fight each other
miigaadiwag /miigaadi-/ vai
FIGURE
FIGURE OUT: figure something out
onendam vai2
FILE
FILE: zisiboojigan, -an ni; file s.o. zisiboozh
/zisibooN-/ vta; file s.t. zisiboodoon vti2;
file things zisiboojige vai
FILE SHARP: file s.o. sharp giiniboozh
/giinibooN-/ vta; file s.t. sharp
giiniboodoon vti2
FILL
FILL: fill s.o. (with a liquid) mooshkinebazh
/mooshkinebaN-/ vta; fill s.o. (with solids)
mooshkina* vta; fill s.t. (with a liquid)
mooshkinebadoon vti2; fill s.t. (with
solids) mooshkinadoon vti2
FILL HALF FULL: fill s.o. half full (of liquid)
aabitoobazh /aabitoobaN-/ vta; fill s.o.
half full (of solids) aabitooshkina* ^£a;nll
s.t. half full aabitooshkinadoon vti2; fill
s.t. half full (of liquid) aabitoobadoon vti2
FILL TO OVERFLOWING: fill s.o. to
overflowing with solids ziigashkina' vta; fill
s.t. to overflowing with a liquid
ziigibadoon vti2; fill s.t. to overflowing
with solids ziigashkinadoon vti2

179
fill out—firewood
FILL OUT
FILL OUT A FORM: mooshkinebii'ige vai
FILLED
FILLED WITH SMOKE: be filled with smoke
mooshkineyaabate,
mooshkineyaabatemagad vii
WELL FILLED: be well filled minwashkine
vai; minwashkine, minwashkinemagad
vii
FINALLY
FINALLY: gegapiipc, ishkwaajpc
FIND
FIND: find s.o. mikaw via; find s.t. mikan vti;
find (s.t.) for s.o. mikamaw vta; find
things mikige vai; find people mikaage vai
FIND TRACKS: find s.o.'s tracks okawi' vta;
find the tracks of s.t. okawitoon vti2
FIND WITH HANDS: find s.o. with hands
mikobizh /rnikobiN-/ vta; find s.t. with
hands mikobidoon vti2; find (s.t.) for s.o.
with hands mikobidaw vta; find things
with hands mikobijige vai
FINE
FINE: be fine biisaa, biisaamagad vii; biisizi
vai; be fine (as something string-like)
agaasaabiigad vii; agaasaabiigizi vai
CHOP FINE: chop s.o. fine biisa' /biisa'w-/
vta; chop s.1. fine biisa'an vti
FINE
FINE: be fine mino-ayaa vai
FINGER
FINGER: niibinaakwaanininj, -iin ni; my
finger nininj, -iin /-ninjy-/ nid; nininjiins,
-an /-ninjiins-/ nid
EAT WITH FINGERS: eat with one's fingers
michininjiikanjige vai
INDEX FINGER: izhinoo'iganinj, -iin ni
LITTLE FINGER: ishkweninj, -iin ni
MIDDLE FINGER: naawininj, -iin ni
SORE FINGEBL: have a sore finger
gaagiijininjii vai
FINGERNAIL
FINGERNAIL: my nail (fingernail, toenail)
nishkanzh, -iig /-shkanzhy-/ nad
• WHITE SPOTS ON FINGERNAILS: have
white spots on fingernails mindaweganzhii
vai
FINISH
FINISH: giizhi- pv4; finish (in work or an
activity) anwaataa vai; finish a task
giizhiitaa vai; finish s.o. giizhi' vta; finish
s.t. giizhitoon vti2; finish with s.o.
giizhiikaw vta; finish with s.t. giizhiikan
vti
FINISH A TASK: giizhiitaa vai
FINISH BOILING: giizhigamide,
giizhigamidemagad vii; finish boiling
things giizhigamizige vai
FINISH BOILING SAP: ishkwaagamizige
vai
FINISH BUILDING A DWELLING:
giizhige vai
FINISH COOKING: finish cooking s.o. giiziz
/giizizw-/ vta; finish cooking s.t. giizizan
vti
FINISH MAKING: finish making s.o. giizhi'
vta; finish making s.t. giizhitoon vti2
FINISH WORK: giizhiitaa vai
FINISHED
FINISHED: be finished giizhichigaade,
giizhichigaademagad vii; giizhichigaazo
vai
FINN
FINN: madoodoowinini, -wag na;
omakakiiwinini, -wag na
FIR
BALSAM FIR: zhingob, -iig na
FIR BOUGH
FIR BOUGH: zhingobaandag, -oog na
FIRE
FIRE: ishkode, -n ni; there is a fire made in a
fireplace boodawaade,
boodawaademagad vii
AROUND THE FIRE: giiwitaashkode pc
BEYOND THE FIRE: awasishkode pc
BUILD A FIRE: boodawe vai
BY A FIRE: jiigishkode pc
CATCH FIRE: nawadide, nawadidemagad
vii; nawadizo vai
HAVE A FIRE: have a fire at one's place
zakizo vai
MAKE A FIRE: ishkodeke vai
ON FIRE: be on fire ishkodewan vii
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE FIRE:
agaamishkode pc
ON THIS SIDE OF THE FIRE:
ondaasishkode pc
OVER ACROSS THE FIRE: awasishkode pc
PUT WOOD ON THE FIRE: bagidinise vai
SET ON FIRE: set s.o. on fire zaka' /zaka'w-/
vta; set s.t. on fire zaka'an vti; set (s.t.) on
fire for s.o. zaka'amaw vta
STIR THE FIRE: jiiehiishkinzhe'ige vai
TAKEN OFF THE FIRE: be taken off the fire
agwaasijigaade, agwaasijigaademagad
vii; agwaasijigaazo vai
WARM BY THE FIRE: warm oneself by the
fire awazo vai
FIRE EXTINGUISHER
FIRE EXTINGUISHER: aate'igan, -an ni
FIRE POKER
FIRE POKER: jiichiishkinzhe'igan, -an ni
FIRE TRUCK
FIRE TRUCK: aate'ishkodawewidaabaan na
FIREFLY
FIREFLY: waawaatesi, -wag na, also
wewaatesi
FIREMAN
FIREMAN: aate'ishkodawewinini, -wag na
FIREPLACE
FIREPLACE: boodawaan, -an ni
FIREWOOD
FIREWOOD: piece of firewood mishi /miS-/
ni

fi rewood—fix
180
BRING FIREWOOD INSIDE: biindigenise
vai
CUT FIREWOOD: manise vai; cut s.t. as
firewood manisaadan vti; cut (s.t.) as
firewood for s.o. manisaw via
GO GET FIREWOOD: naadinise vai, also
naajinise
SPLIT FIREWOOD: daashkiga'ise vai
FIRST
FIRST: nitam pc; first (in a time sequence)
akawe pc, also kawe
AT FIRST: wayeshkad pc
FIRST OF ALL: akawe pc, also kawe
LIVE IN THE FIRST HOUSE: nitamige vai
THE FIRST DAY: be the first day (of a
month) maadaginzo vai
FIRST PERSON
FIRST PERSON: first person prefix ni= pre; also
n=, in=, ind=, im=, nin=*, nim=*, nind=*
FIRST PERSON EXCLUSIVE PLURAL: we
first person exclusive plural personal pronoun
niinawind pr; only us first person exclusive
plural personal pronoun niinetawind pr; our
turn first person exclusive plural personal
pronoun niinitamawind pr
FIRST PERSON INCLUSIVE PLURAL: we
first person inclusive personal pronoun
giinawind pr; only us first person inclusive
personal pronoun giinetawind pr; our turn
first person inclusive personal pronoun
giinitamawind pr
FIRST PERSON SINGULAR: I first person
singular personal pronoun niin pr; my turn
first person singular personal pronoun
niinitam pr; only me first person singular
personal pronoun niinetapr
FIRST TIME
FOR THE FIRST TIME: oshki- pv4
FIRST-BORN
FIRST-BORN: nitamoozhaan, -ag na
FISH
FISH: giigoonh, -yag na; giigoonyike vai
CLEAN A FISH: bakazhaawe vai
FIRE-CURED MEAT OR FISH:
abwewasigan, -an ni
FISH THROUGH THE ICE WITH SPEAR:
akwa'waa vai
FISH WITH A HOOK AND LINE:
wewebanaabii vai
FISH WITH A NET: bagida'waa vai
FISH WITH SET LINES: bagidaabii vai
GO FISHING: noojigiigoonyiwe vai
SCALE FISH: jiiga'e vai
FISH DECOY
FISH DECOY: okeyaw, -ag na
FISH EGG
FISH EGG: waak, -wan ni
FISH HOOK
FISH HOOK: migiskan, -an m
FISH HOUSE
FISH HOUSE FOR SPEARING:
akwa'wewigamig, -oon ni
FISH SOUP
FISH SOUP: giigoonhwaaboo ni
FISH SPEAR
FISH SPEAR: anit, -iin ni
FISH TRAP
FISH TRAP: biinjiboonaagan, -ag na
FISHER
FISHER: ojiig, -ag na
FISHER HIDE
FISHER HIDE: ojiigiwayaan, -ag na
FISHERMAN
FISHERMAN: giigoonyikewinini, -wag na
FISHING POLE
FISHING POLE: migiskanaak, -oon ni, also
migiskanaatig
FIT
FIT: debashkine vai; debashkine,
debashkinemagad vii; fit (as something
liquid) debibii, debibiimagad vii
FIT LOOSELY: fit s.o. loosely geshawishkaw
vta; fit s.t. loosely geshawishkan vti
FIT WELL: minwashkine vai; minwashkine,
minwashkinemagad vii; fit s.o. well (e.g.,
pants) minokaw vta; fit s.t. well minokan
vti
FIT WITH FOOT OR BODY: fit s.o. with
foot pr body debishkaw vta; fit s.t. with
foot or body debishkan vti
FIVE
FIVE: naanan nm; naano- pv4; they are five
naananinoon /naananin-/ vii; naananiwag
/naanani-/ vai; five (card) naanoobii'igan,
-ag na
AND FIVE: ashi-naanan nm; ashi-naano- pv4
FIVE ACRES: naano-diba'igaans pc
FIVE DAYS: naano-giizhikpc; naanogon /V;
be five days naanogonagad vii
FIVE DAYS OLD: be five days old
naanogonagizi vai
FIVE DOLLARS: naanwaabikpc
FIVE FEET: naanozid pc
FIVE HOURS: naano-diba'igan pc
FIVE HUNDRED: naanwaak nm
FPVE INCHES: naanoninjpc
FIVE MILES: naano-diba'igan pc
FIVE MINUTES: naano-diba'igaans pc
FIVE MONTHS: naano-giizis pc
FIVE NIGHTS: naano-dibik pc
FIVE O'CLOCK: be five o'clock naano-
diba'iganed vii
FIVE PAIRS: naanwewaan pc
FIVE SETS: naanwewaan pc
FIVE THOUSAND: naanosagoons nm
FIVE TIMES: naaningpc
FIVE WEEKS: naano-anama'e-giizhik pc; be
five weeks naano-anama'e-giizhigad vii
FIVE YEARS: naano-biboon pc; be five years
naano-biboonagad vii
FIVE YEARS OLD: be five years old naano-
biboonagizi vai
FIX
FIX: fix s.o. nanaa'in vta; fix s.t. nanaa'inan
vti; nanaa'itoon vti2; fix (s.t.) for s.o.
nanaa'itaw vta, also nanaa'itamaw; fix
things nanaa'ichige vai

181
flag—fly
FLAG
FLAG: gikiwe'on, -an ni
FLASHLIGHT
FLASHLIGHT: zakaasigan, -an ni
FLAT
FLAT: be flat nabagaa, nabagaamagad mi;
nabagizi vai
FLAT NOSE: have a flat nose nabagijaane vai
FLAT TIRE: have a flat tire nabagijiishin vai
FLAVOR
FLAVOR: flavor (s.t.) apaabowe vai+o
FLEA
FLEA: babig, -wag na
FLEE
FLEE: giimii vai; ozhimo vai; flee from s.o.
ginjiba' vta; flee from people ginjiba'iwe
vai
ARRIVE FLEEING: arrive fleeing from people
bagamiba'iwe vai
FLEE FOR GOOD: aapijinizhimo vai
START TO FLEE: maajiiba'iwe vai
FLESH
FLESH: my flesh niiyaas /-iiyaas-/ rod
FLIGHT
RUN ALONG IN FLIGHT: biminizhimo
vai; run along in flight from someone
bimiba'iwe vai
RUN FROM CERTAIN PLACE IN
FLIGHT: run from a certain place in flight
onjinizhimo vai
RUN TO A CERTAIN PLACE IN FLIGHT:
izhinizhimo vai
FLING
FLING OPEN: fling s.t. open (as something
stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door)
baakaakowebinan vti
FLINT
FLINT: biiwaanag, -oog na
FLIRT
FLIRT: noodendam vai2
FLOAT
FLOAT: agomo vai; agonde vii
FLOAT AWAY: animaabogo vai;
animaaboode, animaaboodemagad vii
FLOAT
FLOAT: detelba'agonjichigan, -an ni; net
float agonjoonaagan, -an ni
FLOOD
FLOOD: there is a flood mooshka'an vii
FLOODED
FLOODED: be flooded mooshka'an vii;
nikibii vai; nikibii, nikibiimagad vii
FLOOR
FLOOR: michiisag, -oon ni
FLOOR ABOVE: the floor above ishpimisag,
-oon ni
FLOOR PIECE OF CANOE: apisidaagan,
-ag«a
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE FLOOR:
naawisag pc
UNDER THE FLOOR: anaamisagpc
WASH FLOORS: giziibiigisaginige vai
FLOUR
FLOUR: bakwezhigan, -ag na; bebinezid
bakwezhigan na; bibine-bakwezhigan na
FLOUR BOX
FLOUR BOX: bakwezhigani-makak, -oon ni
FLOW
FLOW A CERTAIN WAY: izhijiwan vii
FLOW ALONG: bimijiwan vii
FLOW AWAY: animijiwan vii
FLOW FAST: gizhiijiwan vii
FLOW FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjijiwan vii
FLOW IN: biinjijiwan vii
FLOW INTO A LAKE: zaagidawaa,
zaagidawaamagad vii
FLOW OUT: zaagijiwan vii
FLOW TO A CERTAIN PLACE: izhijiwan
vii
FLOW WITH A RIPPLE: zaasijiwan vii
HEARD FLOWING: be heard flowing (e.g., a
rapids) madwejiwan vii
RIVER FLOWS ALONG: flow along (as a
river) bimitigweyaa, bimitigweyaamagad
vii
RIVER FLOWS AROUND A BEND: flow
around a bend (as a river)
washkitigweyaa, washkitigweyaamagad
vii
RIVER FLOWS TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
flow to a certain place (as a river)
izhitigweyaa, izhitigweyaamagad vii
START TO FLOW: maajijiwan vii
FLOWER
FLOWER: waabigwan, -iin ni
FLUTE
FLUTE: bibigwan, -an ni
PLAY THE FLUTE: bibigwe vai
FLY
ARRIVE FLYING: bagamibide,
bagamibidemagad vii; bagamibizo vai;
bagamise vai; bagamise,
bagamisemagad vii
FLY ABOUT: babaamibide,
babaamibidemagad vii; babaamibizo
vai; babaamise vai; babaamise,
babaamisemagad vii
FLY ALONG: bimibide, bimibidemagad vii;
bimibizo vai; bimise vai; bimise,
bimisemagad vii
FLY AT A CERTAIN SPEED: apiichibide,
apiichibidemagad vii; apiichibizo vai
FLY AWAY: animibide, animibidemagad vii;
animibizo vai; animise vai; animise,
animisemagad vii
FLY AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewebide, animwewebidemagad
vii; animwewebizo vai
FLY FAST: gizhiibide, gizhiibidemagad vii;
gizhiibizo vai; gizhiise vai; gizhiise,
gizhiisemagad vii
FLY FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: onjise vai;
onjise, onjisemagad vii

fly—forehead
182
FLY HERE: biijibide. biijibidemagad mi;
biijibizo vai; biijise vai; biijise,
biijisemagad vii
FLY IN: biinjibide, biinjibidemagad vii;
biinjibizo vai; biinjise vai; biinjise,
biinjisemagad vii
FLY INSIDE: biindigebide,
biindigebidemagad vii; biindigebizo vai
FLY OPEN: fly open (as something stick- or
wood-like, e.g., a door) baakaakose,
baakaakosemagad vii
FLY TO A CERTAIN PLACE: ipide,
ipidemagad vii; ipizo vai; izhise vai;
izhise, izhisemagad vii
FLY UPWARDS: ombibide,
ombibidemagad vii; ombibizo vai
FLY
FLY: fly (insect) oojii, -g na, also oojiins
FLYING SQUIRREL
FLYING SQUIRREL: zhagashkaandawe, -g
na
FOAM
FOAM: biite ni
FOAMY
FOAMY: be foamy biitewan vii
FOG
FOG: there is a fog awan vii
DENSE FOG: be a dense fog gashkawan vii
FOGGY
FOGGY: be foggy awan vii
FOLD
FOLD: fold s.o. biskin vta; fold s.o. (as some-
thing sheet-like) biskiigin vta; fold s.t.
biskinan vti; fold s.t. (as something sheet-
like) biskiiginan vti
FOLD OVER: fold s.o. over nabon vta; fold
s.t. over nabonan vti
FOLD WITH HANDS: fold s.o. with hands
biskibizh /biskibiN-/ vta; fold s.t. with
hands biskibidoon vti2
FOLDED
FOLDED: be folded biskaa, biskaamagad vii;
biskinigaade, biskinigaademagad vii
FOLLOW
FOLLOW: follow in s.o.'s steps aanikeshkaw
vta; follow s.o. noopinazh /noopinaN-/
vta; follow s.t. noopinadoon vti2
FOLLOW A TRAIL: go off following a trail
maada'adoo vai; go off following s.o.'s
trail maada'azh /maada'aN-/ vta
FOLLOW A TRAIL ALONG: bima'adoo
vai; follow s.o.'s trail along bima'azh
/bima'aN-/ vta; follow s.t. along as a trail
bima'adoon vti2
FOLLOW A TRAIL AWAY: anima'adoo vai;
follow s.o.'s trail away anima'azh
/anima'aN-/ vta; follow s.t. away as a trail
anima'adoon vti2
FOLLOW A TRAIL HERE: biida'adoo vai;
follow s.o.'s trail here biida'azh /biida'aN-/
vta; follow s.t. as a trail here biida'adoon
vti2
FOLLOW A TRAIL TO A CERTAIN
PLACE: follow s.o.'s trail to a certain place
ina'azh /ina'aN-/ vta; follow s.t. as a trail
to a certain place ina'adoon vti2
FOND DU LAC
FOND DU LAC: Fond du Lac Reservation
Nagaajiwanaang place
FOOD
FOOD: miijim, -an ni; wiisiniwin ni
BUY FOOD: miijimadaawe vai
GET FOOD: get food by hunting or fishing
nandawenjige vai
GO GET FOOD: naajimiijime vai
SERVE FOOD: serve food to people ashange
vai
FOOLISH
FOOLISH: be foolish gagiibaadad vii;
gagiibaadizi vai
DO FOOLISH THINGS: gagiibaajiehige vai
FOOT
FOOT: my foot inzid, -an /-zid-/ nid
ACHE IN FOOT: have an ache in one's foot
dewizide vai
BIG FOOT: have a big foot mangizide vai
BLISTER ON FOOT: get a blister on one's
foot abashkwebiigizideshin vai
CERTAIN NUMBER OF FEET: a certain
number of feet dasozid pc
MOVE FOOT A CERTAIN WAY: move
one's foot a certain way izhizideni vai
MUDDY FEET: have muddy feet
azhashkiiwizide vai
NUMB FOOT: have a numb foot
niboowizide vai
SORE FOOT: have a sore foot gaagiijizide vai
SPRAIN FOOT: sprain one's foot
zegizideshin vai
SWEATY FOOT: have a sweaty foot
abwezide vai
SWOLLEN FOOT: have a swollen foot
baagizide vai
TAP FOOT: tap one's foot jiichiibizideni vai
WARM FEET: warm one's feet abizidezo vai
FOOTBRIDGE
FOOTBRIDGE: foot bridge
aazhawaandawaagan, -an ni
FOOTPATH
FOOTPATH: ozide-miikana, -n ni
FOOTPRINT
FOOTPRINT: bimikawaan, -an ni
FOOTREST
CRADLE BOARD FOOTREST:
apizideyaakwa'igan, -an ni
FOOTSTOOL
FOOTSTOOL: apizideshinowin, -an ni
FORBID
FORBID: forbid s.o. to gina'amaw vta
FORBIDDEN
FORBIDDEN: it is forbidden gina'amaadim
vai
FOREHEAD
FOREHEAD: my forehead nikatig, -oon
/-katigw-/ nid
MIDDLE OF THE FOREHEAD: in the
middle of the forehead naawigatig pc

183
foreign—freeze
FOREIGN
FOREIGN: maiyagi- pv4; be foreign mayagizi
vai
LOOK FOREIGN: mayaginaagozi vai;
mayaginaajgwad vii
SOUND FOREIGN: mayagitaagozi vai;
mayagitaagwad vii
FOREIGNER
FOREIGNER: mayagwewinini, -wag na
FORETELL
FORETELL THE FUTURE: onwaaehige vai
FOREVER
FOREVER: gaagige- pv4
FORGET
FORGET: wanendam vai2; forget (s.t.)
waniike vai+o; forget s.o. boonenim vta;
wanenim vta; forget s.t. boonendan vti;
wanendan vti
FORK
FORK: badaka'igan, -an ni
USE A FORK ON: use a fork on s.o. badaka'
/badaka'w-/ vta; use a fork on s.t.
badaka'an vti
FORK
RIVER FORKS: fork (as a river)
niingidawitigweyaa,
niingidawitigweyaamagad vii
ROAD FORKS: fork (as a road or trail)
niingidawadamon /niingidawadamo-/ vii
TRAIL FORKS: fork (as a road or trail)
niingidawadamon /niingidawadamo-/ vii
FORM
FORM: form s.o. ozhi' vta; form s.t. ozhitoon
vti2
FORMERLY
FORMERLY: gayatpc; \ko pc, also ko
FORTUNATE
FORTUNATE: be fortunate zhawendaagozi
vai
FORTY
FORTY: niimidana nm
FOUND
FOUND: be found mikigaade,
mikigaadernagad vii; mikigaazo vai
FOUR
FOUR: niiwin nm; niiwo- pv4, also niiyo-; they
are four niiwinoon /niiwin-/ vii; niiwiwag
/niiwi-/ vai; four (card) niiwoobii'iganj, -ag
na, also niiyoobii'igan
AND FOUR: ashi-niiwin nm; ashi-niiwo- pv4,
also ashi-niiyo-; ashi-niiyo- pv4, also ashi-
niiwo-
FOUR ACRES: niiwo-diba'igaanspc, also
niiyo-diba'igaans
FOUR DAYS: niiwo-giizhik pc, also niiyo-
giizhik; niiwogon pc, also niiyogon; be
four days niiiwogonagad vii, also
niiyogonagad
FOUR DAYS OLD: be four days old
niiwogonagizi vai, also niiyogonagizi
FOUR DOLLARS: niiwaabikpc
FOUR EACH: neniiwin nm
FOUR FEET: niiwozid pc, also niiyozid
FOUR HOURS: niiwo-diba'igan pc, also
niiyo-diba'igan
FOUR HUNDRED: niiwaak nm
FOUR INCHES: niiwoninj pc, also niiyoninj
FOUR MILES: niiwo-diba'igan pc, also niiyo-
diba'igan
FOUR MINUTES: niiwo-diba'igaans pc, also
niiyo-diba'igaans
FOUR MONTHS: niiwo-giizis pc, also niiyo-
giizis
FOUR NIGHTS: niiwo-dibik pc, also niiyo-
dibik
FOUR PAIRS: niiwewaan pc
FOUR SETS: niiwewaan pc
FOUR THOUSAND: niiwosagoons nm, also
niiyosagoons
FOUR TIMES: niiwingpc
FOUR WEEKS: niiwo-anama'e-giizhik pc,
also niiyo-anama'e-giizhik; niiwo-
anama'e-giizhik pc, also niiyo-anama'e-
giizhik; be four weeks niiwo-anama'e-
giizhigad vii, also niiyo-anama'e-giizhigad
FOUR YEARS: niiwo-biboon pc, also niiyo-
biboon; be four years niiwo-biboonagad
vii
FOUR YEARS OLD: be four years old niiwo-
biboonagizi vai, also niiyo-biboonagizi
FOURTEEN
FOURTEEN: ashi-niiwin nm; midaaswi ashi-
niiwin nm
FOURTH
THE FOURTH DAY OF THE MONTH: be
the fourth day of the month niiwogonagizi
vai, also niiyogonagizi
FOURTH OF JULY
FOURTH OF JULY: be the Fourth of July
baapaashkizige-giizhigad vii
FOX
FOX: waagosh, -ag na
FOX HIDE
FOX HIDE: waagoshiwayaan, -ag na
FRAIL
FRAIL: be frail niinamizi vai
FRAME
SAP-BOILING FRAME: frame for holding
sap-boiling kettles iskigamiziganaak, -oon
ni
SET UP AS A FRAME: set s.t. up as a frame
onaakosidoon vnZ
FREE
FREE: free s.o. gidiskin vta; free s.t.
gidiskinan vti
GET FREE: gashki'o vai
PULL FREE: pull s.o. free gidiskibizh
/gidiskibiN-/ vta; pull s.t. free
gidiskibidoon vti2
TRY TO GET FREE: wiikwaji'o vai; try to
get free of s.t. wiikwajitoon vti2
FREEZE
FREEZE: mashkawadin vii; mashkawaji vai
FREEZE OVER: gashkadin vii
FREEZE STIFF: freeze s.o. stiff
mashkawaakwajim vta; freeze s.t. stiff
mashkawaakwajidoon vti2

freeze—from
184
FREEZE TO DEATH: gawaji vai
FREEZER
FREEZER: dakisijigan, -an ni
FRENCH
SPEAK FRENCH: wemitigoozhiimo vai
FRENCHMAN
FRENCHMAN: wemitigoozhi, -wag na
FRIDAY
FRIDAY: be Friday naano-giizhigad vii
FRIED
FRIED: be fried zaasakokwaade,
zaasakokwaademagad vii;
zaasakokwaazo vai
FRIEND
FRIEND: my (female's) female friend
niijikwe, -g /-iijikwew-/ nod; my (female's)
female friend indaangwe, -g /-daangwew-/
nod; my (male's) male friend niijikiwenh,
-yag /-iijikiweny-/ nod; my (male's) male
friend ritual use niikaan, -ag /-iikaan-/ nad;
niikaanis, -ag /-iikaanis-/ nad; my friend
(vocative form, usually male to male) niijii
nad
CLOSE FRIENDS: be close friends with s.o.
beshwaji' vta
FRIENDS: they are friends with each other
nagadenindiwag /nagadenindi-/ vai
FRIGHTEN
FRIGHTEN: frighten s.o. zegi' vta
FRINGE
FRINGE: niisiiwezhigan, -an HI
CUT FRINGE: cut fringe in s.o. niisiiwezh
/niisiiwezhw-/ vta; cut fringe in s.t.
niisiiwezhan vti
FRINGED
FRINGED: be fringed niisiiwezhigaade,
niisiiwezhigaademagad vii;
niisiiwezhigaazo vai
FROG
FROG: omakakii, -g na
FROM
ABSENT FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: be
absent from a certain place ondendi vai
BLOWN FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: be
blown from a certain place ondaashi vai;
be blown from a certain place ondaasin vii
CARRY FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: carry
s.o. from a certain place onjiwizh
/onjiwiN-/ vta; carry s.t. from a certain
place onjiwidoon vti2
CARRY ON BACK FROM A CERTAIN
PLACE: carry s.o. on back from a certain
place ondoom vta; carry s.t. on back from
a certain place ondoondan vti
COME AS WIND FROM A CERTAIN
PLACE: come as wind from a certain
direction ondaanimad vii
COME FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondaadad vii; ondaadizi vai; onjibaa vai;
onjii vai; come from a certain place (as
smoke) ondaabate, ondaabatemagad vii
COME FROM A CERTAIN PLACE
CRYING: ondademo vai
CRAWL FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondoode vai
DRIVE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjibide, onjibidemagad vii; onjibizo vai;
onjidaabii'iwe vai
EARN FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: ondizi
vai
FALL FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjibide, onjibidemagad vii; onjibizo vai
FLOW FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjijiwan vii
FLY FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: onjise vai;
onjise, onjisemagad vii
FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: onji- pv3
GET FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: get (s.t.)
for oneself from a certain place
ondinamaazo vai; get s.o. from a certain
place ondin vta; get s.t. from a certain
place ondinan vti; get (s.t.) for s.o. from a
certain place ondinamaw vta; get things
from a certain place ondinige vai
GET WATER FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onda'ibii vai
GONE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: be gone
from a certain place ondendi vai
INHERIT FROM A CERTAIN SOURCE:
ondizi vai
LOOK OUT FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onzaabi vai
OBTAIN FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: ob-
tain s.o. from a certain place ondin vta; ob-
tain s.t. from a certain place ondinan vti;
obtain (s.t.) for s.o. from a certain place
ondinamaw vta; obtain things from a cer-
tain place ondinige vai
OBTAINED FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
be obtained from a certain place
ondinigaade, ondinigaademagad vii;
ondinigaazo vai
PADDLE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondakwazhiwe vai
RIDE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE ON
HORSEBACK: ondoomigo vai
ROAD LEADS FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
lead from a certain place (as a road or trail)
ondadamon /ondadamo-/ vii
RUN FROM CERTAIN PLACE IN
FLIGHT: run from a certain place in flight
onjinizhimo vai
RUN FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjibatoo vai
SAIL FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: ondaashi
vai; ondaasin vii
SKATE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondaada'e vai
SPEED FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjibide, onjibidemagad vii; onjibizo vai
SWIM FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondaadagaa vai; swim from a certain place
(as a fish) ondakwazhiwe vai
TAKE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: take s.o.
from a certain place onjiwizh /onjiwiN-/
vta; take s.t. from a certain place
onjiwidoon vti2

185
from—game warden
TRAIL LEADS FROM A CERTAIN
PLACE: lead from a certain place (as a
road or trail) ondadamon /ondadamo-/ vii
WADE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondaadagaazii vai
WALK FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: ondose
vai
FRONT
AT THE FRONT: niigaan pc
HANG IN FRONT: niigaanagoode,
niigaanagoodemagad vii; niigaanagoojin
vai; hang s.o. in front niigaanagoozh
/niigaanagc>oN-/ vta; hang s.t. in front
niigaanagoodoon vti2
SIT IN FRONT: niigaanabi vai
STAND IN FRONT: niigaanigaabawi vai
FROST
HEAVY FROST: there is a heavy frost
zasakwaa vii
FROSTBITTEN
FROSTBITTEN: be frostbitten mashkawaji
vai; mashkawaakwaji vai
FROSTED
FROSTED: be frosted ningiigwadin vii;
ningiigwaji vai
FROZEN
FROZEN: be frozen mashkawadin vii;
mashkawaji vai
FROZEN HAND: have a frozen hand
mashkawaakwajininjiiwaji vai
FROZEN OVER: be frozen over gashkadin vii
FROZEN SHUT: be frozen shut gibaakwadin
vii; gibaakwaji vai
FROZEN STIFF: be frozen stiff
mashkawaakwadin vii; mashkawaakwaji
vai
FROZEN THICK: be frozen thick
gipagaakwadin vii; gipagaakwaji vai
FROZEN THIN: be frozen thin
bibagaakwaidin vii; bibagaakwaji vai
FRY
FRY: zaasakokwe vai; fry s.o.
zaasakokwaazh /zaasakokwaaN-/ vta; fry
s.t. zaasakokwaadan ni
FRY BREAD
FRY BREAD: zaasakokwaan, -ag na
FRYING PAN
FRYING PAN: abwewin, -an ni
FUEL
RUN OUT OF FUEL: iskaakizige vai
FULL
FULL: be full (after eating) debisinii vai; be
full (of a liquid) mooshkinebii,
mooshkinebiimagad vii; be full (of solids)
mooshkine vai; mooshkine,
mooshkinemagad vii
FULL MOON: be full (as something mineral,
e.g., the moon) miziweyaabikizi vai
FULL OF SMOKE: be full of smoke
gibwanaamode, gibwanaamodemagad
vii
FULLY
FULLY RIPE: be fully ripe giizhaande,
giizhaandemagad vii; giizhaanzo vai
FUN
FUN: be fun minwendaagozi vai;
minwendaagwad vii
JUST FOR FUN: anishaapt
FUNERAL
HOLD A FUNERAL: bagidenjige vai;
maajaa'iwe vai; hold a funeral for s.o.
maajaa* vta
SPEAK AT A FUNERAL: maajaa'iwe vai
FUNGUS
FUNGUS: wazhashkwedo, -wag na
FUNNY
FUNNY: wawiyazh pc
CONSIDERED FUNNY: be considered
funny (comical) wawiyadendaagozi vai
FUNNY MOVIE: be a funny movie
gagiibaadaatese, gagiibaadaatesemagad
vii
LOOK FUNNY: look funny (comical)
wawiyazhinaagozi vai;
wawiyazhinaagwad vii
SOUND FUNNY: sound funny (comical)
wawiyazhitaagozi vai;
wawiyazhitaagwad vii
FUR
FUR FOR TRADE: adaawaagan, -an ni
THICK FUR: have thick fur gipagawe vai
FUTURE
FORETELL THE FUTURE: onwaachige vai
FUTURE TENSE
FUTURE TENSE: future tense prefix after a
personal prefix ga- pvl; future tense prefix
optional form after a personal prefix and before
a vowel gad-; future tense prefix in indepen-
dent order with no personal prefix da- pvl;
future tense prefix in unchanged conjunct order
\\-pvl
FUTURE/DESIDERATIVE TENSE: want to
wii- pvl
G
GALLBLADDER
GALLBLADDER: my gall bladder niinzob,
-iin /-iinzoby-/ nid
GALLSTONE
HAVE GALLSTONES: odasiniinsimi vai
GAMBLE
GAMBLE: ataage vai; they gamble with each
other ataadiwag /ataadi-/ vai
GAME WARDEN
GAME WARDEN: gizhaadigewinini, -wag
na; wiiyaasi-dakoniwewinini, -wag na

gap—give 
186
GAP
PULL APART TO FORM A GAP: pull s.o.
apart to form a gap dawibizh /dawibiN-/
vta; pull s.t. apart to form a gap
dawibidoon vti2; pull things apart to form
a gap dawibijige vai
GARDEN
GARDEN: gitigaan, -an ni; gitige vai
GARTER
ARM GARTER: jiiskinikebizon, -an ni
LEG GARTER: gashkidaasebizon, -an ni
GAS CAN
GAS CAN: waazakonenjiganaaboowakik,
-oog na
GAS STATION
GAS STATION:
waazakonenjiganaaboowadaawewigamig,
-oon ni, also waazakonenjiganaaboo-
adaawewigamig
GAS TANK
GAS TANK: waazakonenjiganaaboowakik,
-oog na
GASOLINE
GASOLINE: waasamoo-bimide ni;
waazakonenjiganaaboo ni
GATHER
GATHER: gather s.o. maamigin vta; gather
s.t. maamiginan vti
GATHER SAP: naadoobii vai
GATHER UP: gather s.o. up asigin vta; gather
s.t. up asiginan vti
GATHERED
GATHERED UP: be gathered up
asiginigaade, asiginigaademagad vii;
asiginigaazo vai
GEAR
GEARSHIFT: aandaabikinigan, -an ni
SHIFT GEARS: aandaabikinige vai;
biindaabikibijige vai
GEARSHIFT
GEARSHIFT: biindaabikibijigan, -an ni
GENEROUS
GENEROUS: be generous gizhewaadizi vai
GERMAN SHEPHERD
GERMAN SHEPHERD: ma'iinganasim,
-oog na
GET
GET EASILY: get s.o. easily wenipazhi' vta;
get s.t. easily wenipazhitoon vti2
GET FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: get s.o.
from a certain place ondin vta; get s.t.
from a certain place ondinan vti; get (s.t.)
for s.o. from a certain place ondinamaw
vta; get things from a certain place
ondinige vai; get (s.t.) for oneself from a
certain place ondinamaazo vai
GET WATER: nibinaadi vai; get water for s.o.
gwaaba'amaw vta
GO GET: go get s.o. naazh /naaN-/ vta; go get
s.t. naadin vti3; go get (s.t.) for s.o.
naadaw via
GO GET A NET: naadasabii vai
GO GET BY BOAT: go get s.o. by boat
naada' /naada'w-/ vta; go get s.t. by boat
naada'an vti
GO GET FIREWOOD: naadinise vai, also
naajinise
GO GET FOOD: naajimiijime vai
GO GET MAIL: naadazina'igane vai
GO GET TRAPS: go get one's traps
naadasoonaagane vai
GO GET WATER: go get water or other
liquid naadoobii vai
GO TO GET: go to get s.o. by boat
naada'oozh /naada'ooN-/ vta; go to get
s.t. by boat naada'oodoon vti2
RUN TO GET: run to get s.o. naajibatwaazh
/naajibatwaaN-/ vta; run to get s.t.
naajibatwaadan vti
GET AWAY
GET AWAY: get away from s.o. gii* vta
GET IN
GET IN: get in a vehicle or boat boozi vai
TELL TO GET IN: tell s.o. to get in (a vehicle
or boat) boozinaazha' /boozinaazha'w-/
vta
GET OFF
GET OFF: get off a vehicle or boat gabaa vai;
get s.o. off a vehicle or boat gabaa' vta
TELL TO GET OFF: tell s.o. to get off
gabaanaazha' /gabaanaazha'w-/ vta
GET UP
GET UP: get up (from a prone position)
onishkaa vai
GHOST
GHOST: jiibay, -ag na
GIANT
GIANT: misaabe, -g na
GIGGLE
GIGGLE: ginagaapi vai
GIRAFFE
GIRAFFE: genwaabiigigwed na~pt
GIRL
GIRL: ikwezens, -ag na; be a girl ikwezensiwi
vai
ADOLESCENT GIRL: oshkiniigikwe, -g na;
be an adolescent girl oshkiniigikwewi vai
GPVE
GIVE: give (s.t.) to s.o. miizh /miiN-/ vta; they
give (s.t.) to each other miinidiwag
/miinidi-/ vai
GP/E AWAY: give away (s.t.) miigiwe vai+o
GIVE PRESENTS: give presents to relatives of
someone deceased in completion of
mourning on anniversary of the death
giiwenige vai
GIVE PRESENTS IN EXCHANGE: give
presents to s.o. in exchange giiwenamaw
vta
GIVE SOMETHING APPROPRIATE: give
s.o. something appropriate debi* vta
HAVE ENOUGH TO GIVE: have enough to
give away deba'ookii vai; have enough to
give to or feed s.o. deba'oozh /deba'ooN-/
vta

187 
give up—go
GIVE UP
GIVE UP: aanizhiitam vai2; boonendam
vai2
GIVEAWAY
GIVEAWAY: they have a giveaway
miinidiwag /miinidi-/ vai
GLAD
GLAD: be glad minwendam vai2
GLAND
GLAND: my gland (lymph node) niniishk,
-wag /-niishkw-/ nod
SWOLLEN GILAND: have a swollen gland
(lymph node) baaginiishkwe vai
GLASS
GLASS: (piece of) glass omoodayaabik, -oon
ni
BROKEN GLASS: (piece of) glass
omoodayaabik, -oon ni
DRINKING GLASS: mikwamiiwinaagaans,
-an ni
WINDOW GLASS: waasechiganaabik, -oon
ni
GLASSES
EYEGLASSES: eyeglasses plural
oshkiinzhigokaajiganan ni, also
oshkiinzhikokaanan
GLOVE
GLOVE: niisiiwe-minjikaawan, -ag na
GLOW
GLOW: waaza.kone, waazakonemagad vii
GLUE
GLUE: agokiwasigan, -an ni; glue s.o.
agokiwas /agokiwasw-/ vta; bazagokazh
/bazagokaN-/ vta; glue s.t. agokiwasan
vti; bazagokadoon vti2
GLUE SHUT: glue s.o. shut gibokiwas vta;
glue s.t. shut gibokiwasan vti
GLUED
GLUED: be glued agokiwaso vai; agokiwate,
agokiwatemagad vii
GLUED SHUT: be glued shut
gibokiwasigaade, gibokiwasigaademagad
vii; gibokiwasigaazo vai
GNAT
GNAT: bingoshens, -ag na
GNAW
GNAW: gnaw s.o. zhishigwam ma; gnaw s.t.
zhishigwandan vti
GO
GO: go to a certain place izhaa vai;
izhaamagad vii
GO A CERTAIN DIRECTION: go a certain
direction (as smoke) inaabate,
inaabatemagad vii
GO A CERTAIN SPEED: apiizikaa vai
GO ACROSS: aazhooshkaa vai
GO ACROSS BY BOAT: aazhawa'am vai2,
also aazhawa'o
GO ACROSS WATER: aazhoge vai
GO AFTER: go after s.o. naajinizha'
/naajinizha'w-/ vta; naazh /naaN-/ vta;
noojif vta; rioopinazh /noopinaN-/ vta; go
after s.t. naadin vti3; naajinizha'an vti;
noojitoon vti2; noopinadoon vti2
GO AFTER HAY: naadashkosiwe vai
GO AFTER TRAPS: naajiwanii'ige vai
GO AGAINST THE WIND:
onjishkawishkaa vai
GO AHEAD: niigaanii vai
GO ALONG: bimi-ayaa vai
GO ALONG THE EDGE: jiigewe vai
GO ALONG THE SHORE: bimaazhagaame
vai; jiigewe vai
GO AND ASK: go and ask for s.o.
nandwewem vta; go and ask for s.t.
nandwewendan vti; go and ask s.o. (for
s.t.) nandwewendamaw vta
GO AND NOT RETURN: aapidendi vai
GO AROUND: ditibise, ditibisemagad vii;
giiwitaashkaa vai; go around (e.g., a
wheel) ditibise vai
GO AS FAST AS POSSIBLE: apiizikaa vai
GO ASHORE: agwaataa vai
GO AWAY: go away! awas pc
GO AWAY FROM THE WATER: gopii vai
GO AWAY IN A CANOE: animishkaa vai
GO BACK: azhe- pv4; azhegiiwe vai
GO BACKWARDS: azheshkaa vai; azhetaa
vai
GO BY CANOE: jiime vai
GO DOWN: go down (of a body of water)
iskate, iskatemagad vii
GO DOWN INTO THE WATER: bakobii
vai
GO DOWNHILL: niisaakiiwe vai
GO DOWNSTAIRS: niisaandawe vai
GO EASY: go easy on s.o. manaaji' vta; go
easy on s.t. manaajitoon va2
GO EVERYWHERE: miziweshkaa,
miziweshkaamagad vii
GO FAST: gizhiikaa vai
GO GET: go get s.o. naazh /naaN-/ vta; go get
s.t. naadin vti3; go get (s.t.) for s.o.
naadaw vta
GO GET A NET: naadasabii vai
GO GET BY BOAT: go get s.o. by boat
naada' /naada'w-/ vta; go get s.t. by boat
naada'an vti
GO GET FIREWOOD: naadinise vai, also
naajinise
GO GET FOOD: naajimiijime vai
GO GET MAIL: naadazina'igane vai
GO GET TRAPS: go get one's traps
naadasoonaagane vai
GO GET WATER: go get water or other
liquid naadoobii vai
GO HOME: giiwe vai
GO HOME BY BOAT: giiwe'o vai
GO HOME MAD: giiwegidaazo vai
GO INLAND: gopii vai
GO INSIDE: biindige vai
GO INTO THE WOODS: jekaakwa'am vai2
GO OFF MAD: maajiigidaazo vai
GO OFF TO THE SIDE: bake vai
GO ON FOOT: mitose vai
GO OUT: zaaga'am vai2

go—good 
188
GO OUT OF PLACE: gotigobide,
gotigobidemagad vii; gotigobizo vai
GO OUT OF SIGHT: ani-naagozi vai; ani-
naagwad vii; go out of sight (as around a
corner) aagawe vai
GO OVER A POINT: gakiiwe vai
GO OVER TO: go over to; after a personal
prefix: a'o- awi- pv2, also *o-
GO STRAIGHT: gwayakoshkaa vai
GO THE RIGHT WAY: gwayakoshkaa vai
GO THROUGH: zhaabose, zhaabosemagad
vii; zhaabwii vai
GO TO: go to s.o. naazikaw vta; go to s.t.
naazikan mi; go to people naazikaage vai
GO TO A CERTAIN PLACE: izhaa vai;
izhaamagad vii
GO TO BED: gawishimo vai
GO TO GET: go to get s.o. by boat
naada'oozh /naada'ooN-/ vta; go to get
s.t. by boat naada'oodoon vti2
GO TO SCHOOL: gikinoo'amaagozi vai
GO TO THE END: gabeshkaa vai; go to the
end of s.t. gabeshkan vti
GO TO THE SHORE: madaabii vai
GO TO THE TOILET: zaaga'am vai2
GO TO WAR: go to war archaic nandobani
vai
GO UPHILL: agidaakiiwe vai
GO UPSTAIRS: akwaandawe vai
GO UPWARDS: ombishkaa vai; ombishkaa,
ombishkaamagad vii
GO UPWARDS AS SMOKE: ombaabate vii
GO WELL: minose, minosemagad vii; have
things go well for one minose vai
GO WITH: go with s.o. wiijiiw vta; go with
people wiijii'iwe vai; they go with each
other wiijiindiwag /wiijiindi-/ vai
GO WITH IN A BOAT: go with s.o. in a boat
aadawa'am vta
GO WRONG: have things go wrong maazhise
vai
GOAT
GOAT: maanadikoshens, -ag na
GOD
GOD: gichi-manidoo, -g na; manidoo, -g na;
God (especially in Christian usage) gizhe-
manidoo na
GOLD
GOLD: ozaawaa-zhooniyaa ni, also
ozhaawaa-zhooniyaa
COLORED GOLD: be colored gold
ozaawaa-zhooniyaawaande, ozaawaa-
zhooniyaawaandemagad vii, also
ozhaawaa-zhooniyaawaande; ozaawaa-
zhooniyaawaanzo vai, also ozhaawaa-
zhooniyaanzo
GOLDEN EAGLE
GOLDEN EAGLE: giniw, -ag na
GONE
GONE: gone! weniban pc
GONE A CERTAIN LENGTH OF TIME:
be gone a certain length of time apiitendi
vai; inendi vai
GONE A CERTAIN NUMBER OF DAYS:
be gone a certain number of days
dasogonendi vai
GONE FOREVER: be gone forever aapidendi
vai
GONE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: be gone
from a certain place ondendi vai
GONE OVERNIGHT: be gone overnight
nikanendi vai
GOOD
GOOD: mino- pv4; be good mino-ayaa vai;
be good (as something mineral)
minwaabikad vii; minwaabikizi vai; be
good (as something sheet-like) minwegad
vii; minwegizi vai; be good (as something
stick- or wood-like) minwaakozi vai;
minwaakwad vii
DO GOOD: do good things minochige vai
FEEL GOOD: minwamanji'o vai
FIND A GOOD TASTE: End a good taste in
s.o. minopozh /minopw-/ vta; find a good
taste in s.t. minopidan vti
GET GOOD USE: get good use of s.o.
minwaabaji' vta; get good use of s.t.
minwaabajitoon vti2
GOOD AT: being good at nitaa- pv4
GOOD BODY: have a good body
minwaabewizi vai
GOOD BREEZE: there is a good breeze
minwaanimad vii
GOOD COLOR: be a good color minwaande,
minwaandemagad vii; minwaanzo vai
GOOD EYESIGHT: have good eyesight
minwaabi vai
GOOD HEALTH: have good health mino-
bimaadizi vai
GOOD LUCK: have good luck minose vai
GOOD MOVIE: be a good movie
minwaatese, minwaatesemagad vii
GOOD PROVIDER: be a good provider
gotaamigozi vai
GOOD SMELL: have a good smell
minomaagozi vai; minomaagwad vii
GOOD USE: be of good use minwaabadad
vii; minwaabadizi vai
GOOD VOICE: have a good voice
minogondaagan vai; minowe vai
GOOD WEATHER: be good weather
mizhakwad vii
GOOD WORKER: be a good worker
gotaamigozi vai
HAVE A GOOD TIME: minawaanigozi vai
IN GOOD HEALTH: be in good health
minwamanji*o vai
LEAD A GOOD LIFE: mino-izhiwebizi vai;
minwaadizi vai
LIE IN A GOOD POSITION: minosin vii
LOOK GOOD: minwaabaminaagozi vai;
minwaabaminaagwad vii
SMELL GOOD: have a good smell
minomaagozi vai; minomaagwad vii
SMELL GOOD BURNING OR COOKING:
minomaaso vai; minomaate,
minomaatemagad vii

189 
good—green tea
SOUND GOOD: minotaagozi vat;
minotaagwad vii
SOUNDING GOOD: hear s.o. sounding good
minotaw vta; hear s.t. sounding good
minotan vti
TASTE GOOD: minopogozi vai;
minopogwad vii; taste good (as a liquid)
minwaagamin /minwaagami-/ vii
TELL A GOOD STORY: minwaajimo vai
TELL GOOD NEWS: minwaajimo vai; tell
good news of s.o. minwaajim ma; tell good
news of s.t. minwaadodan vti
GOOSE
CANADA GOOSE: nika, -g na
GOOSEBERRY
GOOSEBERRY: zhaaboomin, -ag na
GOOSEBERRY BUSH
GOOSEBERRY BUSH:
zhaaboominagaawanzh, -iig na
GOPHER
POCKET GOPHER: memookiwidoo, -g na
GOSSIP
GOSSIP: dazhinge vai; gossip about s.o.
dazhim vta; gossip about s.t. dazhindan
vti
GOVERN
GOVERN: govern s.o. ogimaakandaw vta;
govern s.t. ogimaakandan vti
GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT: ogimaawiwin, -an ni
GOVERNOR
GOVERNOR: odaakewigimaa, -g na, also
odaake-ogimaa
GRAB
GRAB: grab s.o. debibizh /debibiN-/ vta;
nawadin via; grab s.t. debibidoon vti2;
nawadinan vti; grab (s.t.) for s.o.
debibidaw vta; grab (s.t.) of s.o.'s
nawadinannaw vta; grab people
nawadiniwe vai
GRADUALLY
GRADUALLY: eshkam pc
GRAND MEDICINE SOCIETY
GRAND MEDICINE SOCIETY: midewiwin
ni
GRAND PORTAGE
GRAND PORTAGE: Grand Portage Reserva-
tion gichi-onigamiing place
GRANDCHILD
GRANDCHILD: grandchild vocative form of
noozhishenh my grandchild noozis nod;
my grandchild noozhishenh, -yag
/-oozhisheiny-/ nod
GRANDFATHER
GRANDFATHER: my grandfather
nimishoomis, -ag /-mishoomis-/ nod
GRANDMA
GRANDMA: grandma! naan nod (vocative);
nookoo nod (vocative)
GRANDMOTHER
GRANDMOTHER: my grandmother
nookomis, -ag /-ookomis-/ nad
GRANDPA
GRANDPA: grandpa! nimishoo nad (vocative)
GRANULATE
GRANULATE SUGAR: naseyaawangwe vai
GRANULATED SUGAR
GRANULATED SUGAR: bibine-
ziinzibaakwad ni
GRAPE
GRAPE: zhawimin, -an ni, also zhoomin
GRASS
GRASS: mashkosiw, -an ni
GRASSHOPPER
GRASSHOPPER: bapakine, -g na
GRAVE HOUSE
GRAVE HOUSE: jlibegamig, -oon ni
GRAVE MARKER
GRAVE MARKER: jiibayaatig, -oog na
GRAVEL ROAD
GRAVEL ROAD: bingwii-miikana, -n ni
GRAVEYARD
GRAVEYARD: jiibayaki, -in ni
GRAVY
GRAVY: bakwezhiganaaboo ni
GREASE
GREASE: bimide ni
BURP GREASE: biinzibii vai
GREAT
GREAT: gichi- pv4, also chi-
GREAT SPIRIT
GREAT SPIRIT: gichi-manidoo, -g na
GREAT-GRANDCHILD
GREAT-GRANDCHILD: aanikoobijigan,
-agna
GREAT-GRANDPARENT
GREAT-GRANDPARENT: aanikoobijigan,
-agrea
GREBE
GREBE: zhingibis, -ag na
GREEN
GREEN: ozhaawashko- pv4; be green
ozhaawashkozi vai; ozhaawashkwaa,
ozhaawashkwaamagad vii; be green (as
something mineral) ozhaawashkwaabikad
vii; ozhaawashkwaabikizi vai; be green
(as something sheet-like)
ozhaawashkwegad vii;
ozhaawashkwegizi vai; be green (as some-
thing stick- or wood-like)
ozhaawashkwaakozi vai;
ozhaawashkwaakwad vii; be green (as
something string-like)
ozhaawashkwaabiigad vii;
ozhaawashkwaabiigizi vai; be leaf-green
ashkibagong inaande, ashkibagong
inaandemagad vii; ashkibagong inaanzo
vai
GREEN LEAVES: there are green leaves
ashkibagaa, ashkibagaamagad vii
WEAR GREEN: ozhaawashko'o vai
GREEN TEA
GREEN TEA: ozhaawashko-aniibiish ni

greet—hair
190
GREET
GREET: greet s.o. anamikaw via; greet
people anamikaage vai; they greet each
other anamikaadiwag /anamikaadi-/ vai
GREETINGS
GREETINGS: greetings! aaniin^c; boozhoo
pc
GREY
GREY: be grey waabijiiyaa,
waabijiiyaamagad vii; waabijiizi vai
GREY HAIR: have grey hair waabikwe vai
GREY SQUIRREL
GREY SQUIRREL: misajidamoo, -g na
GRILL
GRILL: grill (s.t.) akakanzhebwe vai+o
GRIND
GRIND DOWN: grind s.o. down zisiboozh
/zisibooN-/ vta; grind s.t. down
zisiboodoon vti2
GRIND UP: grind s.o. up biisiboozh
/biisibooN-/ vta; grind s.t. up
biisiboodoon vti2
GRINDER
GRINDER: biisiboojigan, -an m
GRINDSTONE
GRINDSTONE: zhiigwanaabik, -oog na
GROAN
GROAN: mamaadwe vai
GROCERY STORE
GROCERY STORE: grocery store wiisinii-
adaawewigarnig, -oon ni
GROPE
GROPE: grope for s.o. nandoojiin vta; grope
for s.t. nandoojiinan vti; grope for things
nandoojiinige vai
GROUND
GROUND: aki, -in ni
LEVEL GROUND: be level ground
gwayakwakamigaa,
gwayakwakamigaamagad vii
LOW GROUND: be low ground
dabasakamigaa, dabasakamigaamagad
vii
ON TOP OF THE GROUND: agidakamig
pc, also ogidakamig*, wagidakamig
PUT UNDER THE GROUND: put s.o.
under the ground ningwakamigin vta
SPRINGY GROUND: be springy ground
dootooban vii
UNDER THE GROUND: anaamakamig pc
WET GROUND: be wet ground
nibiiwakamigaa, nibiiwakamigaamagad
vii
GROW
GROW: grow s.o. nitaawigi' vta; grow s.t.
nitaawigitoon vti2; make s.o. grow niigi'
vta; make s.t. grow niigitoon vti2
GROW AT A CERTAIN SPEED: apiichigi
vai; apiichigin vii
GROW FAST: gizhiigi vai; gizhiigin vii
GROW OUT: zaagigi vai; zaagigin vii
GROW STRAIGHT: gwayakogi vai;
gwayakogin vii
GROW UP: maajiigi vai; maajiigin vii;
nitaawigi vai; nitaawigin vii
GROW UP A CERTAIN EXTENT: apiichigi
vai; apiichigin vii
GROW WELL: minogi vai; minogin vii
START TO GROW: maajiigi vai; maajiigin
vii
GROWL
GROWL: growl (of a dog) niikimo vai
STOMACH GROWLS: one's stomach growls
madwegamijii vai
GUARD
GUARD: guard s.o. gizhaazh /gizhaaN-/ vta;
guard s.t. gizhaadan vti; guard things
gizhaadige vai
GUIDE
GUIDE ABOUT: guide s.o. about
babaamiwizh /babaamiwiN-/ vta
GUITAR
GUITAR: madweyaabiigibijigan, -an ni
PLAY A GUITAR: madweyaabiigibijige vai
GUM
CHEW GUM: zhaashaagwamikiwe vai
CHEWING GUM: bigiins, -ag na
GUN
GUN: baashkizigan, -an ni
HANDGUN: oninjii-baashkizigan, -an ni
TAKE ALONG A GUN: niimibaashkizigane
vai
GUNNYSACK
GUNNYSACK: mandaaminiwazh, -an m
GUNPOWDER
BLACK GUNPOWDER: makade ni
SMOKELESS GUNPOWDER: waabi-
makade ni
GUT
GUT: gut s.o. bagojiin vta; gijinagizhiin vta
H
HAIR
HAIR: my (strand of) hair niinizis, -an
/-iinisiz-/ rod
BLACK HAIR: have black hair
makadewindibe vai
CURL HAIR BY HEAT: curl s.o.'s hair by
heat babiizigaakiz /babiizigaakizw-/ vta
CURLY HAIR: have curly hair babiizigindibe
vai
CUT HAIR: giishkikozhiwe vai
GREY HAIR: have grey hair waabikwe vai
HAVE BROWN HAIR: ozaawindibe vai
LONG HAIR: have long hair
gagaanwaanikwe vai
MESSY HAIR: have messy hair niiskindibe
vai

191
hair—handgun
PUBIC HAIR: my pubic hair nimiishigwaan, -
an /-miishigwaan-/ nid
SHORT HAIR: have short hair
dadaakwaanikwe vai
WASH HAIR: wash one's hair giziibiigindibe
vai
WHITE HAIR: have white hair
waabishkindibe vai
HAIRPIN
HAIRPIN: wiinizisitnaani-zagaakwa'igan,
-an ni
HAIRCUT
GET A HAIRCUT: baapaagokozo vai
GIVE A HAIRCUT: give s.o. a haircut
baapaagokozh /baapaagokoN-/ vta
HAIRDRESSER
HAIRDRESSER: hairdresser (female)
baapaagokozhiwewikwe, -g na;
hairdresser (male)
baapaagokozhiwewinini, -wag na
HAIRDRESSING SALON
HAIRDRESS1NG SALON:
baapaagokozhiwewigamig, -oon ni
HALF
HALF: aabita />c, aabita- pv4
AND A HALF: ashi-aabita nm
HALF A BAG: aabitooshkin pc
HALF MOON: be half (as something mineralj
e.g., the moon) aabitawaabikizi vai
HALF FULL
HALF FULL: be half full (of liquid)
aabitoobii vai; aabitoobii,
aabitoobii magad vii; be half full (of
solids) aabitooshkine vai; aabitooshkine,
aabitooshkinemagad vii
FILL HALF FULL: fill s.o. half full (of liquid)
aabitoobarh /aabitoobaN-/ vta; fill s.o.
half full (of solids) aabitooshkina' vta; fill
s.t. half full aabitooshkinadoon vti2; fill
s.t. half full (of liquid) aabitoobadoon rti'2
HALF-DOLLAR
HALF-DOLLAR: aabitawaabik na
HALFWAY
HALFWAY: halfway along it aabitawayi'ii pc
HALT
HALT: nagaashkaa vai; nagaashkaa,
nagaashkitamagad vii
HAMMER
HAMMER: bakite'igan, -an ni, also
bakite'igaans
HAND HAMMER: bakite'igaans, -an ni
HAMMER HANDLE
HAMMER HANDLE: bakite'iganaak, -oon
ni
HAND
HAND A CERTAIN WAY: hand (s.t.) to s.o.
a certain way ininamaw vta
HAND BACK: hand s.o. back azhen vta;
hand s.t. back azhenan vti
HAND OVER: hand s.o. over (here) biidin
vta; hand s.t. over (here) biidinan vti; hand
(s.t.) over (here) to s.o. biidinamaw vta
HAND
HAND: my hand nininj, -iin /-ninjy-/ nid
ACHE IN HAND: have an ache in one's hand
dewininjii vai
AT BOTH HANDS: eyiidawininj pc
BIG HAND: have a big hand mangininjii vai
BLISTER ON HAND: get a blister on one's
hand abashkwebiigininjiishin vai
BYHAND:michi-p»4
CLAP HANDS: clap one's hands
bapasininjii'odizo vai
CLEAN HAND: have a clean hand biinininjii
vai
COLD HAND: have a cold hand dakininjii vai
DIRTY HAND: have a dirty hand wiinininjii
vai
FROZEN HAND: have a frozen hand
mashkawaakwajininjiiwaji vai
HAVE SCAR ON HAND: have scar on one's
hand ojiishininjii vai
LEFT HAND: left hand usually possessed
namanjinik, -an ni
MOVE HAND A CERTAIN WAY: move
one's hand a certain way izhininjiini vai
NUMB HAND: have a numb hand
niboowininjii vai
PUT LOTION ON HAND: put lotion one's
hand noomininjii vai
RIGHT HAND: right hand usually possessed
gichinik ni
SHAKE HANDS: shake hands with s.o.
zagininjiin vta; they shake hands with each
other zagininjiinidiwag /zagininjiinidi-/
vai
SORE HAND: have a sore hand gaagiijininjii
vai
STIFF HAND: have a hand stiff from cold
mashkawajininjiiwaji vai
STRONG HAND: have a strong hand
zoongininjii vai
SWEATY HAND: have a sweaty hand
abweninjii vai
SWOLLEN HAND: have a swollen hand
baagininjii vai
WARM HANDS: warm one's hands
abininjiizo vai
WASH HANDS: wash one's hands
giziibiigininjii vai
WIPE HANDS: wipe one's hands gaasiininjii
vai
HAND LOTION
HAND LOTION: noomininjiiwin, -an ni
HANDBAG
HANDBAG: zhooniyaa-mashkimod, -an ni,
also zhooniyaa-mashkimodens
HANDFUL
ONE HANDFUL: ingodobaneninj pc, also
ningodobaneninj*
TAKE A HANDFUL: take a handful of s.o.
ganakin vta; take a handful of s.t.
ganakinan vti
HANDGUN
HANDGUN: oninjii-baashkizigan, -an ni

handkerchief—hate 
192
HANDKERCHIEF
HANDKERCHIEF: moshwens, -an ni
HANDLE
HANDLE: minjiminigan, -an ni
HANDLE A CERTAIN WAY: handle s.o. a
certain way inin vta; handle s.t. a certain
way ininan vti
HANDLED
HANDLED A CERTAIN WAY: be handled a
certain way ininigaade, ininigaademagad
vii; ininigaazo vai
HANDPRINT
LEAVE HANDPRINT: leave a handprint
ezhininjiishin vai
HANDSOME
HANDSOME: be handsome miikawaadad
vii; miikawaadizi vai
HANG
HANG: agoode, agoodemagad vii; agoojin
vai; hang s.o. agoozh /agooN-/ vta; hang
s.t. agoodoon vti2; hang (s.t.) for s.o.
agoodaw vta; hang things agoojige vai
HANG A CERTAIN WAY: inagoode,
inagoodemagad vii; inagoojin vai; hang
s.o. a certain way inagoozh /inagooN-/
vta; hang s.t. a certain way inagoodoon
vti2
HANG AT THE END: ishkwegoode,
ishkwegoodemagad vii; ishkwegoojin
vai; hang s.o. at the end ishkwegoozh
/ishkwegooN-/ vta; hang s.t. at the end
ishkwegoodoon vti2
HANG IN FRONT: niigaanagoode,
niigaanagoodemagad vii; niigaanagoojin
vai; hang s.o. in front niigaanagoozh
/niigaanagooN-/ vta; hang s.t. in front
niigaanagoodoon vti2
HANG IN PLACE: onagoode,
onagoodemagad vii; onagoojin vai; hang
s.o. in place onagoozh /onagooN-/ vta;
hang s.t. in place onagoodoon vti2
HANG LOW: dabasagoode,
dabasagoodemagad vii; dabasagoojin
vai; hang s.o. low dabasagoozh
/dabasagooN-/ vta; hang s.t. low
dabasagoodoon vti2
HANG UP A NET: agoodasabii vai
HANG UP HIGH: ishpagoode,
ishpagoodemagad vii; ishpagoojin vai;
hang s.o. up high ishpagoozh
/ishpagooN-/ vta; hang s.t. up high
ishpagoodoon vti2
HANG UP LAUNDRY: agoojige vai
HANG UPSIDE DOWN: ajidagoode,
ajidagoodemagad vii; ajidagoojin vai;
hang s.o. upside down ajidagoozh
/ajidagooN-/ vta; hang s.t. upside down
ajidagoodoon vti2
HANGER
KETTLE HANGER: agoodakikwaan, -an m
HAPPEN
HAPPEN A CERTAIN WAY: inakamigad
vii; izhiwebad vii
HAPPEN IN A CERTAIN PLACE:
danakamigad vii
HAPPENS TO BE: it happens to be
nangwana pc, also ngwana, ingwana
HAVE CERTAIN THINGS HAPPEN: have
certain things happen to one inakamigizi
vai; izhiwebizi vai
HAPPY
HAPPY: be happy minawaanigozi vai;
minawaanigwad vii; minwendam vai2
HARASS
HARASS: harass s.o. miikinji' vta
HARD
CONSIDER HARD: consider s.o. hard
zanagenim vta; consider s.t. hard
zanagendan vti; consider things hard
zanagendam vai2
HARD TO MANAGE: be hard (to manage)
zanagad vii
HARD WORKER
HARD WORKER: be a hard worker
ginzhizhawizi vai
HARD
HARD: be hard mashkawaa,
mashkawaamagad vii; mashkawizi vai
HARDER
HARDER: enigokpc
HARDLY
HARDLY: agaawaapc
HARDWARE STORE
HARDWARE STORE: biiwaabiko-
adaawewigamig, -oon ni, also
biiwaabikwadaawewigamig
HARE
SNOWSHOE HARE: snowshoe hare
waabooz, -oog na
HARMONICA
HARMONICA: noondaagochigan, -an ni
HARNESS
HARNESS: apikan, -an ni; harness s.o.
onapizh /onapiN-/ vta; harness up
onapijige vai
HARNESSED
HARNESSED: be harnessed onapizo vai
HARVEST
HARVEST WILD RICE: bawa'am vai2;
manoominike vai
HAT
HAT: wiiwakwaan, -an ni
PUT ON HAT: put on one's hat
biichiwakwaane vai
TAKE OFF HAT: take off one's hat
giichiwakwaane vai
HATCH
HATCH: baashkaawe'am vai2, also
baashkaawe'o
HATCHET
HATCHET: waagaakwadoons, -an ni
HATE
HATE: hate s.o. zhiingenim vta; hate s.t.
zhiingendan vti; they hate each other
zhiingenindiwag /zhiingenindi-/ vai

193
hated—heard
HATED
HATED: be hated zhiingendaagozi vai;
zhiingendaagwad vii
HAUL
HAUL: haul s.o. aawazh /aawaN-/ vta; haul
s.t. aawadoon vti2; haul something
aawadaaso vai; haul (s.t.) for s.o.
aawadaw vta; haul people aawazhiwe vai
HAUL ON SHOULDER: haul s.o. on one's
shoulder aawajinigaazh /aawajinigaaN-/
vta; haul s.t. on one's shoulder
aawajinigaadan vti; haul things on one's
shoulder aawajinige vai
HAUL TO A CERTAIN PLACE: haul s.o. to
a certain place inaawazh /inaawaN-/ vta;
haul s.t. to a certain place inaawadoon
vti2; haul something to a certain place
inaawadaaso vai
HAUL WILD RICE: aawajimine vai
HAVE
HAVE: have s.o. ayaaw vta; have s.t. ayaan
/ayaam-/ vti3
HAVE ON
HAVE ON: have s.o. on (e.g., clothes)
biizikaw via; have s.t. on (e.g., clothes)
biizikan vti
HAWK
HAWK: gekek, -wag na
HAWTHORN
HAWTHORN: hawthorn tree
miinensagaawanzh, -iig na
HAWTHORN FRUIT
HAWTHORN FRUIT: miinens, -ag na
HAY
HAY: mashkosiw, -an ni
GO AFTER HAY: naadashkosiwe vai
HAZELNUT
HAZELNUT: bagaan, -ag na
HAZELNUT BUSH
HAZELNUT BUSH: bagaaniminzh, -iig na
HE
HE: he third person singular personal pronoun
wiin pr
HEAD
HEAD: my head nishtigwaan, -an
/-shtigwaan-/ nid
BIG HEAD: have a big head mangindibe vai
BUMP HEAD: bump one's head
bitaakondibeshin vai
FALL AND CRACK HEAD: fall and crack
one's head baasindibeshin vai
HOLD HEAD STRAIGHT: hold one's head
straight gwayakokweni vai
LIE WITH HEAD A CERTAIN WAY: lie
with one's head a certain way inikweshin
vai
LIE WITH HEAD ON: lie with head on
something apikweshimo vai
NOD HEAD: nod one's head wewebikweni
vai
NOD HEAD A CERTAIN WAY: nod one's
head to s.o. a certain way inikwetaw vta
PUT HEAD A CERTAIN WAY: put one's
head a certain way inikweni vai
SHAKE HEAD: shake head at s.o.
wewebikwetaw vta
SLAP ON HEAD: slap s.o. on the head
basindibe' /basindibe'w-/ vta
STICK OUT HEAD: stick out one's head
zaagikweni vai
TURN HEAD AROUND: turn one's head
around gwekikweni vai
HEAD OFFICE
HEAD OFFICE: ogimaawigamig, -oon ni
HEADACHE
HEADACHE: have a headache dewikwe vai
GET A SUDDEN HEADACHE: dewikwese
vai
HEADBAND
HEADBAND: basikwebizon, -an ni
HEADDRESS
FEATHER HEADDRESS: feather bonnet
miigwani-wiiwakwaan, -an ni
HEADMAN
CEREMONIAL HEADMAN: ogichidaa, -g
na
HEADWOMAN
CEREMONIAL HEADWOMAN:
ogichidaakwe, -g na
HEAL
HEAL: heal s.o. nanaandawi* vta; heal people
nanaandawi'iwe vai
HEAL UP: giige vai
HEALER
TRADITIONAL HEALER:
nenaandawi'iwed na-pt
HEAR
HEAR: noondam vai2; hear s.o. noondaw
vta; hear s.t. noondan vti
HEAR A CERTAIN NOISE: initam vai2
HEAR A CERTAIN WAY: hear s.o. a certain
way initaw vta; hear s.t. a certain way
initan vti
HEAR IN A CERTAIN PLACE: hear s.o. in a
certain place danitaw vta; hear s.t. in a cer-
tain place danitan vti
HEAR RIGHT: hear the right thing
gwayakotam vai2
LIKE HEARING: like hearing s.o. minotaw
vta; like hearing s.t. minotan vti; like hear-
ing something minotam vai2
HEARD
HEARD: be heard noondaagwad vti; can be
heard noondaagozi vai
BEING HEARD: madwe- pv4
HEARD A CERTAIN WAY: be heard a cer-
tain way initaagozi vai; initaagwad vii
HEARD DRIVING ALONG: be heard driving
along bimwewebide,
bimwewebidemagad vii; bimwewebizo
vai
HEARD DRIVING HERE: be heard driving
here biidwewebide, biidwewebidemagad
vii; biidwewebizo vai
HEARD FALLING: be heard going along and
falling bimweweshin vai

heard—here
194
HEARD IN A CERTAIN PLACE: be heard
in a certain place danitaagozi vai;
danitaagwad vii
HEARD IN AN ACTIVITY: be heard in an
activity madwetaa vai
HEARD RUNNING HERE: be heard running
here biidwewebatoo vai
HEARD RUNNING HERE ON THE
GROUND: be heard running here on the
ground biidwewekamigibatoo vai
HEARD SPEEDING ALONG: be heard
speeding along bimwewebide,
bimwewebidemagad vii; bimwewebizo
vai
HEARD SPEEDING HERE: be heard
speeding here biidwewebide,
biidwewebidemagad vii; biidwewebizo
vai
HEARD SWIMMING HERE: be heard
swimming here biidweweyaadagaa vai
HEARD WALKING ALONG: be heard
walking along bimweweshin vai
HEARD WALKING HERE: be heard walking
here biidweweshin vai
HEARSE
HEARSE: niboowidaabaan, -ag na
HEART
HEART: my heart inde', -an /-de'-/ nid
HEART ATTACK
HAVE A HEART ATTACK:
mamaajide'eshkaa vai
HEART
HEART SUITE CARD: giiwoon, -ag na, also
giiyoon
HEARTBURN
HAVE HEARTBURN: maazhide'e vai
HEAT
HEAT: heat s.o. (as something mineral)
gizhaabikiz /gizhaabikizw-/ vta; heat s.t.
gizizan vii; heat s.t. (as a liquid)
gizhaagamizan mi; heat s.t. (as something
mineral) gizhaabikizan vti; heat things (as
a liquid) gizhaagamizige vai; heat things
(as something mineral) gizhaabikizige vai
HEATER
HEATER: awazowin, -an ni
HEAVEN
HEAVEN: giizhig ni
IN HEAVEN: ishpiming/v
HEAVY
HEAVY: be heavy gozigwan vii; gozigwani
vai
SO HEAVY: be so heavy apiitinigozi vai;
apiitinigwad vii
HEEL
HEEL: my heel indoondan, -an /-doondan-/
nid
HEIGHT
CERTAIN HEIGHT: be a certain height
akoozi vai; akwaa. akwaamagad vii;
akwaakozi vai; akwaakwad vii; apiitaa,
apiitaamagad vii
HELD
HELD A CERTAIN WAY: be held a certain
way ininigaade, ininigaademagad vii;
ininigaazo vai
HELD IN PLACE: be held in place with
weight minjimishkoode,
minjimishkoodemagad vii;
minjimishkoozo vai
HELL DIVER
HELL DIVER: zhingibis, -ag na
HELLO
HELLO: hello! aaniin pc; boozhoo pc
HELP
HELP: wiidookaazo vai; help s.o. naadamaw
vta; wiidookaw vta; help people
naadamaage vai; wiidookaage vai; they
help each other naadamaadiwag
/naadamaadi-/ vai; wiidookodaadiwag
/wiidookodaadi-/ vai
HERE
HERE: bi- pv2; omaa pc, also o'omaa
BLOWN HERE: be blown here biidaashi vai;
biidaasin vii
BRING HERE IN A BOAT: biida'oodoon
vti2; bring s.o. here in a boat biida'oozh
/biida'ooN-/ vta
CLIMB HERE: biidaandawe vai
CRAWL HERE: biidoode vai
DRAG HERE: biijidaabii vai; drag s.o. here
biijidaabaazh /biijidaabaaN-/ vta; drag s.t.
here biijidaabaadan vti
DRIVE HERE: biijibide, biijibidemagad vii;
biijibizo vai; biijidaabii'iwe vai
DRIVE HERE WITH A LIGHT:
biidaazakonebizo vai
FLY HERE: biijibide, biijibidemagad vii;
biijibizo vai; biijise vai; biijise,
biijisemagad vii
FOLLOW A TRAIL HERE: biida'adoo vai;
follow s.o.'s trail here biida'azh /biida'aN-/
vta; follow s.t. as a trail here biida'adoon
vti2
HEARD DRIVING HERE: be heard driving
here biidwewebide, biidwewebidemagad
vii; biidwewebizo vai
HEARD RUNNING HERE: be heard running
here biidwewebatoo vai
HEARD RUNNING HERE ON THE
GROUND: be heard running here on the
ground biidwewekamigibatoo vai
HEARD SPEEDING HERE: be heard
speeding here biidwewebide,
biidwewebidemagad vii; biidwewebizo
vai
HEARD SWIMMING HERE: be heard
swimming here biidweweyaadagaa vai
HEARD WALKING HERE: be heard walking
here biidweweshin vai
MOVE RESIDENCE HERE: move one's resi-
dence here biijigozi vai
OVER HERE: owidi pc, also o'owidi
PADDLE HERE: biidakwazhiwe vai;
biidaasamishkaa vai

195
here—hit
RIDE HERE ON HORSEBACK: biidoomigo
vai
RUN HERE: biijibatoo vai; they ran here
together biijiba'idiwag /biijiba'idi-/ vai
SAIL HERE: biidaashi vai; biidaasin vii
SEND A LETTER HERE: biijibii'ige vai
SKATE HERE: biidaada'e vai
SPEED HERE: biijibide, biijibidemagad vii;
biijibizo vai
SWIM HERE: biidaadagaa vai; swim here (as
a fish) biidakwazhiwe vai
THROW HERE: throw s.o. here biijwebin
vta; throw s.t. here biijwebinan vti; throw
(s.t.) here to s.o. biijwebinamaw vta
WADf HERE: biidaadagaazii vai
WALK HERE: biidaasamose vai
WRITE HERE: biijibii'ige vai; write (s.t.) here
to s.o. inverse forms of: biijibii'amaw- vta
HERON
BLUE HERON: zhashagi, -wag na
HICCOUGH
HICCOUGH: onwaawe vai
HICKORY
HICKORY: mitigwaabaak, -oog na
HIDDEN
HIDDEN: be hidden gaajigaade,
gaajigaadernagad vii; gaajigaazo vai
HIDE
HIDE: hide from s.o. gaazootaw vta; hide s.o.
gaazh /gaaN-/ vta; hide s.t. gaadoon vti2;
hide self gaazo vai; hide (s.t.) from s.o.
gaadaw vta; hide things gaajige vai
HIDE
HIDE: bashkwegin, -oon ni
BEAVER HIDE: amikwayaan, -ag na
CALFHIDE: bizhikiinsiwayaan, -ag na
DEER HIDE: waawaashkeshiwayaan, -ag na
FISHER HIDE: ojiigiwayaan, -ag na
FOX HIDE: waiagoshiwayaan, -ag na
LYNX HIDE: bizhiwayaan, -ag na
MARTEN HIDE: waabizheshiwayaan, -ag
na
MINK HIDE: zhaangweshiwayaan, -ag na
MUSKRAT HIDE: wazhashkwayaan, -ag na
OTTER HIDE: nigigwayaan, -ag na
STRETCH A HIDE: naazhiiga'ige vai
TANNED HIDE: asekaan, -ag na
WOLF HIDE: ma'iinganiwayaan, -ag na
HIDE SCRAPER
HIDE SCRAPER: jiishaakwa'igan, -an ni
HIDE STRETCHER
HIDE STRETCHER: naazhiiga'igan, -an ni
FLAT HIDE STRETCHER: flat hide stretch-
er (especially for muskrats)
zhiibaakwa''ataan, -an ni
HIGH
HIGH: ishpi- pv4; be high (e.g., the sun)
ishpagoojin vai
CHARGE A HIGH PRICE: ishpagindaaso
vai; charge a high price for s.t.
ishpagindani vti
HANG UP HIGH: ishpagoode,
ishpagoodemagad vii; ishpagoojin vai;
hang s.o. up high ishpagoozh
/ishpagooN-/ vta; hang s.t. up high
ishpagoodoon vti2
HIGH IN STATUS OR OFFICE: be high in
status or office ishpaginzo vai
HIGH PLACE: be a high place ishpadinaa,
ishpadinaamagad vii
HIGH UP: be high up ishpaa, ishpaamagad
vii
LIE HIGH UP: ishpishin vai; ishpisin vii
MAKE HIGH: make s.t. high ishpaatoon vti2
HIGH-PRICED
HIGH-PRICED: be high-priced ishpaginde,
ishpagindemagad vii; ishpaginzo vai
HIGHLY
THINK HIGHLY: think highly of s.o.
ishpenim vta
HIGHWAY
HIGHWAY: gichi-miikana, -n ni
HILL
HILL: be a hill ishpadinaa, ishpadinaamagad
vii
BIG HILL: there is a big hill mangadinaa,
mangadinaamagad vii
COME OUT OVER A HILL: zaagajiwe vai
ON TOP OF A HILL: agidaaki pc, also
ogidaaki*, wagidaaki
SMALL HILL: be a small hill bikwadinaa,
bikwadinaamagad vii; there is a small hill
agaasadinaa, agaasadinaamagad vii
HINDER
HINDER: hinder s.o. ondami* vta
HINDQUARTER
HINDQUARTER: my hindquarter
imbwaam, -an /-bwaanW nid
HIP
HIP: my hip ninoogan, -an /-noogan-/ nid
HIRE
HIRE: anookii vai; hire s.o. anoozh /anooN-/
vta
HIRE TO DO A CERTAIN JOB: hire s.o. to
do a certain job inanoozh /inanooN-/ vta
HIRE TO GO TO A CERTAIN PLACE: hire
s.o. to go to a certain place inanoozh
/inanooN-/ vta
HIT
HIT: be hit bakite'igaade,
bakite'igaademagad vii; bakite'igaazo
vai; hit s.o. bakite* /bakite'w-/ vta; hit s.o.
(in shooting) mizho /mizhw-/ vta; hit s.t.
bakite'an vti; hit s.t. (in shooting)
mizhodan vti; hit things bakite'ige vai;
they hit each other bakite'odiwag
/bakite'odi-/ vai
ACCIDENTALLY HIT: accidentally hit s.o.
bitaganaam vta; accidentally hit s.t.
bitaganaandan vti
HIT AGAINST ACCIDENTALLY: hit
against something accidentally (as some-
thing stick- or wood-like) bitaakoshin vai;
bitaakosin vii
HIT DEAD CENTER: hit s.o. dead center
with something miikwa* /miikwa'w-/ vta;
hit s.t. dead center with something
miikwa'an vti

hit—hook
196
HIT THE BOTTOM: mizhakiise vai;
mizhakiise, mizhakiisemagad vii
HIT THE TARGET: mizhodam vai2
MAKE NOISE HITTING: madweshin vai;
madwesin vii; make noise hitting s.t.
madwesidoon vti2; make noise hitting
things madwesijige vai
SHOOT AND HIT: shoot and hit s.o.
miikonaw vta; shoot and hit s.t. miikonan
vti
HITCHED
HITCHED ON: be hitched on
agwapijigaade, agwapijigaademagad vii;
agwapijigaazo vai
HITHER
HITHER: b\-pv2
HIVE
BEEHIVE: aamoo-wadiswan, -an ni
HOARSE
HOARSE: be hoarse gibiskwe vai; maanowe
vai
HOE
HOE: ningwaja'ige vai; hoe s.o. ningwaja*
/ningwaja'w-/ vta; hoe s.t. ningwaja'an vti
HOIST
HOIST: hoist s.o. ombaabiigin vta; hoist s.t.
ombaabiiginan vti
HOLD
HOLD: hold s.o. dakon vta; hold s.t. dakonan
vti; hold (s.t.) for s.o. dakonamaw vta
ADEQUATELY HOLD: debashkine vai;
debashkine, debashkinemagad vii; ade-
quately hold (something liquid) debibii,
debibiimagad vii
GET HOLD: get hold of s.o. debibizh
/debibiN-/ vta; get hold of s.t. debibidoon
vti2; get hold of (s.t.) for s.o. debibidaw
vta
HOLD A CERTAIN WAY: hold s.o. a certain
way inin vta; hold s.t. a certain way ininan
vti
HOLD AGAINST: hold s.o. against ashidin
vta; hold s.t. against ashidinan vti
HOLD BACK: hold s.o. back nanagin via
HOLD IN MOUTH: hold s.o. in one's mouth
agwanem vta; hold s.t. in one's mouth
agwanendan vti; hold things in one's
mouth agwanenjige vai
HOLD IN PLACE: hold s.o. in place
minjimin vta; hold s.o. in place with foot
or body minjimishkaw vta; hold s.o. in
place with weight minjimishkoozh
/minjimishkooN-/ vta; hold s.t. in place
minjiminan vti; hold s.t. in place with foot
or body minjimishkan vti; hold s.t. in
place with weight minjimishkoodoon vti2;
hold (s.t.). in place for s.o. minjiminamaw
vta
HOLD ON: minjimii vai; hold on (as to some-
thing stick- or wood-like) minjimaakwii
vai
HOLD UP AGAINST: hold s.o. up against
agon vta; hold s.t. up against agonan vti
HOLD UPSIDE DOWN: hold s.o. upside
down ajidin vta; hold s.t. upside down
ajidinan vti
TAKE HOLD: take hold of s.o. dakon vta;
take hold of s.t. dakonan vti
HOLD ON
HOLD ON: hold on! bekaapc
HOLE
BURN A HOLE: burn a hole in s.o.
bagwaakiz /bagwaakizw-/ vta; burn a hole
in s.t. bagwaakizan vti
DIG A HOLE: waanike vai
EXCAVATED HOLE: waanikaan, -an ni
GET A HOLE: bagoshkaa vai; bagoshkaa,
bagoshkaamagad vii 
^
HAVE A HOLE: bagoneyaa,
bagoneyaamagad vii; bagonezi vai
HAVE A HOLE BURNED IN: bagwaakide,
bagwaakidemagad vii; bagwaakizo vai
HOLE MADE IN THE ICE FOR WATER:
dwaa'ibaan, -an ni, also dwaa'igan
MAKE A HOLE IN THE ICE: dwaa'ige vai
MAKE A HOLE USING SOMETHING:
make a hole in s.o. using something
bagone* /bagone'w-/ vta; make a hole in
s.t. using something bagone'an vti
MAKE A WATER HOLE IN THE ICE:
dwaa'ibii vai, also dwaa'ige
HOLLOW
HOLLOW: be hollow wiimbaa,
wiimbaamagad vii; wiimbizi vai
GIVE A HOLLOW SOUND: wiimbwewe,
wiimbwewemagad vii
HOME
HOME: his/her home: endaad changed form of:
daa vai
BE AT HOME: abi vai
CARRY HOME: carry s.o. home giiwewizh
/giiwewiN-/ vta; carry s.t. home
giiwewidoon vti2; carry (s.t.) home for s.o.
giiwewidaw vta
DRIVE HOME: giiwedaabii'iwe vai
GO HOME: giiwe vai
GO HOME BY BOAT: giiwe'o vai
GO HOME MAD: giiwegidaazo vai
RUN HOME: giiwebatoo vai
TAKE HOME: take s.o. home giiwewizh
/giiwewiN-/ vta; take s.t. home
giiwewidoon vri2; take (s.t.) home for s.o.
giiwewidaw vta
TELL TO GO HOME: tell s.o. to go home
giiwenaazha* /giiwenaazha'w-/ vta
HOMELY
HOMELY: be homely maanaadizi vai
HOMINY
HOMINY: gijikonayezigan, -ag na
HONEY
HONEY: aamoo-ziinzibaakwad ni
HOOF
HOOF: my hoof ninasid /-nasid-/ nid
HOOK
FISH HOOK: migiskan, -an ni
FISH WITH A HOOK AND LINE:
wewebanaabii vai

197
hook—hundred
HOOK AND LINE: migiskaneyaab, -iin ni
HOP HORNBEAM
HOP HORNBEAM: maananoons, -ag na
HOPE
HOPE: bagosendam vai2; hope for s.o., have
hope for s.o. bagosenim vta; hope for s.t.
bagosendan vti
LOSE HOPE: lose hope in s.o. banaadenim
vta; lose hope in s.t. banaadendan vti
HOPEFUL
HOPEFUL: be hopeful ombendam vai2
HORN
HORN: noondaagochigan, -an ni
HORN
HORN: horn (of an animal) eshkan, -ag na
HORSE
HORSE: bebezhigooganzhii, -g na, also
mishtadim*, mashtadim*; my horse
inday, -ag /-day-/ nod
FALL OFF A HORSE: banoomigo vai
HAVE A HORSE: odayi vai
LOOK FOR HORSES: nandawisimwe vai
RIDE TO A CERTAIN PLACE WITH
HORSES: apa'igo vai
HORSEBACK
ARRIVE ON HORSEBACK: bagamoomigo
vai
RIDE ABOUT ON HORSEBACK:
babaamoomiigo vai
RIDE ALONG ON HORSEBACK:
bimoomigo vai
RIDE AWAY ON HORSEBACK:
animoomigo vai
RIDE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE ON
HORSEBACK: ondoomigo vai
RIDE HERE ON HORSEBACK: biidoomigo
vai
RIDE TO A CERTAIN PLACE ON HORSE-
BACK: ride to a certain place on horse-
back inoomigo vai
HORSEFLY
HORSEFLY: mizizaak, -wag na
HORSESHOE
HORSESHOE: oshkanzhiikaajigan, -an ni
HOSPITAL
HOSPITAL: aakoziiwigamig, -oon ni
MENTAL HOSPITAL:
giiwanaadiziiwigamig, -oon ni
VETERAN'S HOSPITAL: zhimaaganishii-
aakoziiwigamig, -oon ni
HOT
HOT: be hot gizhide, gizhidemagad vii;
gizhizo vai; be hot (as a liquid)
gizhaagamidej gizhaagamidemagad vii
HOT INSIDE: be hot inside giizhoote,
giizhootemagad vii
HOT WEATHER: be hot (weather) gizhaate,
gizhaatemagad vii
HOT WIND: be a hot wind gizhaanimad vii
HOTEL
HOTEL: noogishkaawigamig, -oon ni
HOUR
CERTAIN HOUR: be a certain hour daso-
diba'iganed vii
CERTAIN NUMBER OF HOURS: a certain
number of hours daso-diba'igan pc
CERTAIN TIME IN HOURS: be a certain
time in hours daso-diba'iganed vii
HOUSE
HOUSE: waakaa'igan, -an ni
ALONGSIDE THE HOUSE:
zhishwajigamig pc
BUILD A HOUSE: waakaa'ige vai; build a
house for s.o. ozhigaw vta
BY A HOUSE: jiigigamigpc
COLD HOUSE: be cold (as a house or room)
dakate, dakatemagad vii
DARK HOUSE: be dark (as in a room or
house) dibikate, dibikatemagad vii
ON TOP OF THE HOUSE: agidigamig pc,
also ogidigamig*, wagidigamig
QUIET HOUSE: be a quiet house bangate,
bangatemagad vii
SMALL HOUSE: be small (as a room or
house) agaasate, agaasatemagad vii
HOW
HOW: how? aaniin pc; aaniish pc
HOW MANY: how many? aaniin minikpc
HOW MUCH: how much? interrogative aaniin
minik/n
I DON'T KNOW HOW: amanj dubitative pc,
also amanj iidog, namanj*, namanj iidog*
I WONDER HOW: I wonder how dubitative
amanj pc, also amanj iidog, namanj*,
namanj iidog*
HOWEVER
HOWEVER: however dubitative amanj igo pc
HOWL
HOWL: howl waawoono vai
HUG
HUG: hug s.o. gikinjigwen vta; giishkijiin vta;
they hug each other gikinjigwenidiwag
/gikinjigwenidi-/ vai; giishkijiinidiwag
/giishkijiinidi-/ vai
HUMAN
HUMAN: human (in contrast to non-human
beings) anishinaabe, -g na; be human (in
contrast to non-human beings)
anishinaabewi vai
HUMMINGBIRD
HUMMINGBIRD: nenookaasi, -wag na
HUNDRED
CERTAIN NUMBER OF HUNDREDS:
daswaak nm
EIGHT HUNDRED: ishwaaswaak nm, also
nishwaaswaak*
FIVE HUNDRED: naanwaak nm
FOUR HUNDRED: niiwaak nm
NINE HUNDRED: zhaangaswaak nm
ONE HUNDRED: ingodwaak nm, also
ningodwaak*
SEVEN HUNDRED: niizhwaaswaak nm
SIX HUNDRED: ingodwaaswaak nm, also
ningodwaaswaak*
THREE HUNDRED: niswaak nm

hundred—identify 
198
TWO HUNDRED: niizhwaak nm
HUNGRY
HUNGRY: be hungry bakade vai
PRETEND TO BE HUNGRY: bakadekaazo
vai
HUNT
HUNT: giiwose vai, also giiyose; get food by
hunting or fishing nandawenjige vai; hunt
for s.o. nooji' vta; hunt for s.t. noojitoon
vti2; hunt for people nooji'iwe vai
HUNT BEAVER: noodamikwe vai
HUNT DUCKS: nandawishibe vai
HUNT FOR RABBITS: nandawaaboozwe
vai
HUNTER
HUNTER: giiwosewinini, -wag na, also
giiyosewinini
HUNTING BLIND
HUNTING BLIND: akandoowin, -an ni
HUNTING DOG
HUNTING DOG: giiwosewasim, -oog na,
also giiyosewasim
HURRY
HURRY: wewiib pc; wewiibishkaa vai; hurry
(in some work or activity) wewiibitaa vai;
hurry s.o. wewiibi' vta; hurry s.t.
wewiibitoon vti
COOK IN A HURRY: ojaanimizekwe vai
HURRY BY SPEECH: hurry s.o. by speech
ojaanimim vta
HURRY MAKING: hurry making s.o.
wewiibi' vta; hurry making s.t.
wewiibitoon vti
IN A HURRY: wewiib pc; be in a hurry
wewiibizi vai
MAKE HURRY: make s.o. hurry ojaanimi'
vta
TELL TO HURRY: tell s.o. to hurry
wewiibim vta
WANT TO HURRY: wewiibendam vai
HURT
GET HURT: wiisagishin vai
HURT WITH FOOT OR BODY: hurt s.o.
with foot or body wiisagishkaw vta
HUSBAND
HUSBAND: my husband ninaabem, -ag
/-naabem-/ nod; niwiidigemaagan, -ag
/-wiidigemaagan-/ na
HAVE A HUSBAND: onaabemi vai
HYMN
HYMN: anama'e-nagamon, -an ni
\
I
I: I first person singular personal pronoun niinpr
I DON'T KNOW
I DON'T KNOW HOW: dubitative amanj pc,
also amanj iidog, namanj*, namanj iidog*
I DON'T KNOW WHEN: dubitative amanj
apii pc
I DON'T KNOW WHERE: dubitative dibi pc
I DON'T KNOW WHO: I don't know who
animate dubitative awegwen, -ag pr
I DON'T REMEMBER
I DON'T REMEMBER WHAT: ayi'ii, -n pr
I DON'T REMEMBER WHO: aya'aa, -gpr
ICE
ICE: mikwam, -iig na
CRACK IN THE ICE: there is a crack in the
ice daashkikwadin vii
FALL THROUGH THE ICE: dwaashin vai
FISH THROUGH THE ICE WITH SPEAR:
akwa'waa vai
GO ABOUT ON THE ICE:
babaamaadagaako vai
GO AWAY ON THE ICE: animaadagaako
vai
GO OUT FROM SHORE ON THE ICE:
niminaaweyaadagaako vai
GO TO A CERTAIN PLACE ON THE ICE:
inaadagaako vai
HOLE MADE IN THE ICE FOR WATER:
dwaa'ibaan, -an ni, also dwaa'igan
MAKE A HOLE IN THE ICE: dwaa'ige vai
MAKE A WATER HOLE IN THE ICE:
dwaa'ibii vai, also dwaa'ige
MUCH ICE: there is much ice mikwamiikaa,
mikwamiikaamagad vii
ON TOP OF THE ICE: agidiskwam pc, also
ogidiskwam*, wagidiskwam
SLIP AND FALL ON THE ICE:
ozhaashikoshin vai
SLIPPERY ICE: there is slippery ice
ozhaashikwaa, ozhaashikwaamagad vii
START OFF ON THE ICE:
maajiiyaadagaako vai
UNDER THE ICE: anaamiskwam pc
WALK ALONG ON THE ICE:
bimaadagaako vai
ICE BOX
ICE BOX: mikwamii-makak, -oon ni
ICE CHISEL
ICE CHISEL: eshkan, -an ni
ICE CREAM
ICE CREAM: dekaag ni-pt
ICY
ICY ROAD: be icy (as a road or trail)
mikwamiiwadamon
/mikwamiiwadamo-/ vii
ICY TRAIL: be icy (as a road or trail)
mikwamiiwadamon
/mikwamiiwadamo-/ vii
IDENTIFY
IDENTIFY: identify s.o. aawenim vta;
identify s.t. aawendan vti
IDENTIFY BY SIGHT: identify s.o. by sight
aawenaw vta; identify s.t. by sight
aawenan vti

199
identify—Indian
IDENTIFY BY SOUND: identify s.o. by
sound aawetaw vta; identify s.t. by sound
aawetan vti
IF
IF: giishpin pc
IGNITE
IGNITE: biskane, biskanemagad -ail
IGNORANT
IGNORANT: be ignorant bagwanawizi vai
IGNORE
IGNORE: boonendam vai2; ignore s.o.
boonenim vta; ignore s.t. boonendan vti
ILL
ILL: be ill aakozi vai+o
FALL ILL FROM BAD MEDICINE:
niboowise vai
SERIOUSLY ILL: be seriously ill aanimizi vai
ILL-FORMED
ILL-FORMED: maazhi-pi>4
ILLNESS
HAVE A RESPIRATORY ILLNESS:
ozosodamwaapine vai
IMAGE
IMAGE: mazinichigan, -ag na
MAKE AN IMAGE: make an image of s.o.
mazinaadin vta
IMPATIENT
IMPATIENT: be impatient ojaanimendam
vai2; zhigajii vai
IMPRINTED
IMPRINTED: be imprinted mazinishin vai;
mazinisin vii
IMPRISONED
IMPRISONED: be imprisoned
gibaakwa'igaazo vai
IN
IN: be in biinde, biindemagad vii; biinzo vai
CRAWL IN: biindoode vii
DRIVE IN: speed in biinjibide,
biinjibidemagad vii; biinjibizo vai
FALL IN: biinjibide, biinjibidemagad vii;
biinjibizo vai; biinjise vai; biinjise,
biinjisemagad vii
FLOW IN: biinjijiwan vii
FLY IN: biinjibide, biinjibidemagad vii;
biinjibizo vai; biinjise vai; biinjise,
biinjisemagad vii
IN A CERTAIN PLACE: dazhi-paS; be in a
certain place dagon /dago-/ vii
IN A PLACE WITH: dago- pv4
IN AMONG: in among it megwe-aya'ii pc,
also megweya'ii
IN THE BRUSH: megwekob pc
IN THE MIDST: in the midst of megwe- pn
IN THE MUD: rnegwejiishkiwag pc
IN THE WOODS: megwaayaakpc
SPEED IN: drive in biinjibide,
biinjibidemagad vii; biinjibizo vai
THROW IN: throw s.o. in biinjwebin vta;
throw s.t. in biinjwebinan vti; throw things
in biinjwebinnge vai
IN ORDER TO
IN ORDER TO: \\-pvl
IN TURN
IN TURN: meshkwadpc
IN TURNS
IN TURNS: memeshkwad pc
IN VAIN
INVAIN:aano-pz;/
DO IN VAIN: aanawewizi vai
INADEQUATE
INADEQUATE: be inadequate aanawewizi
vai
THINK INADEQUATE: think s.o. is
inadequate zhaagoodenim vta
INCH
CERTAIN NUMBER OF INCHES: a certain
number of inches dasoninjpc
INCLUDED
INCLUDED: be included dagwaginde,
dagwagindemagad vii; dagwaginzo vai
INCOMPETENT
INCOMPETENT: be incompetent bagandizi
vai
INCREASE
INCREASE IN NUMBER: niigi vai; make
s.o. increase in number niigi' vta; make s.t.
increase in number niigitoon vti2
INDEED
INDEED: gegetpc
INDEPENDENT
INDEPENDENT: be independent
dibenindizo vai
INDEX FINGER
INDEX FINGER: izhinoo'iganinj, -iin ni
INDIAN
INDIAN: Indian (in contrast to non-Indians)
anishinaabe, -g na; be Indian (in contrast
to non-Indians) anishinaabewi vai
CALL IN INDIAN: call s.o. in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaazh
/anishinaabewinikaaN-/ vta; call s.t. in
Indian (Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaadan
vti
CALLED IN INDIAN: be called in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaade,
anishinaabewinikaademagad vii;
anishinaabewinikaazo vai
INDIAN WRITING: Indian (Ojibwe) writing
anishinaabewibii'igan, -an ni
MANY INDIANS: there are many Indians
anishinaabekaa vii
NON-LOCAL INDIAN: mayagi-
anishinaabe, -g na
SOMETHING WRITTEN IN INDIAN:
something written in Indian (Ojibwe)
anishinaabewibii'igan, -an ni
SPEAK IN AN INDIAN LANGUAGE: speak
in an Indian language (especially in
Ojibwe) anishinaabe-gaagiigido vai
WRITE IN INDIAN: write in Indian (Ojibwe)
anishinaabewibii'ige vai; write s.t. in
Indian (Ojibwe) anishinaabewibii'an vti;
write s.t. in Indian (Ojibwe) (e.g., a book)
anishinaabewisidoon vti2; write (s.t.) in

Indian—insignificant 
200
Indian (Ojibwe) to s.o.
anishinaabewibii'amaw ma
WRITTEN IN INDIAN: be written in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewibii'igaade,
anishinaabewibii'igaademagad vii; be
written in Indian (Ojibwe) (e.g., a book or
document) anishinaabewisin vii
INDIAN CENTER
INDIAN CENTER: anishinaabe-
maawanjii'idiiwigamig, -oon m
INDIAN COUNTRY
INDIAN COUNTRY: anishinaabewaki m
INDIAN LANGUAGE
INDIAN LANGUAGE: Indian language
(especially Ojibwe) anishinaabemowin,
-an ni
SPEAK AN INDIAN LANGUAGE: speak an
Indian language (especially Ojibwe) to s.o.
anishinaabemotaw vta; speak an Indian
language (especially Ojibwe)
anishinaabemo vai
INDIAN WOMAN
INDIAN WOMAN: anishinaabekwe, -g na;
be an Indian woman anishinaabekwewi
vai
INEFFECTIVE
INEFFECTIVE: be ineffective aanawewizi
vai; zhaagwaadad vii; zhaagwaadizi vai
INFECT
INFECT: infect s.o. with something
aazhookoodin via
INFECTED
INFECTED EAR: have an infected ear
miniiwitawage vai
INFLATE
INFLATE: inflate s.o. boodaajii'
/boodaajii'w-/ vta; inflate s.t. boodaajii'an
vti; inflate things boodaajii'ige vai
INHERENTLY
INHERENTLY: dibinawe pc
INHERIT
INHERIT FROM A CERTAIN SOURCE:
ondizi vai
INJURE
INJURE: injure s.o. inigaa' vta
INJURED
INJURED: fall and be injured godigoshin vai
INK
INK: ozhibii'iganaaboo ni
INLAND
INLAND: noopimingpc
CARRY INLAND: carry s.o. inland gopiwizh
/gopiwiN-/ vta; carry s.t. inland
gopiwidoon vti2
GO INLAND: gopii vai
RUN INLAND: gopibatoo vai
TAKE INLAND: take s.o. inland gopiwizh
/gopiwiN-/ vta; take s.t. inland
gopiwidoon nil
INLET
INLET: at the inlet zaagiingpc/ be an inlet
zaagidawaa, zaagidawaamagad vii
INQUIRE
INQUIRE: gagwedwe vai
INSANE
INSANE: be insane giiwanaadizi vai
INSECT
INSECT: manidoons, -ag na
INSIDE
INSIDE: biindigpc; inside it biinjayi'ii pc
BLOWN INSIDE: be blown inside
biindigeyaashi vai; biindigeyaasin vii
BRING FIREWOOD INSIDE: biindigenise
vai
BRING INSIDE: bring s.o. inside biindigazh
/biindigaN-/ vta; bring s.t. inside
biindigadoon vti2
CHASE INSIDE: chase s.o. inside
biindigenaazhikaw vta; biindigenizhikaw
via
COME INSIDE: biindige vai
DANCE INSIDE: dance inside (as in a Grand
Entry) biindigeshimo vai
DRIVE INSIDE: biindigebide,
biindigebidemagad vii; biindigebizo vai
FLY INSIDE: biindigebide,
biindigebidemagad vii; biindigebizo vai
GO INSIDE: biindige vai
INSIDE BODY: inside the body biinjinapc
INSIDE EAR: inside an ear biinjitawag pc
INSIDE MOUTH: inside the mouth
biinjidoon pc
INSIDE NOSE: inside the nose biinjijaanzh pc
RUN INSIDE: biindigebatoo vai; they run
inside together biindigeba'idiwag
/biindigeba'idi-/ vai; run inside with s.o.
biindigebatwaazh /biindigebatwaaN-/
vta; run inside with s.t.
biindigebatwaadan vii; run inside from
people biindigeba'iwe vai
SPEED INSIDE: biindigebide,
biindigebidemagad vii; biindigebizo vai
TAKE INSIDE: take s.o. inside biindigazh
/biindigaN-/ via; take s.t. inside
biindigadoon vli2
TELL TO GO INSIDE: tell s.o. to go inside
biindigenaazha' /biindigenaazha'w-/ vta
THROW INSIDE: throw s.o. inside
biindigewebin via; throw s.t. inside
biindigewebinan vti; throw things inside
biindigewebinige vai
INSIDE OUT
TURN INSIDE OUT: aaboozikaa vai;
aaboozikaa, aaboozikaamagad vii; turn
s.o. inside out aaboodin vta; turn s.t. in-
side out aaboodinan vti
WEAR INSIDE OUT: wear s.o. inside out
aaboozikaw vta; wear s.t. inside out
aaboozikan vti
INSIGNIFICANT
CONSIDER INSIGNIFICANT: consider s.o.
insignificant agaasenim via; consider s.t.
insignificant agaasendan vti
CONSIDERED INSIGNIFICANT: be con-
sidered insignificant agaasendaagozi vai;
agaasendaagwad vii

201 
inspect—jingle dress
INSPECT
INSPECT: inspect s.o. dibaabam vta; inspect
s.t. dibaabandan vti
INSTRUMENT
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT:
madwewechigan, -an ni; musical instru-
ment (especially a wind instrument)
noondaagochigan, -an ni
INTACT
INTACT: be intact miziweyaa,
miziweyaamagad vii; miziwezi vai
INTELLIGENT
INTELLIGENT: be intelligent nibwaakaa vai
INTENSE
HAVE INTENSE FEELINGS OR DESIRES:
aakwendam vai2
INTERCOURSE
HAVE SEXUAL INTERCOURSE: mazhiwe
vai; have sexual intercourse with s.o.
mazhi /maN-/ vta
INTERPRET
INTERPRET: interpret s.o. aanikanootaw
vta; interpret s.t. aanikanootan vti;
interpret for people aanikanootaage vai
INTERPRETED
INTERPRETED: be interpreted
aanikanootaagozi vai
INTERPRETER
INTERPRETER: aanikanootaagewinini,
-wag na
INTERRUPT
INTERRUPT: interrupt s.o. wanishkwe' via
INTERRUPT BY SPEECH: interrupt s.o. by
speech wanishkwem vta
INTESTINE
INTESTINE: my intestine ninagizh, -iin
/-nagizhy-/ rod
INTIMIDATE
INTIMIDATE: intimidate s.o. by speech
zegim vta
INTROVERTED
INTROVERTED: be introverted
zhaagwenimoi vai
INVITE
INVITE TO A FEAST: invite s.o. to a feast
(especially as part of a religious ceremony)
wiikom vta; invite people to a feast (espe-
cially as part of a religious ceremony)
wiikonge vai
INVOLVED
INVOLVED: be involved with s.o. dazhiikaw
vta; be involved with s.t. dazhiikan vti
IRON
IRON: biiwaabik, -oon ni; clothes iron
zhooshkwega'lgan, -an ni; iron s.o. (e.g.,
pants) zhooshkwega' /zhooshkwega'w-/
vta; iron s.t. zhooshkwega'an vti
IRON CLOTHES: zhooshkwega'ige vai
IRONWOOD
IRONWOOD: maananoons, -ag na
ISLAND
ISLAND: minis, -an ni
ROCKY ISLAND: minisaabik, -oon m
IT IS SO
IT IS SO: memwech pc
IT IS THUS THAT
IT IS THUS THAT: miish pc; mil pc
ITCH
ITCH: gizhiibizi vai
ITCHY
ITCHY SKIN: have itchy skin gizhiibazhe vai
J
JACK
JACK: jack (card) zhimaaganish, -ag na
JACK PINE
JACK PINE: okikaandag, -oog na, also
wakikaandag
JACK RABBIT
JACK RABBIT: misaabooz, -oog na
JACKET
JACKET: babiinzikawaagan, -an ni
JACKLIGHT
JACKLIGHT: waaswaa vai
JAIL
JAIL: gibaakwa'odiiwigamig, -oon ni; jail s.o.
gibaakwa' /gibaakwa'w-/ vta
JAM
JAM: baashkiminasigan, -an ni
JANITOR
JANITOR: biinichigewinini, -wag na; janitor
(female) biinichigewikwe, -g na
JANUARY
JANUARY: gichi-manidoo-giizis na, also
manidoo-giizis
JAW
JAW: my jaw indaamikan, -an /-daamikan-/
nid
JAY
BLUE JAY: diindiisi, -wag na
JEALOUS
JEALOUS: be jealous gaawe vai; gaawendam
vai2; be jealous of s.o. gaawam vta;
gizhaawenim vta; be jealous of things
gizhaawenjige vai
JELLO
JELLO: wetotwaag ni-pt
JIG
JIG: jig s.t. (e.g., wild rice) mimigoshkan vti;
jig something (e.g., wild rice)
mimigoshkam vai2
JINGLE
JINGLE: jingle (on dress) ziibaaska'igan, -an
ni
JINGLE DRESS
JINGLE DRESS: jingle dress
ziibaaska'iganagooday, -an ni

job—kind
202
JOB
JOB: anokiiwin. -an ni
DO A CERTAIN JOB: do a certain job for s.o.
inanokiitaw vta
HAVE A CERTAIN JOB: inanokii vai
HIRE TO DO A CERTAIN JOB: hire s.o. to
do a certain job inanoozh /inanooN-/ vta
JOINING
LAY JOINING: lay s.o. joining something else
aanikooshim vta; lay s.t. joining some-
thing else aanikoosidoon vti2
LIE JOINING: lie joining something else
aanikooshin vai; aanikoosin mi
JOURNEY
START A JOURNEY: maadaadizi vai
JOYOUS
JOYOUS: be joyous minawaanigozi vai
JUDGE
JUDGE: dibaakonigewinini, -wag na; gichi-
dibaakonigewinini, -wag na; judge s.o.
dibaakon vta; onaakon vta; judge s.t.
dibaakonan vti; judge things dibaakonige
vai; onaakonige vai
JUDGE A CERTAIN WAY: judge s.o. a cer-
tain way inaakon vta; judge s.t. a certain
way inaakonan vti
JUDGED
JUDGED: be judged dibaakonigaazo vai
JUDGED A CERTAIN WAY: be judged a
certain way inaakonigaazo vai
JUDGEMENT
MAKE A CERTAIN JUDGEMENT:
inaakonige vai
JUICE
APPLE JUICE: mishiiminaaboo ni
JULY
JULY: aabita-niibino-giizis na;
baapaashkizige-giizis na; miini-giizis na,
also miinike-giizis
JUMP
JUMP: gwaashkwani vai
JUMP ABOARD: boozigwaashkwani vai
JUMP ACROSS: aazhawigwaashkwani vai
JUMP IN A VEHICLE OR BOAT:
boozigwaashkwani vai
JUMP INTO THE WATER:
bakobiigwaashkwani vai
JUMP OUT OF THE WATER: jump out of
the water as a fish googa'am vai2
JUMP OVER: baazhijigwaashkwani vai
JUMP UPWARDS: ombigwaashkwani vai
JUNE
JUNE: ode'imini-giizis na
JUNEBERRY
JUNEBERRY: gozigwaakomin, -ag na
JUNEBERRY BUSH
JUNEBERRY BUSH:
gozigwaakominagaawanzh, -iig na
JUST
JUST: enda-£i)4
JUST DON'T: gego binapc
JUST FOR FUN: anishaapc
JUST FOR NOTHING: anishaapc
JUST LIKE: indigo pc, also nindigo*
JUST NOW: bijiinag^c
JUST SO: eniwek pc; wenda- pv4
JUST THAT: memwech pc
JUST THEN: na'idaa pc
K
KEROSENE
KEROSENE: waazakonenjiganaaboo ni
KETTLE
KETTLE: akik, -oog na
LEGGED KETTLE: okaadakik, -oog na
PUT IN THE KETTLE: put (s.t.) in the
kettle boodaakwe vai+o
WASH KETTLE: giziibiiginakokwe vai
KETTLE HANGER
KETTLE HANGER: agoodakikwaan, -an ni
KEY
KEY: aabaabika'igan, -an ni
KICK
KICK: kick s.o. basikawaazh /basikawaaN-/
vta; dangishkaw vta; kick s.t.
basikawaadan vti; dangishkan vti; kick
things dangishkige vai; kick people
dangishkaage vai
KICK IN REAR: kick s.o. in the rear
basidiyeshkaw vta
KICK OUT OF THE WAY: kick s.o. out of
the way ikowebishkaw vta; kick s.t. out of
the way ikowebishkan vti
KIDNEY
KIDNEY: my kidney indoodikosiw, -ag
/-doodikosiw-/ na
KILL
KILL: kill game nitaage vai; kill s.o. nishi
/niS-/ vta; kill s.t. nitoon vti2; kill oneself
nisidizo vai; kill (s.t.) for s.o. nitamaw vta;
kill (s.t.) of people or for people
nitamaage vai; kill (s.t.) for oneself
nitamaazo vai; kill people nishiwe vai;
they kill each other nisidiwag /nisidi-/ vai
FINALLY AND COMPLETELY KILL:
finally and completely kill s.o. aapijinazh
/aapijinaN-/ vta
KILL FOR A CERTAIN REASON: kill s.o.
for a certain reason onjinazh /onjinaN-/
vta
KILL OFF: kill s.o. oil jaaginazh /jaaginaN-/
vta
KIND
KIND: be kind gizhewaadizi vai; minode'e
vai
KIND
KIND: kind animate dino, -wagpfj also
dinowa; kind inanimate dinos -wan pr, also
dinowa

203 
kind—lake
ALL KINDS: anooj pc
KIND-HEARTED
KIND-HEARTED: be kind-hearted
zhawenjige vai
KINDLING
KINDLING WOOD: biisiga'isaan, -an ra
MAKE KINDLING: biisiga'ise vai
KING
KING: gichi-ogimaa, -g na; be a king gichi-
ogimaawi vai; king (card) ogimaa, -g na
KINGBIRD
KINGBIRD: wiindigoo-bineshiinh, -yag na
KINGFISHER
KINGFISHER: ogiishkimanisii, -g na
KINNIKINNICK
KINNIKINNICK: kinnikinnick (tobacco and
bark smoking mixture) apaakozigan ni
MAKE KINNIKINNICK: apaakozige vai
KISS
KISS: kiss s.o. ojiim vta; they kiss each other
ojiindiwag /ojiindi-/ vai
KITCHEN
KITCHEN: jiibaakwewigamig, -oon ni
KITCHEN APRON
KITCHEN APRON: inapizowin, -an ni
KNEAD
KNEAD: knead s.o. onadin vta; knead s.t.
onadinan vti; knead things onadinige vai
KNEE
KNEE: my knee ingidig, -wag /-gidigw-/ nod
SKIN KNEE: skin one's knee
bishagigidigweshin vai
KNEEL
KNEEL: ojijiingwanabi vai
KNIFE
KNIFE: mookoimaan. -an ni
BUTCHER KNIFE: gichi-mookomaan, -an
ni
CROOKED KNIFE: waagikomaan. -an ni
LARGE KNIFE: gichi-mookomaan, -an ni
KNIFE SHEATH
KNIFE SHEATH: biinjikomaan, -an ni
KNOCK
KNOCK: knock on s.o. (as something stick- or
wood-like) baapaagaakwa'
/baapaagaakwa'w-/ vta; knock on s.t. (as
something stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door)
baapaagaakwa'an vti; knock on things (as
something stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door)
baapaagaakwa'ige vai
KNOCK DOWN: knock s.o. down
gawiwebin vta; knock s.t. down
gawiwebinan vti
KNOCK DOWN OFF: knock s.o. down off
something with foot or body diitibishkaw
vta; knock s.t. down off something with
foot or body diitibishkan vti
KNOCK DOWN OFF USING
SOMETHING: knock s.o. down effusing
something diitiba' /diitiba'w-/ vta; knock
s.t. down effusing something diitiba'an vti
KNOCK DOWN OFF WITH HANDS:
knock s.o. down off something with hands
diitibibizh /diitibibiN-/ vta; knock s.t.
down off something with hands
diitibibidoon vti2
KNOCK DOWN USING SOMETHING:
knock s.o. down using something
biniweba' /biniweba'w-/ vta; knock s.t.
down using something biniweba'an vti
KNOCK SENSELESS: knock s.o. senseless
giiwashkweganaam vta
KNOCK WILD RICE: bawa'am vai2
KNOCKER
RICE KNOCKER: rice knocker (stick for wild
rice harvesting) bawa'iganaak, -oog na
KNOLL
KNOLL: be a knoll bikwadinaa,
bikwadinaamagad vii
KNOT
KNOT: gashka'oojigan, -an ni
TIE WITH A KNOT: tie s.o. with a knot
gashka'oozh /gashka'ooN-/ vta; tie s.t.
with a knot gashka'oodoon vti2
KNOTTED
KNOTTED: be knotted gashka'oode,
gashka'oodemagad vii; gashka'oozo vai
KNOW
KNOW: know s.o. gikenim vta; know s.t.
gikendan vti; know things gikenjige vai
KNOW HOW: know how to do something
nitaa- pv4; know how to handle s.o. nagaji*
vta; know how to handle s.t. nagajitoon
vti2
KNOW HOW TO MAKE: know how to make
s.o. nitaawi' vta; know how to make s.t.
nitaawitoon vti2; know how to make
things nitaawichige vai
SEEK TO KNOW: seek to know s.o. nanda-
gikenim vta; seek to know s.t. nanda-
gikendan vti
KNOWN
KNOWN: be known gikendaagozi vai;
gikendaagwad vii
L
LACROSSE
PLAY LACROSSE: baaga'adowe vai
LACROSSE STICK
LACROSSE STICK: baaga'adowaan, -an ni
LADDER
LADDER: akwaandawaagan, -an ni
LADLE
LADLE: spoon emikwaan, -an ni
WOODEN LADLE: mitigwemikwaan, -an ni
LAKE
LAKE: zaaga'igan, -iin m
ACROSS THE LAKE: agaamingpc
AT THE LAKE: agamiing ft

lake—lay 
204
CHAIN OF LAKES: be a chain of lakes
aanikegamaa, aanikegamaamagad vii
FLOW INTO A LAKE: zaagidawaa,
zaagidawaamagad vii
GREAT LAKE: one of the Great Lakes
gichigami, -in ni
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE LAKE:
naawagaam pc
LAKE GOES OFF FROM ANOTHER:
bakegamaa, bakegamaamagad vii
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE LAKE:
agaaming/ic
OUT IN THE LAKE: naawij pc
WALK AROUND A LAKE:
giiwitaayaazhagaame vai
LAKE SUPERIOR
LAKE SUPERIOR: gichigami ni usually in
locative gichigamiing
LAME
LAME: be lame maakizi vai
LAME LEG: have a lame leg maakigaade vai
LAMP
LAMP: waazakonenjigan, -an ni
ELECTRIC LAMP: waasamoo-
waazakonenjigan, -an ni
LANCE
LANCE: zhimaagan, -an ni
LAND
LAND: aki, -in ni
ALLOT LAND: allot s.o. land mamakii* via
ALLOTMENT OF LAND: there is an allot-
ment of land mamakii'idim /mamakii'idi-/
vai
CLEAR LAND: mazhii'ige vai
HAVE LAND: odakiimi vai
SURVEY LAND: diba'akii vai
LAND
LAND: agwaa'o vai, also agwaa'am; land
(from flight) boonii vai
LANGUAGE
LANGUAGE: inwewin, -an ni
OJIBWE LANGUAGE: ojibwemowin ni;
Indian language (especially Ojibwe)
anishinaabemowin, -an ni
LAP
LAP: my lap injiingwan, -ag /-jiingwan-/ nod
LARD
LARD: gookooshi-bimide in
LAST
LAST: ishkwaaj pc
LAST AUTUMN: dagwaagong pc
LAST BORN CHILD: ishkwejaagan, -ag na
LAST FALL: dagwaagong pc
LAST NIGHT: dibikongpc
LAST SPRING: ziigwanongpc
LAST SUMMER: niibinongpc
LAST WINTER: biboonong/>.
LAST NAME
LAST NAME: ishkwenikaazowin, -an ni
HAVE A LAST NAME: ishkwenikaazo vai
LATE
LATE: wiikaapc
LATE AT NIGHT: ishpi-dibikpc; niibaa-
dibikpc; be late at night ishpi-dibikad vii
LATE SUMMER: giiwe-niibin vii
LATE WINTER: be late winter giiwe-biboon
vii
SO LATE IN THE DAY: be so late in the day
apiichi-giizhigad vii
TOO LATE: naanabem pc
LATER
LATER: baanimaapc, also baamaa;
baanimaa apii pc, also baanimaapii,
baamaapii; naagaj pc
LAUGH
LAUGH: baapi vai; ginagaapi vai; laugh at
s.o. baapi' via; laugh at s.t. baapitoon vti2
ARRIVE LAUGHING: bagamaapi vai
BURST OUT LAUGHING: baashkaapi vai
COME LAUGHING: biidaapi vai
GO AWAY LAUGHING: animaapi vai
LAUGH SECRETLY: giimoodaapi vai
LAUNCH
MOTOR LAUNCH: waasamoo-jiimaan, -an
ni
LAUNDROMAT
LAUNDROMAT: giziibiiga'igewigamig,
-oon ni
LAUNDRY
HANG UP LAUNDRY: agoojige vai
LAW
LAW: inaakonigewin, -an ni
CHANGE LAWS: aandaakonige vai
LAWYER
LAWYER: dibaakonigewinini, -wag na
LAWYER
LAWYER: lawyer (fish) mizay, -ag na
LAXATIVE
LAXATIVE: zhaabozigan, -an ni
LAY
LAY A CERTAIN WAY: lay s.o. a certain way
izhishim vta; lay s.t. a certain way
izhisidoon vti2
LAY ACROSS: lay s.o. across (as something
stick- or wood-like) aazhawaakoshim vta;
lay s.t. across (as something stick- or wood-
like) aazhawaakosidoon vti2
LAY AN EGG: boonam vai2
LAY DOWN AROUND: lay s.o. down around
giiwitaashim vta; lay s.t. down around
giiwitaasidoon vti2
LAY FACE DOWN: lay s.o. face down
animikoshim vta; lay s.t. face down
animikosidoon vti2
LAY FACE UP: lay s.o. face up aazhigijishim
vta; lay s.t. face up aazhigijisidoon vti2
LAY JOINING: lay s.o. joining something else
aanikooshim vta; lay s.t. joining some-
thing else aanikoosidoon vti2
LAY ON SIDE: lay s.o. on side opimeshim
vai; lay s.t. on side opimesidoon vti2
LAY OVER BACKWARDS: lay s.o. over
backwards aazhigijishim vta; lay s.t. over
backwards aazhigijisidoon vti2

20S
lay—left
LAY SOMETHING FOR PROTECTION:
lay something on or under s.t. for
protection apisidoon vti2
LAY SPREAD OUT: lay s.o. spread out
zhingadeshim vta; lay s.t. spread out
zhingadesidoon vti2
LAY STRAIGHT: lay s.o. straight
gwayakoshim vta; lay s.t. straight
gwayakosidoon vti2
LAYER
AS A LAYER: biitoo- pv4
LIE IN A LAYER: biitooshin vai; biitoosin
vii
LIE IN A THICK LAYER: gipagishin vai;
gipagisin vii
LIE IN A THIN LAYER: bibagishin vai;
bibagisin vii
WEAR LAYERS: wear layers (as underwear)
biitookonaye vai
LAZY
LAZY: be habitually lazy gitimishki vai; be
lazy bagandizi vai; gitimi vai
LAZYBONES
LAZYBONES: be a lazybones gitimishki vai
LEAD
LEAD: niigaanii vai; lead s.o. niigaaniwizh
/nigaaniwiN-/ vta
LEAD ALONG: lead along (as something
string-like) bimaabiigamon
/bimaabiigamo-/ vii
ROAD LEADS ALONG: lead along (as a road
or trail) bimamon /bimamo-/,
bimamoomagad vii
ROAD LEADS FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
lead from a certain place (as a road or trail)
ondadamon /ondadamo-/ vii
ROAD LEADS TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
lead to a certain place (as a road or trail)
inamon /inamo-/ vii
TRAIL LEADS ALONG: lead along (as a
road or trail) bimamon /bimamo-/,
bimamoomagad vii
TRAIL LEADS FROM A CERTAIN
PLACE: lead from a certain place (as a
road or trail) ondadamon /ondadamo-/ vii
TRAIL LEADS TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
lead to a certain place (as a road or trail)
inamon /inamo-/ vii
LEAD
LEAD: lead (metal) ashkikomaan ni
LEADER
LEADER: eshpabid na-pt; ogimaa, -g na; be a
leader ogimaawi vai
HIGHEST LEADER: gichi-ogimaa, -g na; be
the highest leader gichi-ogimaawi vai
MAKE LEADER: make s.o. leader
ogimaakaw vta
WIFE OF CHIEF OR LEADER:
ogimaakwe, -g na
WOMAN LEADER: ogimaakwe, -g na
LEADERSHIP
LEADERSHIP: ogimaawiwin, -an ni
LEADING
LEADING: niigaan pc
LEAF
LEAF: aniibiish, -an ni; aniibiishibag. -oon ni
BRIGHT LEAVES: there are bright leaves
waatebagaa, waatebagaamagad vii
GREEN LEAVES: there are green leaves
ashkibagaa, ashkibagaamagad vii
LEAVES BUD: zaagibagaa,
zaagibagaamagad vii
MANY LEAVES: there are many leaves
aniibiishikaa, aniibiishikaamagad vii
RED LEAVES: have red leaves miskobagizi
vai; there are red leaves on the trees
miskobagaa, miskobagaamagad vii
LEAF-GREEN
LEAF-GREEN: be leaf-green ashkibagong
inaande, ashkibagong inaandemagad vii;
ashkibagong inaanzo vai
LEAK
LEAK: onjigaa, onjigaamagad vii
LEAK FAST: gizhiigaa, gizhiigaamagad vii
START TO LEAK: maajigaa,
maajigaamagad vii
LEAN
LEAN AGAINST: lean against (as something
stick- or wood-like) aatwaakoshin vai;
aatwaakosin vii; lean s.o. against (as
something stick- or wood-like)
aatwaakoshim vta; lean s.t. against (as
something stick- or wood-like)
aatwaakosidoon vti2
STAND LEANING AGAINST: stand leaning
against something aatwaakogaabawi vai
LEARN
LEARN BY OBSERVATION: gikinawaabi
vai; learn by observation of s.o.
gikinawaabam vta
SEEK TO LEARN: seek to learn s.t. nanda-
gikendan vti
LEAST
IN THE LEAST: ganage pc
LEATHER
LEATHER: bashkwegin. -oon ni;
bashkweginowayaan, -an ni
LEAVE
LEAVE: maajaa vai, also ani-maajaa
LEAVE ALONE: leave s.o. alone boon!' vta;
leave s.t. alone boonitoon vti2
LEAVE BEHIND: leave s.o. behind nagazh
/nagaN-/ vta; leave s.t. behind nagadan
vti; leave (s.t.) behind for s.o. nagadamaw
vta; abandon people nagazhiwe vai
LEAVE BEHIND UNEATEN: leave s.o.
behind uneaten ishkwam vta; leave s.t.
behind uneaten ishkwandan vti
LEECH
LEECH: ozagaskwaajime, -g na, also
zagaskwaajime
LEECH LAKE
LEECH LAKE: Leech Lake Reservation Gaa-
zagaskwaajimekaag place
LEFT
LEFT HAND: left hand usually possessed
namanjinik, -an ni

left alone—lie 
206
LEFT ALONE
LEFT ALONE: be left alone boonichigaade,
boonichigaademagad vii; boonichigaazo
vai
LEFT-HANDED
LEFT-HANDED: be left-handed namanjii
vai
LEFTOVERS
LEFTOVERS: leftover food ishkwanjigan, -an
ni
LEAVE LEFTOVERS: ishkwanjige vai
LEG
LEG: my leg nikaad. -an /-kaad-/ nid
ACHE IN LEG: have an ache in one's leg
dewigaade vai
BREAK LEG: break one's leg bookogaade vai
BROKEN LEG: have a broken leg
bookogaade vai
FALL AND BREAK LEG: fall and break
one's leg bookogaadeshin vai
LAME LEG: have a lame leg maakigaade vai
NUMB LEG: have a numb leg niboowigaade
vai
SIT WITH LEGS CROSSED:
aazhoogaadebi vai
SORE LEG: have a sore leg gaagiijigaade vai
SPRAIN LEG: sprain one's leg zegigaadeshin
vai
STIFF LEG: have a stiff leg jiibadaakogaade
vai; jiibajigaade vai
LEG GARTER
LEG GARTER: gashkidaasebizon, -an ni
WEAR LEG GARTERS: gashkidaasebizo vai
LEGEND
LEGEND: aadizookaan, -ag na
CHARACTER OF A LEGEND OR MYTH:
aadizookaan, -ag na
TELL A LEGEND: aadizooke vai; tell a
legend to s.o. aadizookaw vta
LEGGING
LEGGING: aas, -an ni
LEND
LEND: lend (s.t.) to s.o. awi' vta; lend (s.t.) to
people awi'iwe vai
LENGTH
CERTAIN LENGTH: ako- pv3; be a certain
length akoozi vai; akwaa, akwaamagad
vii; be a certain length (as something min-
eral) akwaabikad vii; akwaabikizi vai; be
a certain length (as something sheet-like)
akwegad vii; akwegizi vai; be a certain
length (as something stick- or wood-like)
akwaakozi vai; akwaakwad vii; be a
certain length (as something string-like)
akwaabiigad vii; akwaabiigizi vai
MAKE A CERTAIN LENGTH: make s.o. a
certain length akoo' vta; make s.t. a certain
length akootoon vti2
LESS AND LESS
LESS AND LESS: eshkam pc
LET GO
LET GO: be let go bagidinigaade,
bagidinigaademagad vii; bagidinigaazo
vai; let s.o. go bagidin vta; let s.t. go
bagidinan vti; let things go bagidinige vai
LET IT BE
LET IT BE: maanoo pc
LET OUT
LET OUT: they are let out together (as from
school or a meeting) zaagidinidiwag
/zaagidinidi-/ vai
LET'S GO
LET'S GO: let's go! ambepc
LETTER
LETTER: mazina'igan. -an ni; maajiibii'igan,
-an ni
LETTER OF THE ALPHABET:
ozhibii'igan, -an ni
SEND A LETTER HERE: biijibii'ige vai
WRITE A LETTER: maajiibii'ige vai; write a
letter to s.o. maajiibii'amaw vta
LEVEL
LEVEL GROUND: be level ground
gwayakwakamigaa,
gwayakwakamigaamagad vii
LEVEL SURFACE: be a level surface desaa,
desaamagad vii
LIAR
LIAR: be a habitual liar gagiinawishki vai
LIBRARY
LIBRARY: agindaasoowigamig, -oon ni
LICE
LOOK FOR LICE: nandookome vai
LICENSE
LICENSE: mazina'igaans, -an ni
DRIVER'S LICENSE: odaabii'iwe-
mazina'igaans, -an ni
MARRIAGE LICENSE: aapiji-wiidige-
mazina'igan, -an ni
RICING LICENSE: manoominike-
mazina'igaans, -an in
LICK
LICK: lick s.o. nooskwaada'
/nooskwaada'w-/ vta; lick s.t.
nooskwaada'an vti
LID
POT LID: gibaabowe'igan, -an ni
PUT A LID ON: put a lid on s.o. gibaabowe'
/gibaabowe'w-/ vta; put a lid on s.t.
gibaabowe'an vti; put a lid on things
gibaabowe'ige vai
LIE
LIE A CERTAIN WAY: izhishin vai; izhisin
vii
LIE ACROSS: lie across (as something stick-
or wood-like) aazhawaakoshin vai;
aazhawaakosin vii
LIE ALONG: lie along (as something stick- or
wood-like) bimaakoshin vai; bimaakosin
vii
LIE AS PADDING: apishin vai; apisin vii
LIE AT THE END: ishkweshin vai;
ishkwesin vii
LIE COMFORTABLY: minoshin vai
LIE CORRECTLY: gwayakoshin vai;
gwayakosin vii

207
lie—light
LIE DOWN: gawishimo vai; zhingishin vai
LIE FACE DOWN: animikoshin vai;
animikosin mi
LIE FACE UP: aazhigijishin vai; aazhigijisin
vii
LIE FACING A CERTAIN WAY:
inaasamishin vai
LIE FIRMLY FIXED: lie firmly fixed in place
zoongishin vai; zoongisin vii
LIE HIGH UP: ishpishin vai; ishpisin vii
LIE IN A CERTAIN PLACE: dazhishin vai;
dazhisin vii
LIE IN A GOOD POSITION: minoshin vai;
minosin vii
LIE IN A LAYER: biitooshin vai; biitoosin
vii
LIE IN A PILE: okoshin vai; okosin vii
LIE IN A THICK LAYER: gipagishin vai;
gipagisin vii
LIE IN A THIN LAYER: bibagishin vai;
bibagisin vii
LIE IN A TIGHT PLACE: zhegoshin vai;
zhegosin vii
LIE IN WAIT: lie in wait for game akandoo
vai; lie in wait for s.o. akamaw vta
LIE IN WARMTH: giizhooshin vai
LIE JOINING: lie joining something else
aanikooshiin vai; aanikoosin vii
LIE LIMP: neshangishin vai; neshangisin vii
LIE ON: lie on something apishimo vai
LIE ON SIDE: opimesin vii; lie on one's side
opimeshin vai
LIE OUT OF THE WAY: ikoshin vai; ikosin
vii
LIE PROTECTIVELY ON: lie protectively on
s.o. badagoshkaw vta; lie protectively on
s.t. badagoshkan vti
LIE SIDE BY SIDE IN A ROW: they lie side
by side in a row niibidesinoon /niibidesin-/
vii; they lie side by side in a row
niibideshiinoog /niibideshin-/ vai
LIE SLACK: neshangisin vii
LIE SPREAD OUT: zhingadeshin vai;
zhingadesin vii
LIE STICKING OUT: lie sticking out (as
something stick- or wood-like)
zaagaakoshin vai; zaagaakosin vii
LIE STILL: bizaanishin vai
LIE STRAIGHT: gwayakoshin vai;
gwayakosin vii
LIE TO A CERTAIN DEPTH: apiichishin
vai; apiichisin vii
LIE TOUCHING: daangishin vai; daangisin
vii
LIE UNCOMFORTABLY: maazhishin vai
LIE UNCOVERED: baakishin vai; baakisin
vii; michishin vai; michisin vii
LIE WELL IN PLACE: minosin vii
LIE WITH FACE COVERED: lie with one's
face covered badagwiingweshin vai
LIE WITH HEAD A CERTAIN WAY: lie
with one's head a certain way inikweshin
vai
LIE WITH HEAD ON: lie with head on
something apikweshimo vai
LIE WITH REAR END STICKING OUT: lie
with one's rear end sticking out
jaangidiyeshin vai
TURN LYING IN PLACE: gwekishin vai;
gwekisin vii
LIE
LIE: giiwanimo vai; lie to s.o. giiwanim vta
LIFE
CHANGE LIFE: change one's life aanji-
bimaadizi vai
LEAD A BAD LIFE: maazhi-bimaadizi vai
LEAD A GOOD LIFE: mino-bimaadizi vai;
mino-izhiwebizi vai; minwaadizi vai
LEAD AN EVIL LIFE: maji-izhiwebizi vai
LIVE A PROPER LIFE: gwayako-bimaadizi
vai
SAVE LIFE: save the life of s.o. bimaaji' vta
LIFT
LIFT: lift s.o. ombin vta; lift s.o. (as with
something string-like) ombaabiigin vta; lift
s.t. ombinan vti; lift s.t. (as with something
string-like) ombaabiiginan vti; lift (s.t.) for
s.o. ombinamaw vta
LIFT A PACK: lift a pack to one's back
ombiwane vai
LIFT AND CARRY: lift and carry s.o.
ombiwizh /ombiwiN-/ vta; lift and carry
s.t. ombiwidoon vti2
LIFT ARM: lift one's arm ombinikeni vai
LIFT ON BACK: lift s.o. on one's back
omboom vta; lift s.t. on one's back
omboondan vti
STRAIN IN LIFTING: strain self in lifting
jakiiwii vai
LIGHT
LIGHT: light s.o. zakiz /zakizw-/ vta; light
s.o. (e.g., a pipe) zaka* /zaka'w-/ vta; light
s.t. zaka'an vti; zakizan vti; light (s.t.) for
s.o. zaka'amaw vta; light things zakizige
vai
COME WITH A LIGHT:
biidaazakwanenjige vai
DRIVE AWAY WITH A LIGHT:
animaazakonenjigebizo vai
DRIVE HERE WITH A LIGHT:
biidaazakonebizo vai
GIVE OFF LIGHT: waazakone,
waazakonemagad vii
GO ALONG WITH A LIGHT:
bimaazakonenjige vai
GO AWAY WITH A LIGHT:
animaazakonenjige vai
GO TO A CERTAIN PLACE WITH
LIGHT: inaazakonenjige vai
LIGHT A PIPE: zaka'ipwaagane vai
LIGHT AT DAWN: be light at dawn
waaseyaaban vii
LIGHT BY STRIKING: light s.t. by striking
biskanesidoon vti2
TURN ON A LIGHT: turn s.t. on for a light
waazakonebidoon vti2
LIGHT
LIGHT: be light in weight naangan vii;
naangizi vai

light—lock 
208
CARRY A LIGHT PACK: naangiwane vai
CONSIDER LIGHT: consider s.o. light in
weight naangenim vta; consider s.t. light
in weight naangendan vti
LIGHT POLE
LIGHT POLE: waazakonenjiganaatig, -oon
ni
LIGHTER
LIGHTER: ishkodekaan, -an ni; zaka'igan,
-an ni
LIGHTNING
LIGHTNING: inaabiwin ni; waasamowin ni;
there is a flash of lightning waasese,
waasesemagad vii; there is lightning
wawaasese, wawaasesemagad vii
STRUCK BY LIGHTNING: be struck by
lightning baagijigaade.
baagijigaademagad vii; baagijigaazo vai
LIKE
LIKE: like s.o. minwenim vta; like s.t.
minwendan vti
LIKE
LIKE: naasaab pc
JUST LIKE: dibishkoopc, indigo^, also
nindigo*
LIKEABLE
LIKEABLE: be likeable minwendaagozi vai;
minwendaagwad vii
LIMBER
LIMBER: be limber neshangaa,
neshangaamagad vii; neshangizi vai
LIMP
LIE LIMP: neshangishin vai; neshangisin vii
LINE
FISH WITH A HOOK AND LINE:
wewebanaabii vai
HAVE A LINE: beshaa, beshaamagad vii;
beshizi vai
HOOK AND LINE: migiskaneyaab, -iin ni
LING
LING: mizayj -ag na
LINIMENT
LINIMENT: gwendaaseg ni-pt
LION
LION: mishibizhii, -g na
LIP
CHAPPED LIPS: have chapped lips
gagiipidoon vai
LIPSTICK
LIPSTICK: miskodoonechigan, -an ni
LIQUOR
LIQUOR: ishkodewaaboo ni
LISTEN
LISTEN: bizindam vai2; listen to s.o.
bizindaw vta; listen to s.t. bizindan vti
LISTEN FOR: listen for s.o. nandotaw vta;
listen for s.t. nandotan vti; listen for
something nandotam vai2
LITTLE
ALITTLE:bangiipc
JUST A LITTLE: bangiishenh pc
THINK LITTLE OF: think little of s.o.
agaasenim vta; think little of s.t.
agaasendan vti
LITTLE BIT
LITTLE BIT: be a little bit bangiiwagad vii;
bangiiwagizi vai
A LITTLE BIT: bangii pc; eniwek pc
A LITTLE BIT EACH: bebangii pc
A VERY LITTLE BIT: bangiishenh pc
VERY LITTLE BIT: be a very little bit
bangiishenhwagad vii; bangiishenhwagizi
vai
LITTLE FINGER
LITTLE FINGER: ishkweninj, -iin ni
LITTLE WHILE
A LITTLE WHILE: ajina pc
A LITTLE WHILE AGO: naanoomaya pc
IN A LITTLE WHILE: wayiiba pc
LIVE
LIVE: bimaadizi vai
LIVE A PROPER LIFE: gwayako-bimaadizi
vai
LIVE ABOUT: babaamaadizi vai
LIVE ALONE: nazhikewige vai
LIVE IN: live in s.t. abiitan vti
LIVE IN A CERTAIN PLACE: danakii vai;
daa vai
LIVE IN A WIGWAM: wiigiwaamige vai
LIVE IN THE FIRST HOUSE: nitamige vai
LIVE IN THE LAST HOUSE: ishkwege vai
LIVE ON THE END OF TOWN: live at the
end of town ishkwege vai
LIVE SOMEWHERE ELSE: aandakii vai
LIVE THE INDIAN WAY: anishinaabe-
bimaadizi vai
LIVE WELL: mino-bimaadizi vai
LIVER
LIVER: my liver nikon, -an /-kon-/ nid
LIVING
MAKE A LIVING A CERTAIN WAY: ondizi
vai
LIVING ROOM
LIVING ROOM: abiwin, -an ni; abiiwigamig,
-oon ni
LOAD
LOAD: load s.o. (e.g., a pipe) onashkina' vta;
load s.t. (e.g., a gun) onashkinadoon vti2
LOAD CARGO: boozitaaso vai; load s.t. as
cargo boozitoon vti2; load (s.t.) with cargo
for s.o. boozitaw vta
PACK TOO MUCH OF A LOAD:
onzaamiwane vai
LOADED
LOADED: be loaded onashkinade,
onashkinademagad vii
LOCK
LOCK: gashkaabika'igan, -an ni; lock s.o.
gashkaabika* /gashkaabika'w-/ vta; lock
s.t. gashkaabika'an vti; lock s.t. (as or as
with something stick- or wood-like
gashkaakonan vti; lock (s.t.) for s.o. (as or
as with something stick- or wood-like)
gashkaakwa'amaw vta; lock things
gashkaabika'ige vai

209 
locked—look for
LOCKED
LOCKED: be locked gashkaabika'igaade,
gashkaabika'igaademagad vii;
gashkaabika'igaazo vai
LODGE
LODGE: wiigiwaam, -an ni
BARK LODGE: wanagekogamig, -oon ni
BEAVER LODGE: amikwiish, -an m
BIRCH BARK LODGE: wiigwaasigamig,
-oon ni
BUILD A LODGE: ozhige vai
DOMED LODGE: waaginogaan, -an ni
EARTH LODGE: akiiwe-wiigiwaam, -an ni
HOUSE-LIKE LODGE: gakaaga'ogaan, -an
ni
LODGE OF GRASS: mashkosiigaan, -an ni
LODGE WITH PEAKED ROOF:
nisawa'ogaan, -an m
LODGE WITH POINTED TOP:
bajiishka'ogaan;, -an ni
LONG LODGE: ginoondawaan, -an ni; long
lodge with doors at both ends
zhaaboondawaan, -an m
MIDE LODGE: midewigaan, -an ni
OTHER SIDE OF THE LODGE:
agaamindesi pc; on the other side of the
lodge agaamindesing pc
SAP-BOILING LODGE:
iskigamizigewigamig, -oon ni
STORAGE LODGE: asanjigoowigamig,
-oon ni
SWEAT LODGE: madoodiswan, -an ni
LODGE POLE
LODGE POLE: abanzh, -iin ni
LOG CABIN
LOG CABIN: mitigo-waakaa'igan, -an ni
LOGGER
LOGGER: giishka'aakwewinini, -wag na
LONELY
LONELY: be lonely gashkendam vai2
LONG
LONG: be long ginoozi vai; ginwaa,
ginwaamagad vii; they are long plural
gagaanwaawan /gagaanwaa-/,
gagaanwaamagadoon vii; be long (as
something mineral) ginwaabikad vii;
ginwaabikizi vai; be long (as something
sheet-like) ginwegad vii; ginwegizi vai; be
long (as something stick- or wood-like)
ginwaakozi vai; ginwaakwad vii; be long
(as something string-like) ginwaabiigad
vii; ginwaabiigizi vai
AS LONG AS: nko-pv3
CUT LONG: cut s.o. long (as something
string-like) ginwaabiigizh
/ginwaabiigizhw-/ vta; cut s.t. long (as
something string-like) ginwaabiigizhan vti
HAVE LONG SLEEVES: gagaanonagweyaa,
gagaanonagweyaamagad vii
LONG BOAT: be a long boat ginoonagad vii
LONG HAIR: have long hair
gagaanwaanikwe vai
MAKE LONG: make s.o. long ginoo' vta;
make s.t. long ginwaatoon vti2; make s.o.
long (as something sheet-like) ginwegi*
vta; make s.t. long (as something sheet-
like) ginwegitoon vti2
MAKE SO LONG: make s.o. so long akoo'
vta; make s.t. so long akootoon vti2
SO LONG: be so long akoozi vai; akwaa,
akwaamagad vii; be so long (as something
mineral) akwaabikad vii; akwaabikizi vai;
be so long (as something sheet-like)
akwegad vii; akwegizi vai; be so long (as
something string-like) akwaabiigad vii;
akwaabiigizi vai
LONG TIME
A LONG TIME: gabe-ayi'ii pc, also gabeyi'ii
A LONG TIME AGO: mewinzha pc
FOR A LONG TIME: ginwenzh pc
LOOK
HAVE A CERTAIN LOOK: izhinaagozi vai;
izhinaagwad vii
LOOK GOOD: minwaabaminaagozi vai;
minwaabaminaagwad vii
LOOK NEW: oshkiinaagozi vai;
oshkiinaagwad vii
LOOK OLD: gichi-aya'aawinaagozi vai
LOOK POOR: gidimaaginaagozi vai;
gidimaaginaagwad vii
LOOK SICK: aakoziiwinaagozi vai
LOOK WEAK: niinaminaagozi vai;
niinaminaagwad vii
LOOK YOUNG: oshkiinaagozi vai
MAKE LOOK A CERTAIN WAY: make s.o.
look a certain way izhinaago* vta; make s.t.
look a certain way izhinaagotoon vti2
LOOK
LOOK: ganawaabi vai; look! inashke pc, also
nashke
LIKE THE LOOK: like the look of s.o.
minwaabam ma; like the look of s.t.
minwaabandan vti
LOOK AT: look at s.o. ganawaabam vta; look
at s.t. ganawaabandan vti; look at things
ganawaabanjige vai; they look at each
other ganawaabandiwag /ganawaabandi-/
vai
LOOK MALEVOLENTLY: look malevolently
out of corner of one's eye at s.o.
negwaabam vta
LOOK OUT FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onzaabi vai
LOOK OVER: look s.o. over dibaabam vta;
look s.t. over dibaabandan vti
LOOK THROUGH A WINDOW: dapaabi
vai; look through a window at s.o.
dapaabam vta; look through a window at
s.t. dapaabandan vti
LOOK TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inaabi vai
TURN AND LOOK BACK: aabanaabi vai;
turn and look back at s.o. aabanaabam
vta; turn and look back at s.t.
aabanaabandan vti
LOOK FOR
LOOK FOR: nanda- pv4; look for s.o.
nandawaabam vta; nandone'
/nandone'w-/ vta; look for s.t.

look for—macaroni 
210
nandawaabandan vti; nandone'an vti;
look for things nandawaabanjige vai;
nandone'ige vai
LOOK FOR A DRINK: nandoobii vai
LOOK FOR HORSES: nandawisimwe vai
LOOK FOR LICE: nandookome vai
LOOK FOR TRACKS: nandokawechige vai;
look for s.o.'s tracks nandokawe' vta
LOOK FOR WORK: nanda-anokii vai
LOOK OUT
LOOK OUT: look out! naasanaa/v
LOOKED
LOOKED AT: be looked at
ganawaabanjigaade,
ganawaabanjigaademagad vii;
ganawaabanjigaazo vai
LOOKED FOR
LOOKED FOR: be looked for
nandone'igaade, nandone'igaademagad
vii: nandone'igaazo vai
LOOM
BEAD LOOM: mazinaabidoo'iganaatig,
-oon ni
BEAD ON A LOOM: bead s.t. on a loom
mazinaabidoo'an vti; bead things on a
loom mazinaabidoo'ige vai
LOON
LOON: maang, -wag na
LOOSE
COME LOOSE: come loose (as something
string-like) gidiskaabiigishkaa,
gidiskaabiigishkaamagad vii
LOOSELY
FIT LOOSELY: fit s.o. loosely geshawishkaw
vta; fit s.t. loosely geshawishkan vti
PUT LOOSELY: put s.o. loosely
geshawishim vta; put s.t. loosely
geshawisidoon vti2
LOSE
LOSE: lose s.o. wani' vta; lose s.t. wanitoon
vti2
LOSE HOPE: lose hope in s.o. banaadenim
vta; lose hope in s.t. banaadendan vti
LOST
LOST: be lost wanishin vai; wanisin vii
GET LOST: wanishin vai; wanisin vii
GET LOST DRIVING: wanibizo vai
LOTION
HAND LOTION: noomininjiiwin, -an ni
PUT LOTION ON HAND: put lotion on
one's hand noomininjii vai
LOUD
LOUD: be loud ombiigizi vai; be loud (in op-
eration) ombiigwewe vai; ombiigwewe,
ombiigwewemagad vii
SPEAK LOUD: gizhiiwe vai
LOUSE
LOUSE: ikwa, -g na
LOVE
LOVE: love s.o. zaagi* vta; love s.t. zaagitoon
vti2; they love each other zaagi'idiwag
/zaagi'idi-/ vai
LOVED
LOVED: be loved zaagichigaade,
zaagichigaademagad vii; zaagichigaazo
vai
LOW
LOW: dabazhish pc; be low dabasaa,
dabasaamagad vii
HANG LOW: dabasagoode,
dabasagoodemagad vii; dabasagoojin
vai; hang s.o. low dabasagoozh
/dabasagooN-/ vta; hang s.t. low
dabasagoodoon vti2
LOW GROUND: be low ground
dabasakamigaa. dabasakamigaamagad
vii
LOW REGARD
HELD IN LOW REGARD: be held in low
regard dabasendaagozi vai;
dabasendaagwad vii
HOLD IN LOW REGARD: hold s.o. in low
regard dabasenim vta; hold s.t. in low
regard dabasendan vti
LUCKY
LUCKY: be lucky debizi vai
LUMBER CAMP
LUMBER CAMP: giishka'aakwewigamig,
-oon ni
LUMBERJACK
LUMBERJACK: giishka'aakwewinini, -wag
na
LUNCH
EAT LUNCH: eat lunch (noon meal)
naawakwe-wiisini vai; eat s.t. for lunch
(noon meal) naawakwe-miijin vti3
LUNCH TAKEN ALONG: nawapwaan, -an
ni
MAKE A LUNCH TO TAKE ALONG:
nawapwaanike vai
TAKE A LUNCH ALONG: nawapo vai
TAKE A LUNCH BREAK: nawajii vai
LUNG
LUNG: my lung nipan, -an /-pan-/ nid
LYMPH NODE
LYMPH NODE: my gland (lymph node)
niniishk, -wag /-niishkw-/ nad
LYNX
LYNX: bizhiw, -ag na
LYNX HIDE
LYNX HIDE: bizhiwayaan, -ag na
M
MACARONI
MACARONI: macaroni plural onagizhiinsan
/onagizhiins-/ ni

2 1 1 
mad—mariah
MAD
MAD: be mad nishkaadizi vai; be mad at s.o.
nishkenim via
ARRIVE MAD: bagamigidaazo vai
FEEL MAD: nishkendam vai2
GO AWAY MAD: animigidaazo vai
GO HOME MAD: giiwegidaazo vai
GO OFF MAD: maajiigidaazo vai
MAKE MAD: make s.o. mad nishki' vta;
speak and make s.o. mad nishkim vta;
make people mad nishkitaa vai; they make
each other mad nishki'idiwag /nishki'idi-/
vai
MAKE MAD FOR A CERTAIN REASON:
make s.o. mad for a certain reason
onjinawe* vta
MADE
MADE: be made ozhichigaade,
ozhichigaademagad vii; ozhichigaazo vai
MADE A CERTAIN WAY: be made a certain
way izhichigaade, izhichigaademagad vii;
izhichigaazo vai
MAGGOT
MAGGOT: ookwe, -g na
MAGNET
MAGNET: manidoo-biiwaabik ni
MAIL
GO GET MAIL: naadazina'igane vai
MAIL TRUCK
MAIL TRUCK: mazina'iganiiwidaabaan, -ag
na
MAINTENANCE ENGINEER
MAINTENANCE ENGINEER:
boodawewinini, -wag na
MAKE
MAKE: make s.o. ozhi' vta; make s.t.
ozhitoon vti2; make (s.t.) for s.o.
ozhitamaw vta; ozhitaw vta; make things
ozhichige vai
FINISH MAKING: finish making s.t.
giizhitoon vti2
HURRY MAKING: hurry making s.o.
wewiibi' vta; hurry making s.t.
wewiibitoon vti
KNOW HOW TO MAKE: know how to make
s.o. nitaawi* vta; know how to make s.t.
nitaawitoon vti2; know how to make
things nitaawichige vai
MAKE A BED: ozisijige vai, also ozhisijige
MAKE A CERTAIN WAY: make s.t. a certain
way izhitoon vti2
MAKE BADLY: make things badly
mamaazhii vai
MAKE DO: make s.o. do something izhi' vta
MAKE NICE: make s.o. nice onizhishi' vta;
make s.t. nice onizhishitoon vti2
MAKE OVER: make s.o. over aanji' vta; make
s.t. over aanjitoon vti2
MAKE SKILFULLY: make s.o. skilfully
wawiinge' vta; make s.t. skilfully
wawiingetoon vti2
MAKE WELL: make s.o. well onizhishi' vta;
make s.t. well onizhishitoon vti2
START TO MAKE: start to make s.o. maaji'
vta; start to make s.t. maajitoon vti2
MAKEUP
MAKE UP: make s.o. up wawezhi' vta; make
up oneself wawezhi'o vai
MALE
MALE: naabe- pv4
MALLARD
MALLARD: ininishib, -ag na
MAN
MAN: inini, -wag na; be a man ininiiwi vai
DRESSED-UP MAN: zazegaa-inini, -wag na
FELLOW MAN: my fellow man niijiinini nad
OLD MAN: akiwenzii, -yag na
UNMARRIED MAN: moozhaabe. -g na
YOUNG MAN: oshki-inini, -wag na;
oshkinawe, -g na; be a young man
oshkinawewi vai
MANAGE
MANAGE: manage s.o. gashki' vta; manage
s.t. gashkitoon vti2
UNABLE TO MANAGE: be unable to
manage s.o. bwaanawi* vta; be unable to
manage s.t. bwaanawitoon vti2
MANITOU
MANITOU: manidoo, -g na; be a manitou
manidoowi vai
MANUFACTURE
MANUFACTURE: anokaajigan, -an ni
MANY
MANY: niibowa pc, also niibiwa*; they are
many baatayiinadoon /baatayiinad-/ vii;
baatayiinowag /baatayiino-/ vai, also
baatayiini-/; niibowagadoon
/niibowagad-/ vii; niibowagiziwag
Miibowagizi-/ vai
HAVE MANY: have many of s.o. baatayiino'
vta; have many of s.t. baatayiinatoon vti2
HOW MANY: how many? aaniin minikpc
SO MANY: minikpc
MAP
MAP: akii-mazina'igan, -an ni
MAPLE
MAPLE: aninaatig, -oog na, also ininaatig
MAPLE SAP
MAPLE SAP: wiishkobaaboo ni;
ziinzibaakwadwaaboo ni
MAPLE SUGAR
MAPLE SUGAR: ziinzibaakwad ni;
anishinaabe-ziinzibaakwad ni
GRANULATED MAPLE SUGAR: nase'igan
ni
MAPLE TAFFY
MAPLE TAFFY: bigiwizigan ni
MARBLE
MARBLE: nemaab, -iin ni
MARCH
MARCH: onaabani-giizis na
MARIAH
MARIAH: mizay, -ag na

mark—meeting
212
MARK
MARK: mark s.o. gikinawaaji' vta; mark s.t.
gikinawaajitoon vti2; mark things
gikinawaajichige vai
LEAVE A MARK: ezhishin vai; ezhisin vii
MARK WITH A STRIPE: mark s.o. with a
stripe beshibii' /beshibii'w-/ vta; mark s.t.
with a stripe beshibii'an vti; mark things
with a stripe beshibii'ige vai
MARRIAGE LICENSE
MARRIAGE LICENSE: aapiji-wiidige-
mazina'igan, -an ni
MARRIED
MARRIED: be legally married aapiji-wiidige
vai; be married wiidige vai; be married to
s.o. wiidigem vta; they are married to each
other wiidigendiwag /wiidigendi-/ vai
MARROW
EXTRACT MARROW: extract marrow from
bones zhigwaajige vai
TOOL FOR EXTRACTING MARROW: tool
for extracting marrow from bones
zhigwaajiganaak, -oon ni
MARRY
MARRY: wiidige vai; marry s.o. wiidigem
vta; they marry each other wiidigendiwag
/wiidigendi-/ vai
MARTEN
MARTEN: waabizheshi, -wag na
MARTEN HIDE
MARTEN HIDE: waabizheshiwayaan, -ag
na
MARTIN
MARTIN: zhaashaawanibiisens, -ag na
MASSAGE
MASSAGE: massage s.o. with something
zinigobizh /zinigobiN-/ vta; massage s.t.
with something zinigobidoon vti2
MASTER
MASTER: be the master of s.t. dibendan vti;
be the master to s.o. dibenim vta; be one's
own master dibenindizo vai
MAT
CATTAIL MAT: apakweshkway, -ag na
MAT ON BOTTOM OF A CANOE: mat on
bottom of canoe apishkaamon, -an ni
PROTECTIVE MAT: apisijigan, -an ni
WOVEN MAT: anaakan, -an ni
MATCH
MATCH: ishkodens, -an ni
MATTRESS
MATTRESS: apishimon, -an ni
MAY
MAY: waabigwanii-giizis na; zaagibagaa-
giizis na
MAYBE
MAYBE: ganabaj pc; iidog pc; maagizhaa pc,
also maazhaa
OR MAYBE: gemaapc, also gemaa gaye
MAYFLY
MAYFLY: omiimiisi. -wag na
ME
ME: niin pr first person singular person pronoun
MEADOW
BY A MEADOW: jiigashkosiw pc
MIDDLE OF A MEADOW: in the middle of
a meadow naawashkosiw pc
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
MEADOW: agaamashkosiw pr
MEAN
MEAN: be mean gagwaanisagizi vai; be mean
to s.o. inigaa' vta
MEANS
BY ANY MEANS: ganage pc
MEASLES
HAVE MEASLES: miskwazhe vai
MEASURE
MEASURE: measure s.o. (as with something
string-like) dibaabiigin vta; measure s.t.
(as with something string-like)
dibaabiiginan vti; measure things diba'ige
vai
MEASURING STICK
MEASURING STICK FOR TIMBER:
diba'aatigwaan, -an ni
MEAT
MEAT: wiiyaas ni; my meat (of the body)
niiyaas /-iiyaas-/ nid
CUT MEAT INTO STRIPS: cut meat into
strips for preservation baanizhaawe vai
DEER MEAT: waawaashkeshiwi-wiiyaas ni
FIRE-CURED MEAT OR FISH:
abwewasigan, -an ni
RAW MEAT: be raw (as meat) ashkin vii;
ashkini vai
MEAT MARKET
MEAT MARKET: wiiyaas-adaawewigamig,
-oon ni
MECHANIC
MECHANIC: odaabaanikewinini, -wag na
MEDICINE
MEDICINE: mashkiki, -wan ni; medicine for
burning nookwezigan, -an ni
BURN AS MEDICINE: burn s.t. as medicine
nookwezan vti; burn things as medicine
nookwezige vai
GATHER MEDICINE: manashkikiiwe vai
LIQUID MEDICINE: mashkikiwaaboo, -n
ni
MAKE MEDICINE: mashkikiike vai
MEDICINE DANCE
MEDICINE DANCE: midewiwin ni
MEEK
MEEK: be meek nookaadizi vai
MEET
MEET: meet s.o. nakweshkaw vta; meet s.o.
(while going somewhere) nagishkaw vta;
meet s.t. (while going somewhere)
nagishkan vti; they meet each other
nagishkodaadiwag /nagishkodaadi-/ vai;
nakweshkodaadiwag /nakweshkodaadW
vai
MEETING
COUNCIL MEETING: they have a council
meeting zagaswe'idiwag /zagaswe'idi-/
vai

213
meeting—mind
HAVE A MEETING: they have a meeting
maawanji'idiwag /maawanji'idi-/ vai
MELT
MELT: ningide, ningidemagad mi; ningizo
vai; melt s.o. ningiz /ningizw-/ vta; melt
s.t. ningizan vti
MEMBER
MEMBER: be a member dibendaagozi vai
INITIATED MEMBER: be an initiated
member dibenjigaazo vai
MENOMINEE
MENOMINEE: omanoominii, -g na
MENSES
SECLUDED AT FIRST MENSES: be
secluded at first menses bakaanige vai
MENTAL HOSPITAL
MENTAL HOSPITAL:
giiwanaadiziiwigamig, -oon ni
MENTION
MENTION: mention s.o. waawiinzh
/waawiinN-/ vta; mention s.o. come to
one's mind mikom vta; mention s.t. come
to one's mind mikondan vti; mention the
name of s.o. wiinzh /wiinN-/ vta; mention
the name of s.t. wiindan vti
MERCIFUL
MERCIFUL: be merciful zhawenjige vai
MERRY
DRINK AND BE MERRY: minobii vai
MESS
MAKE A MESS: ombwewebinige vai
MESSENGER
CEREMONIAL MESSENGER:
oshkaabewis, -ag na
MESSY
MESSY HAIR: have messy hair niiskindibe
vai
METAL
METAL: metal biiwaabik, -oon ni
ON METAL: on something mineral (e.g.,
metal, glass, rock) agidaabikpc, also
ogidaabik*, wagidaabik
PIECE OF METAL: bookwaabik, -oon ni
METIS
METIS: Metis wiisaakodewinini, -wag na
METIS WOMAN
METIS WOMAN: wiisaakodewikwe, -g na
MID-SUMMER
AFTER MID-SUMMER: be after mid-
summer giiwe-niibin vii
MID-WINTER
AFTER MID-WINTER: be after mid-winter
giiwe-biboon vii
MIDDLE
IN THE MIDDLE: in the middle of naawi-
pn; in the middle of it naawayi'ii pc
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE FLOOR:
naawisag pc
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE LAKE:
naawagaam pc
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE ROAD: in the
middle of title road or trail naawikana^c
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE TRAIL: in the
middle of the road or trail naawikanapt
MIDDLE OF A BOAT: in the middle of a
boat naawoonag pc
MIDDLE OF A MEADOW: in the middle of
a meadow naawashkosiw pc
MIDDLE OF THE BACK: in the middle of
the back naawaawigan pc
MIDDLE OF THE CHEST: in the middle of
the chest naawaakigan pc
MIDDLE OF THE FOREHEAD: in the
middle of the forehead naawigatig pc
MIDDLE OF THE WOODS: in the middle of
the woods naawaakwaap£
MIDDLE FINGER
MIDDLE FINGER: naawininj, -iin ni
MIDDLING
MIDDLING: eniwekpc
MIDDLING DEGREE: to a middling degree
gomaapc
MIDE DRUM
MIDE DRUM: mitigwakik, -oog na
MIDE LODGE
MIDE LODGE: midewigaan, -an ni
MIDE LODGE FRAME
MIDE LODGE FRAME: midewigaanaak,
-oon ni
MIDE SHELL
MIDE SHELL: miigis, -ag na
MIDEWIWIN
MIDEWIWIN: midewiwin ni
JOIN THE MIDEWIWIN: midewi vai
MIDNIGHT
MIDNIGHT: be midnight aabitaa-dibikad vii
MIGHT
MIGHT: might modal daa- pvl
MILD
MILD: be mild nookaadad vii; nookaadizi
vai
MILD WEATHER: be mild weather
aabawaa, aabawaamagad vii
MILE
CERTAIN NUMBER OF MILES: a certain
number of miles daso-diba'igan pc
MILK
MILK: doodooshaaboo ni; milk cows
ziininiwe vai; milk s.o. ziinin vta
MILL
MILL: btisiboojigan, -an ni
SAW MILL: daashkiboojigan, -ag na
MILLE LACS
MILLE LACS: Mille Lacs Reservation Misi-
zaaga'iganiing place
MIND
CHANGE MIND: change one's mind
aanizhiitam vai2
COME TO MIND: mikwendaagozi vai;
mikwendaagwad vii; have things come to
one's mind mikwendam vai2
HAVE MIND MADE UP: have one's mind
made up giizhendam vai2
HAVE ON MIND: have something on one's
mind biingeyendam vai2

mind—moccasin 
214
KEEP IN MIND: keep s.o. in one's mind
minjimenim vta; keep s.t. in one's mind
minjimendan mi
OF A CERTAIN MIND: be of a certain mind
inendam vai2
RELEASE FROM MIND: release s.o. from
one's mind bagidenim vta; release s.t.
from one's mind bagidendan vti; release
things from one's mind bagidenjige vai
MINE
MINE: biiwaabikokaan, -an ni
MINER
MINER: biiwaabikokewinini, -wag na
MINISTER
MINISTER: gagiikwewinini, -wag na
MINK
MINK: zhaangweshi, -wag na
MINK HIDE
MINK HIDE: zhaangweshiwayaan, -ag na
MINNEAPOLIS
MINNEAPOLIS: Gakaabikaangptace
MINNOW
MINNOW: giigoozens, -ag na
MINUTE
CERTAIN NUMBER OF MINUTES: a cer-
tain number of minutes daso-diba'igaans
pc
MIRROR
MIRROR: waabamoojichaagwaan, -an ni;
waabandizowin, -an ni
MISBEHAVE
MISBEHAVE: maji-izhiwebizi vai
MISCOUNT
MISCOUNT: wanagindaaso vai; miscount
s.o. wanagim vta; miscount s.t.
wanagindan vti
MISHEAR
MISHEAR: mishear s.o. banitaw vta; mishear
s.t. banitan vti
MISLEAD
MISLEAD: mislead s.o. by speech wanim vta
MISPLACE
MISPLACE: misplace s.o. wanishim vta;
misplace s.t. wanisidoon vti2
MISPRONOUNCE
MISPRONOUNCE: wanigiizhwe vai
MISREAD
MISREAD: wanagindaaso vai; misread s.t.
wanagindan vti
MISS
MISS: miss s.o. absent gwiinawenim vta; miss
s.t. absent gwiinawendan vti
MISS OUT: banizi vai
MISS USING SOMETHING: miss s.o. using
something bana* /bana'w-/ vta; miss s.t.
using something bana'an vti
SHOOT AND MISS: bishkonaage vai; shoot
at s.o. and miss bishkonaw vta; shoot at
s.t. and miss bishkonan vti
MISSED
MISSED: missed it! hay'pc
MISSISSIPPI RIVER
MISSISSIPPI RIVER: Gichi-ziibi, -wan ni
MISTAKE
BY MISTAKE: bichi- pv4; wani- pv4
MAKE A MISTAKE: wanichige vai
MAKE A MISTAKE BEADING: make a
mistake beading s.t. on a loom
wanaabidoo'an vti; make a mistake
beading things on a loom wanaabidoo'ige
vai
MAKE A MISTAKE SEWING: wanigwaaso
vai; make a mistake sewing on s.o.
wanigwaazh /wanigwaaN-/ vta; make a
mistake sewing on s.t. wanigwaadan vti
MAKE A MISTAKE SPEAKING:
wanigiizhwe vai
MAKE A MISTAKE WRITING: wanibii'ige
vai; make a mistake writing s.t. wanibii'an
vti
MISTREAT
MISTREAT: mistreat s.o. goopaji* vta;
mistreat s.t. goopajitoon mi2
MISTY
MISTY: be misty awanibiisaa,
awanibiisaamagad vii
MISUNDERSTAND
MISUNDERSTAND: misunderstand (what)
s.o. (says) wanitaw vta; misunderstand
something heard wanitam vai2
MITTEN
MITTEN: minjikaawan, -ag na
PUT ON MITTENS: put on one's mittens
biichiminjikaawane vai
TAKE OFF MITTENS: take off one's mittens
giichiminjikaawane vai
WEAR MITTENS: gigiminjikaawane vai
MIX
MIX: mix s.o. ginigawin vta; mix s.t.
ginigawinan vti; mix things ginigawinige
vai
MIX BY SHAKING: mix s.o. by shaking
ginigawiwebin vta; mix s.t. by shaking
ginigawiwebinan vti
MIX IN: mix s.o. in dagon vta; mix s.t. in
dagonan vti; mix things in dagonige vai
MIXED
MIXED: be mixed ginigawinigaade,
ginigawinigaademagad vii;
ginigawinigaazo vai; ginigawisin vii
MIXED IN: be mixed in dagonigaade,
dagonigaademagad vii; dagonigaazo vai
MIXED ANCESTRY
PERSON OF MIXED ANCESTRY:
wiisaakodewinini, -wag na
WOMAN OF MIXED ANCESTRY:
wiisaakodewikwe, -g na
MIXER
MIXER: waninawe'igan, -an ni
MOCCASIN
MOCCASIN: makizin, -an ni
HIDE MOCCASIN: bashkweginwakizin, -an
in, also bashkwegino-makizin
MAKE MOCCASINS: makizinike vai

215
moccasin—mountain
PUT ON MOCCASINS: put on one's
moccasins babiichii vai
TAKE OFF MOCCASINS: take off one's
moccasins gagiichii vai
MOCCASIN CUFF
MOCCASIN CUFF: apiganegwaajigan. -an
ni, aha apigwanegwaason, -an
MOCCASIN GAME
MOCCASIN GAME: makizinataagewin ni
PLAY THE MOCCASIN GAME:
makizinataage vai; they play the moccasin
game with each other makizinataadiwag
/makizinataadi-/ vai
MOCCASIN GAME SONG
MOCCASIN GAME SONG: makizinataage-
nagamon, <-an ni
MOCCASIN VAMP
MOCCASIN VAMP: apiingwe'igan, -an ni
MOCK
MOCK: mock s.o. naabinootaw via; mock
people naabinootaage vai
MOCK DISRESPECTFULLY: mock s.o.
disrespectfully baapinodaw vta
MOLD
MOLD: mold s.o. onadin vta; mold s.t.
onadinan vti; mold things onadinige vai
MOLDY
MOLDY: be moldy agwaagoshi vai;
agwaagosin vii
MOLE
MOLE: nenaapaajinikesi, -wag na
MONDAY
MONDAY: be Monday ishkwaa-anama'e-
giizhigad vii, also ishkwaa-aname-
giizhigad
MONEY
MONEY: zhooniyaa na
COLLECT MONEY AS A DONATION:
asigizhooniyaawe vai
EARN MONEY: zhooniyaake vai
HAVE MONEY: ozhooniyaami vai
MAKE MONEY: zhooniyaake vai
USE UP MONEY: use up all of the money
jaagizhoon iyaaweshin vai
MONKEY
MONKEY: nandookomeshiinh, -yag na
MONSTER
WINTER CANNIBAL MONSTER: windigo:
winter cannibal monster wiindigoo, -g na
MONTH
MONTH: giizis, -oog na
CERTAIN DATE OF THE MONTH: be a
certain date of the month inaginzo vai
CERTAIN NUMBER OF MONTHS: a
certain number of months daso-giizis pc
EVERY MONTH: endaso-giizis pc
START A MONTH: maadaginzo vai
MOON
MOON: dibik-giizis, -oog na, also dibiki-
giizis; giizis, -oog na
FULL MOON: be full (as something mineral,
e.g., the moon) michaabikizi vai;
miziweyaabikizi vai
HALF MOON: be half (as something mineral,
e.g., the moon) aabitawaabikizi vai
NEW MOON: be new (of a moon)
oshkagoojin vai, also oshki-agoojin
MOONLIGHT
MOONLIGHT: there is moonlight
giizhigaate, giizhigaatemagad vii
MOOSE
MOOSE: mooz, -oog na
MORE
MORE: nawaj pc
MUCH MORE: awashimepc
MORE AND MORE
MORE AND MORE: eshkam pc
MORNING
MORNING: be morning gigizhebaawagad vii
EARLY IN THE MORNING: gichi-gigizheb
pc
EVERY MORNING: endaso-gigizheb pc
IN THE MORNING: gigizheb pc
LATE MORNING OR EARLY
AFTERNOON: be late morning or early
afternoon ishpi-giizhigad vii
THIS MORNING: this morning (just past)
zhebaa pc
MORTAR
MORTAR: mortar for wild rice bootaagan,
-ag«a
STAMP IN A MORTAR: stamp s.t. in a mor-
tar bootaagaadan vti; stamp things in a
mortar (e.g., wild rice) bootaage vai
MORTUARY
MORTUARY: niboowigamig, -oon ni
MOSQUITO
MOSQUITO: zagime, -g na
MANY MOSQUITOES: there are many
mosquitoes zagimekaa.
zagimekaamagad vii
MOSQUITO NET
MOSQUITO NET: zagimewayaan, -ag na
MOSS
MOSS: aasaakamig, -oon ni
MOTHER
MOTHER: my mother nimaamaa, -yag
/-maamaay-/ nad; my mother old-fashioned
inga nad
HAVE A MOTHER: omaamaayi vai
MOTHER-IN-LAW
MOTHER-IN-LAW: my mother-in-law
inzigozis, -ag /-zigozis-/ nad
MOTION
IN MOTION: be in motion mamaajii vai
MOTOR
OUTBOARD MOTOR: akikoons, -ag na
MOTORLAUNCH
MOTOR LAUNCH: waasamoo-jiimaan, -an
ni
MOUNTAIN
MOUNTAIN: wajiw, -an ro
BEYOND THE MOUNTAIN: awasajiwpc
ON TOP OF A MOUNTAIN: agidajiwpc,
also ogidajiw*, wagidajiw

mountain—myth
216
OVER ACROSS THE MOUNTAIN:
awasajiw pc
MOUNTAIN ASH
MOUNTAIN ASH: makominagaawanzh,
-iig na
MOURN
MOURN: inigaazi vai; nitaage vai
COMPLETE MOURNING: complete
mourning for s.o. bagidenim vta
MOUSE
MOUSE: waawaabiganoojiinh, -yag na
MOUSTACHE
MOUSTACHE: have a moustache
miishidoon vai
MOUTH
MOUTH: my mouth indoon. -an /-doon-/ nid
INSIDE MOUTH: inside the mouth
biinjidoon pc
OPEN MOUTH: open one's mouth daawani
vai
PUT IN MOUTH: put (something) in one's
mouth zhakamo vai
TWISTED MOUTH: have a twisted mouth
(as from a stroke) biimidoon vai
WIPE MOUTH: wipe one's mouth
gaasiidoone'o vai
MOVE
MOVE: mamaajise vai; mamaajise,
mamaajisemagad vii; mamaajii vai;
mamaazikaa vai
MOVE A CERTAIN WAY: with a pv4 move a
certain way ayaa vai; ayaa, ayaamagad vii
MOVE ARM A CERTAIN WAY: move one's
arm a certain way izhinikeni vai
MOVE FAST: gizhiibide, gizhiibidemagad
vii; gizhiibizo vai
MOVE FOOT A CERTAIN WAY: move
one's foot a certain way izhizideni vai
MOVE HAND A CERTAIN WAY: move
one's hand a certain way izhininjiini vai
MOVE OFF: maajise vai; maajise,
maajisemagad vii
MOVE RESIDENCE: move one's residence
gozi vai
MOVE RESIDENCE ABOUT: move one's
residence about babaamigozi vai
MOVE RESIDENCE HERE: move one's
residence here biijigozi vai
MOVE SLOWLY: bejibide, bejibidemagad
vii; bejibizo vai; bezikaa vai
MOVE TO A NEW RESIDENCE: aanjigozi
vai
START TO MOVE: maajiishkaa,
maajiishkaamagad vii
MOVIE
MOVIE: be a movie mazinaatese,
mazinaatesemagad vii
CERTAIN KIND OF MOVIE: be a certain
kind of movie inaatese, inaatesemagad
vii
FUNNY MOVIE: be a funny movie
gagiibaadaatese, gagiibaadaatesemagad
vii
GOOD MOVIE: be a good movie
minwaatese, minwaatesemagad vii
SCARY MOVIE: be a scary movie zegaatese.
zegaatesemagad vii
MOVIE PROJECTOR
MOVIE PROJECTOR: mazinaatewebinigan,
-an ni
MOVIE THEATER
MOVIE THEATER: mazinaatesewigamig,
-oon ni, also mazinaatesijigewigamig
MUCH
MUCH: niibowa pc, also niibiwa*; be much
baatayiinad vii; baatayiino vai, also
baatayiini; there is much of it niibowagad
vii; niibowagizi vai
HAVE MUCH: have much of s.o. baatayiino'
vta; have much of s.t. baatayiinatoon vri2
HOW MUCH: how much? interrogative aaniin
minikpc
SO MUCH: minikpc
TOO MUCH: onzaam pc
MUD
MUD: azhashki ni
IN THE MUD: megwejiishkiwag pc
MUCH MUD: there is much mud
azhashkiikaa, azhashkiikaamagad vii
MUD HEN
MUD HEN: aajigade, -g na
MUDDY
MUDDY: be muddy azhashkiiwan vii; there
is a muddy patch wiinijiishkiwagaa,
wiinijiishkiwagaamagad vii
MUDDY FEET: have muddy feet
azhashkiiwizide vai
MULE
MULE: memaangishens, -ag na
MUMPS
HAVE THE MUMPS: mamagoniishkwe vai
MUSCLE
MUSCLE: mashkawiziiwin, -an ni
MUSHROOM
MUSHROOM: wazhashkwedoons, -ag na
MUSIC
PLAY MUSIC: madweweehige vai; play
music for s.o. madwewetaw vta, also
madwewetamaw
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT
MUSICAL INSTRUMENT:
madwewechigan, -an ni; musical instru-
ment (especially a wind instrument)
noondaagochigan, -an ni
MUSKELLUNGE
MUSKELLUNGE: maashkinoozhe, -g na
MUSKRAT
MUSKRAT: wazhashk, -wag na
MUSKRAT HIDE
MUSKRAT HIDE: wazhashkwayaan, -ag na
MUSKRAT LODGE
MUSKRAT LODGE: wazhashkwiish, -an ni
MUST BE
MUST BE: iidogpc
MYTH
MYTH: aadizookaan, -ag na

217
myth—need
CHARACTER OF A LEGEND OR MYTH:
aadizookaan, -ag na
TELL A MYTH: aadizooke vai; tell a myth to
s.o. aadizookaw vta
N
NAIL
NAIL: zaga'igan, -an ni
NAIL UP AGAINST THE WALL: nail s.t. up
against the wall agwaakwa'an vti
NAIL
NAIL: my nail (fingernail, toenail) nishkanzh,
-iig /-shkanzhy-/ nad
CUT NAILS: cut one's own nails
giishkiganzhiikonidizo vai
NAKED
NAKED: be naked mitagwazhe vai
NAME
NAME: name s.o. waawiinzh /waawiinN-/
vta; wiinzh /wiinN-/ vta; name s.t. wiindan
vti
GIVE A NAME: give s.o. a name wiinzh
/wiinN-/ vta
HAVE A NAME: wiinde, wiindemagad vii;
wiinzo vai
HAVE AN UGLY NAME: maazhinikaade,
maazhinikaademagad vii;
maazhinikaazo vai
NAME A CERTAIN WAY: name s.o. a
certain way izhinikaazh /izhinikaaN-/ vta;
izhi-wiinzh /izhi-wiinN-/ vta; name s.t. a
certain way izhinikaadan vti; izhi-wiindan
vti
NAMED
NAMED A CERTAIN WAY: be named a
certain way izhinikaade,
izhinikaademagad vii; izhinikaazo vai;
izhi-wiinde, izhi-wiindemagad vii; izhi-
wiinzo vai
NAMESAKE
NAMESAKE: be a namesake owiiyawen'enyi
vai; my namesake (reciprocal relationship
between name-giving sponsor and child)
niiyawen'enh, -ag /-iiyawen*eny-/ nad
NAP
TAKE A QUICK NAP: zhiibaangwashi vai
NAPKIN
NAPKIN: giziidoone'on, -an ni; giziininjii'on,
-an ni
NARRATE
NARRATE: dibaajimo vai; narrate (s.t.) to
s.o. dibaajimotaw vta
NARRATE A CERTAIN WAY: inaajimo vai;
narrate a certain way about s.t. inaadodan
vti; narrate of s.o. a certain way inaajim
vta; narrate (s.t.) to s.o. a certain way
inaajimotaw vta
NARRATIVE
NARRATIVE: dibaajimowin, -an ni
NARROW
NARROW: be narrow agaasadeyaa,
agaasadeyaamagad vii; agaasadezi vai;
be narrow (as something mineral)
agaasadeyaabikad vii; agaasadeyaabikizi
vai; be narrow (as something sheet-like)
agaasadeyiigad vii; agaasadeyiigizi vai;
be narrow (as something string-like)
agaasadeyaabiigad vii;
agaasadeyaabiigizi vai
BECOME NARROW: wiibwaa,
wiibwaamagad vii
MAKE NARROW: make s.o. narrow
agaasade' vta; make s.t. narrow
agaasadetoon vti2
NARROW BOAT: be narrow (as a boat)
agaasadeyoonagad vii
NARROW FACE: have a narrow face
agaasadengwe vai
NARROW RIVER: be narrow (as a river)
agaasadetigweyaa,
agaasadetigweyaamagad vii
NARROW ROAD: be narrow (as a road or
trail) agaasademon /agaasademo-/ vii
NARROW TRAIL: be narrow (as a road or
trail) agaasademon /agaasademo-/ vii
NARROWS
NARROWS: there is a narrows wabaashiiwan
vii; wabigamaa, wabigamaamagad vii
NAVEL
NAVEL: my navel indis /-disy-/ nid
NEAR
NEAR: besho pc; jiigi- pn; be near beshowad
vii
NEAR WOODS: near the woods jiigaakwaa
pc
THOUGHT NEAR: be thought near
beshwendaagozi vai; beshwendaagwad
vii
NEARLY
NEARLY: gegaa pc; ingoji pc, also ningoji*
NECESSARY
NECESSARY: it is necessary booch pc
NECK
BACK OF NECK: the back of my neck
nikwegan, -an /-kwegan-/ nid
STIFF NECK: have a stiff neck
jiibajigwayawe vai
WEAR AROUND NECK: wear s.o. around
one's neck naabikaw vta; wear s.t. around
one's neck naabikan vti
WRING NECK: wring s.o.'s neck
bookogwebizh /bookogwebiN-/ vta
NECKLACE
NECKLACE: naabikawaagan, -ag na
NECKTIE
NECKTIE: naabikawaagan, -ag na
NEED
IN NEED: be in need of (s.t.) manezi vai-o

need—nine
218
NEED TO: noonde- pv4
NEEDLE
NEEDLE: zhaabonigan, -an ni
BEADING NEEDLE: naabidoo'igan, -an ni
NEIGHBOR
NEIGHBOR: be a neighbor to s.o.
wiijigamigishkaw vta
NEPHEW
NEPHEW: my cross-nephew (male's sister's
son or female's brother's son) niningwanis,
-ag /-ningwanis-/ nad; my parallel nephew
(male's brother's son or female's sister's
son) indoozhim. -ag /-doozhim-/ nad
NERVOUS
NERVOUS: be nervous zegendam vai2
NEST
BIRD NEST: wad is wan. -an ni
NESTLING
NESTLING: banajaanh, -yag na
NET
NET: asab, -iig na
CAUGHT IN A NET: be caught in a net
biinda'am vai2
FISH WITH A NET: bagida'waa vai
GO GET A NET: naadasabii vai
HANG UP A NET: agoodasabii vai
MAKE NETS: asabike vai
MOSQUITO NET: zagimewayaan, -ag na
PICK UP A NET: naadasabii vai
PREPARE A NET: prepare a net for setting
oninasabii vai
SET A NET: bagida'waa vai
NET CORD
NET CORD: zhinoodaagan, -an ni
NET FLOAT
NET FLOAT: agonjoonaagan, -an ni
NET SINKER
NET SINKER: asinaab, -iig na
NETTLAKE
NETT LAKE: Nett Lake Reservation
Asabikone-zaaga'iganiing place, also
Asabikonaye-zaaga'iganiing
NETTLE
NETTLE: zesab, -iig na
NEVER
NEVER: gaa wiikaa pc, also gaawiin wiikaa
NEVER MIND: maanoo pc
NEW
NEW: oshki- pv4; be new oshkayi'iiwan vii
LOOK NEW: oshkiinaagozi vai;
oshkiinaagwad vii
SOMEONE NEW: oshkaya'aa, -g na, also
oshki-aya'aa
SOMETHING NEW: oshkayi'ii, -n ni, also
oshki-ayi'ii
WEAR NEW CLOTHES: oshki'o vai
NEW MOON
NEW MOON: be new (of a moon)
oshkagoojin vai, also oshki-agoojin
NEWS
ARRIVE WITH NEWS: bagamaajimo vai
COME TELLING NEWS: biidaajimo vai
SPREAD THE NEWS ABOUT:
babaamaajimo vai
TELL GOOD NEWS: minwaajimo vai; tell
good news of s.o. minwaajim vta; tell good
news of s.t. minwaadodan vti
NEWSPAPER
NEWSPAPER: babaamaajimoo-
mazina'igan. -an ni
NEXT
NEXT: they are next to each other
aanikeshkodaadiwag/aanikeshkodaadi-/
vai
NEXT ROOM: in the next room aajisagpc
NEXT TO: be next to s.o. aanikeshkaw vta
SOMEONE NEXT IN SUCCESSION TO
THE LEADER: someone next in
succession to the leader (e.g., a vice
president) aanike-ogimaa, -g na
NICE
NICE: mino- pv4; be nice onizhishi vai;
onizhishin vii
MAKE NICE: make s.o. nice onizhishi' vta;
make s.t. nice onizhishitoon vti2
NICE DAY: be a nice day mino-giizhigad vii
NICKEL
NICKEL: nickel (coin) aabita-zhooniyaans,
-ag na
NIECE
NIECE: my cross-niece (female's brother's
daughter or male's sister's daughter)
nishimis, -ag /-shimis-/ nad; my parallel
niece (male's brother's daughter or
female's sister's daughter) indoozhimis,
-ag /-doozhimis-/ nad
NIGHT
NIGHT: be night dibikad vii
ALL NIGHT: gabe-dibik/v
AT NIGHT: n\\baa.-pv4
CERTAIN NUMBER OF NIGHTS: a certain
number of nights daso-dibikpc
DARK AS NIGHT: be dark as night gashkii-
dibik-ayaa, gashkii-dibik-ayaamagad vii
DARK AT NIGHT: be very dark at night
gashkii-dibikad vii
DRIVE AT NIGHT: niibaabizo vai
EARLY IN THE NIGHT: be early in the
night oshki-dibikad vii
EVERY NIGHT: endaso-dibikpc
LAST NIGHT: dibikong^c
LATE AT NIGHT: ishpi-dibik /)t, niibaa-
dibik pc; be late at night ishpi-dibikad vii
SPEND THE WHOLE NIGHT: gabe-
dibikwe vai
TRAVEL AT NIGHT: niibaashkaa vai
NIGHTMARE
NIGHTMARE: have a nightmare
giiwanaadingwaam vai; zegingwashi vai
NINE
NINE: zhaangaswi nm; zhaangaso- pv4; nine
(card) zhaangasoobii'igan, -ag na; they
are nine zhaangachinoon /zhaangachin-/
vii; zhaangachiwag /zhaangachi-/ vai
AND NINE: ashi-zhaangaswi nm, ashi-
zhaangaso- pv4

219
nine—not
NINE ACRES: zhaangaso-diba'igaanspc
NINE DAYS: zhaangaso-giizhik pc;
zhaangasogon pc; be nine days
zhaangasogonagad vii
NINE DAYS OLD: be nine days old
zhaangasogonagizi vai
NINE DOLLARS: zhaangaswaabik pc
NINE EACH: zhezhaangaswi nm
NINE FEET: zhaangasozid pc
NINE HOURS: zhaangaso-diba'igan pc
NINE HUNDRED: zhaangaswaak nm
NINE INCHES: zhaangasoninj pc
NINE MILES: zhaangaso-diba'igan pc
NINE MINUTES: zhaangaso-diba'igaans pc
NINE MONTHS: zhaangaso-giizis pc
NINE O'CLOCK: be nine o'clock zhaangaso-
diba'iganed vii
NINE PAIRS: zhaangaswewaan pc
NINE SETS: zhaangaswewaan pc
NINE THOUSAND: zhaangasosagoons nm
NINE TIMES: zhaangaching pc
NINE WEEKS: zhaangaso-anama'e-giizhik
pc; be nine weeks zhaangaso-anama'e-
giizhigad vii
NINE YEARS: zhaangaso-biboon pc; be nine
years zhaangaso-biboonagad vii; be nine
years old zhaangaso-biboonagizi vai
NINETEEN
NINETEEN: ashi-zhaangaswi nm; midaaswi
ashi-zhaanigaswi nm
NINETY
NINETY: zhaangasimidana nm
NINTH
NINTH DAY OF THE MONTH: be the
ninth day of the month
zhaangasogonagizi vai
NO
NO: gaawiin pc
NO LONGER: gaawiin geyaabi pc
NO MORE: gaawiin geyaabi pc
NO PURPOSE AT ALL: for no purpose at all
biinizikaap£
NO WAY: no way! gaawesapc
NOBODY
NOBODY: gaawiin awiyaprj also gaawiin
awiiya
NOD
NOD HEAD: nod one's head wewebikweni
vai
NOD HEAD A CERTAIN WAY: nod one's
head to s.o. a certain way inikwetaw vta
NOISE
DRIVE AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewebide, animwewebidemagad
vii
HEAR A CERTAIN NOISE: initam vai2
MAKE A CERTAIN NOISE: inwewe,
inwewemagad vii
MAKE NOISE: madwewe, madwewemagad
vii; noondaagozi vai; noondaagwad vii;
make noise on s.t. madwewetoon vti2
MAKE NOISE BOILING: madwegamide,
madwegarnidemagad vii; madwegamizo
vai
MAKE NOISE HITTING: madweshin vai;
madwesin vii; make noise hitting s.t.
madwesidoon vti2; make noise hitting
things madwesijige vai
MAKING NOISE: madwe-p»4
NOISE IN A CERTAIN PLACE: there is
noise in a certain place danwewe,
danwewemagad vii
STOP MAKING VOCAL NOISE: giishkowe
vai
WAKE BY VOCAL NOISE: wake s.o. by
vocal noise amajim vta
WALK AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewetoo vai
NOISY
NOISY: ojaanimi- pv4; be noisy ombiigizi vai
NOON
NOON: be noon naawakwe,
naawakwemagad vii
NORTH
NORTH: giiwedin ni
NORTH WIND: giiwedin ni
NORTHERN LIGHTS
NORTHERN LIGHTS: they are the northern
lights jiibayag niimi'idiwag /niimi'idi-/ vai
NORTHERN PIKE
NORTHERN PIKE: ginoozhe, -g na
NOSE
NOSE: my nose injaanzh, -an /-jaanzh-/ aid
BLOODY NOSE: bloody s.o.'s nose
gibitaneganaam vta; have a bloody nose
miskwiiwijaane vai
BLOODY NOSE FALLING: bloody one's
nose falling gibitaneshin vai
BLOW NOSE: blow one's nose ziinikiigome
vai
FLAT NOSE: have a flat nose nabagijaane vai
HAVE A BROKEN NOSE: bookojaane vai
HAVE A STUFFED-UP NOSE: gibijaane
vai, also gagiibijaane
INSIDE NOSE: inside the nose biinjijaanzh pc
RED NOSE: have a red nose miskojaane vai
SWOLLEN NOSE: have a swollen nose
baagijaane vai
NOSEBLEED
NOSEBLEED: have a nosebleed gibitan vai,
also gibitane*
NOSTRIL
NOSTRIL: my nostril indenigom, -ag
/-denigom-/ nod
NOT
NOT: not negative gaawiin pc
NOTABLE: gwiinawi-pc4
NOT AT ALL: gaawesapc
NOT BEFORE: bwaa- pvl
NOT IN THE LEAST: gaawiin ganage pc
NOT KNOW WHAT TO DO: gwiinawi-
doodam vai2
NOT KNOW WHAT TO THINK: gwiinawi-
inendam vai2
NOT KNOWING: gwiinawi- pv4
NOT NECESSARY: it's not necessary
gaawiin memwech pc
NOT REALLY: anishaapc

not—offering 
220
NOT TOO HARD: not too hard! na'egaaj pc
NOT YET: gaa mashi pc, also gaawiin mashi
NOTCHED
NOTCHED: be notched aajikode,
aajikodemagad mi
NOTHING
NOTHING: gaawiin gegoo pr
NOTICE
NOTICE: agwaakwa'igan, -an ni
NOVEMBER
NOVEMBER: gashkadino-giizis na
NOW
NOW: azhigwapc, also zhigwa, zhigo;
noongom pc; zhayiigwa pc
JUSTNOW:bijiinagpc
NOWADAYS
NOWADAYS: noongom pc
NUMB
FEEL NUMB: giikimanizi vai
NUMB ARM: have a numb arm niboowinike
vai
NUMB FOOT: have a numb foot
niboowizide vai
NUMB HAND: have a numb hand
niboowininjii vai
NUMB LEG: have a numb leg niboowigaade
vai
NUMBER
NUMBER: asigibii'igan, -an ni
CERTAIN NUMBER: a certain number
daso- pv3; daswi nm; minik pa they are a
certain number dashiwag /dashi-/ vai;
dasinoon /dasin-/ vii
CERTAIN NUMBER OF TIMES: a certain
number of times dasing pc
WRITE NUMBERS: asigibii'ige vai
NUN
NUN: anama'ewikwe, -g na;
mekadewikonayewikwe, -g na, also
mekadewikonayekwe
NURSE
NURSE: nurse s.o. (e.g., a baby) noozh
/nooN-/ via
NURSE A CHILD: noonaawaso vai
NURSE
NURSE: nurse (female) mashkikiiwikwe, -g
na
NUT
NUT: bagaan, -ag na
o
OAK
OAK: mitigomizh, -iig na
OAR
OAR: azheboyaanaak, -oon ni
OATMEAL
OATMEAL: daataagwa'igan, -an ni
OBSERVATION
LEARN BY OBSERVATION: gikinawaabi
vai; learn by observation of s.o.
gikinawaabam vta
OBSERVE
OBSERVE: observe s.o. naagadawaabam vta;
naanaagadawaabam vta; observe s.t.
naagadawaabandan vti;
naanaagadawaabandan vti; observe
people waabange vai
OBSTRUCT
OBSTRUCT: obstruct s.o. gibaakwa'
/gibaakwa'w-/ vta; obstruct s.t.
gibaakwa'an vti
OBTAIN
OBTAIN FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: ob-
tain s.o. from a certain place ondin vta; ob-
tain s.t. from a certain place ondinan vti;
obtain (s.t.) for s.o. from a certain place
ondinamaw vta; obtain things from a cer-
tain place ondinige vai
OBTAINED
OBTAINED FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
be obtained from a certain place
ondinigaade, ondinigaademagad vii;
ondinigaazo vai
OCCASIONALLY
OCCASIONALLY: ayaangodinongpc, also
aangodinong
OCCUPIED
OCCUPIED: be occupied abiichigaade,
abiichigaademagad vii
OCCUPY
OCCUPY: occupy s.t. abiitan vti
OCTOBER
OCTOBER: binaakwii-giizis na, also
binaakwe-giizis; waatebagaa-giizis na,
also waatebago-giizis
ODAWA
ODAWA: Odawa (Ottawa) odaawaa, -g na
SPEAK ODAWA: speak Odawa (Ottawa)
odaawaamo vai
ODD
MAKE ODD: make s.o. odd maanaaji' vta;
make s.t. odd maanaajitoon vti2
OF COURSE
OF COURSE: memindagepc
OFF
COME OFF: gidiskise vai; gidiskise,
gidiskisemagad vii
OFFER
OFFER: offer s.o. bagidin vta; offer s.t.
bagidinan mi; offer (s.t.) to s.o.
bagidinamaw vta; offer things bagidinige
vai
OFFERED
OFFERED: be offered bagidinigaade,
bagidinigaademagad vii; bagidinigaazo
vai
OFFERING
OFFERING: bagijigan, -an ni

221 
offering—once
MAKE AN OFFERING: bagijige vat
MAKE AN OFFERING OF TOBACCO:
biindaakoojige vai; make an offering of to-
bacco to s.o. biindaakoozh
/biindaakooN-/ via
OFFICE
OFFICE: ozhibii'igewigamig, -oon ni
ADMINISTRATION OFFICE:
ogimaawigamig, -oon ni
OFFICER
MILITARY OFFICER: zhimaaganishii-
ogimaa, -g na
OFFICIAL
GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL:
wegimaawabid na-pt
OFTEN
OFTEN: moozhagpc; naaningim pc
OH
OH: oh! oo pc; oonh pc
OIL
OIL: bimide ni
OJIBWE
OJIBWE: anishinaabe, -g na; ojibwe, -g na;
ojibwewanishinaabe, -g na, also ojibwe-
anishinaabe; be Ojibwe anishinaabewi
vai; ojibwewi vai
CALL IN OJIBWE: call s.o. in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaazh
/anishinaabewinikaaN-/ vta; call s.t. in
Indian (Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaadan
vti
CALLED IN OJIBWE: be called in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewinikaade,
anishinaabewinikaademagad vii;
anishinaabewinikaazo vai
OJIBWE WRITING: Indian (Ojibwe) writing
anishinaabewibii'igan, -an ni
PUT INTO OJIBWE: put s.t. into Ojibwe
ojibwewisidoon vti2
SPEAK OJIBWE: ojibwemo vai; speak
Ojibwe to s.o. ojibwemotaw via; speak an
Indian language (especially Ojibwe) to s.o.
anishinaabemotaw vta; speak an Indian
language (especially Ojibwe)
anishinaabemo vai
WRITE IN OJIBWE: write in Indian (Ojibwe)
anishinaabewibii'ige vai; write s.t. in
Indian (Ojibwe) anishinaabewibii'an vti;
write s.t. in Indian (Ojibwe) (e.g., a book)
anishinaabewisidoon vti2; write s.t. in
Ojibwe ojibwewibii'an vti; write (s.t.) in
Indian (Ojibwe) to s.o.
anishinaabewibii'amaw vta; write things
in Ojibwe ojibwewibii'ige vai
WRITTEN IN OJIBWE: be written in Indian
(Ojibwe) ariishinaabewibii'igaade,
anishinaabewibii'igaademagad vii; be
written in Indian (Ojibwe) (e.g., a book or
document) anishinaabewisin vii; be writ-
ten in Ojibwe ojibwewibii'igaade,
ojibwewibii'igaademagad vii; be written
in Ojibwe (e.g., a book) ojibwewisin vii
OJIBWE LANGUAGE
OJIBWE LANGUAGE: ojibwemowin ni; In-
dian language (especially Ojibwe)
anishinaabemowin, -an ni
OJIBWE WOMAN
OJIBWE WOMAN: ojibwekwe, -g na
OLD
OLD: gete-pv4
CERTAIN NUMBER OF DAYS OLD: be a
certain number of days old dasogonagizi
vai
CERTAIN NUMBER OF YEARS OLD: be a
certain number of years old daso-
biboonagizi vai
LOOK OLD: gichi-aya'aawinaagozi vai
SO MANY YEARS OLD: be so many years
old daso-biboonagizi vai
SOMEONE OLD: gete-aya'aa, -g na
SOMETHING OLD: gete-ayi'ii, -n ni
OLD LADY
OLD LADY: mindimooyenh, -yag na; be an
old lady mindimooyenyiwi vai
OLD MAN
OLD MAN: akiwenzii, -yag na; be an old
man akiwenziiyiwi vai
OLD WOMAN
OLD WOMAN: mindimooyenh, -yag na; be
an old woman mindimooyenyiwi vai
OLD-TIME
OLD-TIME: gete-pv4
OLDER
OLDER: be older gitizi vai
ON
ON METAL: on something mineral (e.g.,
metal, glass, rock) agidaabik pc, also
ogidaabik*, wagidaabik
ON ROCK: on something mineral (e.g., metal,
glass, rock) agidaabik pc, also ogidaabik*,
wagidaabik
ON THE SHORE: agamiingpc
ON TOP: on top of agiji- pn, also ogiji-*,
wagiji-; on top of it agijayi'ii pc, also
ogijayi'ii*, wagijayi'ii
ON TOP OF A HILL: agidaaki pc, also
ogidaaki*, wagidaaki
ON TOP OF A MOUNTAIN: agidajiwpc,
also ogidajiw*, wagidajiw
ON TOP OF A ROCK: agidasin pc, also
ogidasin*, wagidasin
ON TOP OF THE GROUND: agidakamig
pc, also ogidakamig*, wagidakamig
ON TOP OF THE HOUSE: agidigamig pc,
also ogidigamig*, wagidigamig
ON TOP OF THE ICE: agidiskwam pc, also
ogidiskwam*, wagidiskwam
ON TOP OF THE WATER: agidibiig pc, also
ogidibiig*, wagidibiig
ON PURPOSE
ON PURPOSE: onjidapc
ONCE
ONCE:aabidingpc

one—oriental 
222
ONE
ONE: bezhig nm; bezhigo- pv4; ingo- /ningo-/
pv4, also ningo-*; be one bezhigwan vii
AND ONE: ashi-bezhig nm; ashi-bezhigo-
pv4
AT ONE TIME: aabiding pc; ingodingpc, also
ningoding*
GONE A CERTAIN LENGTH OF TIME:
be gone a certain length of time apiitendi
vai
IN ONE PLACE: bezhigwanong pc
ONE ACRE: ingo-diba'igaanspc, also ningo-
diba'igaans*
ONE DAY: ingo-giizhikpc, also ningo-
giizhik*
ONE DOLLAR: bezhigwaabik no.
ONE FOOT: ingodozidpc, also ningodozid*
ONE HOUR: ingo-diba'igan pc, also ningo-
diba'igan*
ONE HUNDRED: ingodwaak nm, also
ningodwaak*
ONE INCH: ingodoninj pc, also ningodoninj*
ONE MILE: ingo-diba'igan pc, also ningo-
diba'igan*
ONE MINUTE: ingo-diba'igaans pc, also
ningo-diba'igaans*
ONE MONTH: ingo-giizis pc, also ningo-
giizis*
ONE NIGHT: ingo-dibikpc, also ningo-dibik*
ONE O'CLOCK: be one o'clock ingo-
diba'iganed /ningo-diba'iganed-/ vii, also
ningo-diba'iganed*
ONE PLACE: bezhigwanong pc
ONE THOUSAND: ingodosagoons nm, also
ningodosagoons*
ONE WEEK: ingo-anama'e-giizhik pc, also
ningo-anama'e-giizhik*
ONE YEAR: ingo-biboon pc, also ningo-
biboon*; be one year ingo-biboonagad
/ningo-biboonagad-/ vii, also ningo-
biboonagad*
ONE YEAR OLD: be one year old ingo-
biboonagizi /ningo-biboonagizi-/ vai, also
ningo-biboonagizi*
ONE-BY-ONE
ONE-BY-ONE: bebezhig nm
ONION
ONION: zhigaagawanzh, -iig na
ONLY
ONLY: eta pc
ONLY HER: only her third person singular
personal pronoun wiinetapr
ONLY HIM: only him third person singular
personal pronoun wiinetapr
ONLY ME: only me first person singular
personal pronoun niinetapr
ONLY THEM: only them third person plural
personal pronoun wiinetawaapr
ONLY US: only us first person exclusive plural
personal pronoun niinetawind pr; only us
first person inclusive personal pronoun
giinetawind pr
ONLY YOU: only you second person singular
personal pronoun giinetapr,' only you second
personal plural personal pronoun giinetawaa
pr
THE ONLY ONE: be the only one bezhigo
vai; bezhigwan vii
OPEN
OPEN: be open baakishin vai; baakisin vii; be
open (as something stick- or wood-like,
e.g., a door) baakaakosin vii; open s.t. (as
something stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door)
baakaakonan vti; open (s.t.) for s.o. (as
something stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door)
baakaakonamaw vta
COME OPEN: baakise, baakisemagad vii
FLING OPEN: fling s.t. open (as something
stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door)
baakaakowebinan vti
FLY OPEN: baakise, baakisemagad vii; fly
open (as something stick- or wood-like,
e.g., a door) baakaakose,
baakaakosemagad vii
OPEN EYES: open one's eyes dooskaabi vai
OPEN MOUTH: open one's mouth daawani
vai
OPEN UP: open s.o. up baakin vta; open s.t.
up baakinan vti; open things up baakinige
vai
RIP OPEN: rip s.o.open aabibizh /aabibiN-/
vta; rip s.t. open aabibidoon vti2
OPENED
OPENED: be opened (as something stick- or
wood-like, e.g., a door) baakaakonigaade,
baakaakonigaademagad vii
OPENER
CAN OPENER: baakaakozhigan, -an ni
OPERATE
OPERATE POORLY: maazhibide,
maazhibidemagad vii; maazhibizo vai
OPPOSITE
OPPOSITE: dibishkookamigpc
OPTOMETRIST
OPTOMETRIST: oshkiinzhigokewinini,
-wag na
OR
OR: gemaapc, also gemaa gaye
ORANGE
ORANGE: orange (fruit) wezaawiminagazid
na-pt
ORDER
ORDER: order (s.t.) for s.o. naajinizha'amaw
vta; order things naajinizha'ige vai
GIVE AN ORDER: anookii vai; give an order
to s.o. anoozh /anooN-/ vta
PUT IN ORDER: put s.o. in order onin vta;
put s.t. in order oninan vti; put things in
order oninige vai
ORGAN
ORGAN: madwewechigan, -an ni
ORIENTAL
ORIENTAL: aniibiishaabookewinini, -wag
na; be Oriental aniibiishaabookewininiiwi
vai

223 
originate—overdo
ORIGINATE
ORIGINATE IN A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondaadad vii
ORPHANED
ORPHANED: be orphaned giiwizi vai
OSIER
RED OSIER: miskwaabiimizh, -iig no,
OTHER SIDE
ON THE OTHER SIDE: on the other side of
it agaamayi'ii pc; aazhawayi'ii pc
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF: agaami-£n
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
CLEARING: agaamaakwaa pc
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE FIRE:
agaamish kode pc
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE LAKE:
agaaming pc
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
MEADOW: agaamashkosiw pc
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE ROAD: on
the other side of the road or trail
agaamikana pc
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE TRAIL: on
the other side of the road or trail
agaamikana pc
OTHER SIDE OF THE LODGE:
agaamindesi pc; on the other side of the
lodge agaamindesing pc
OTTER
OTTER: nigig, -wag na
OTTER HIDE
OTTER HIDE: nigigwayaan, -ag na
OUT
CRAWL OUT: zaagidoode vai
FLOW OUT: zaagijiwan vii
GO OUT IN A GROUP: they go out in a
group zaagidaawanidiwag
/zaagidaawanidi-/ vai
GROW OUT: zaagigi vai; zaagigin vii
MAKE GO OUT: make s.o. go out zaagizi'
via
PUT OUT: put s.o. out zaagidin vta; put s.t.
out zaagidinan vti
RUN OUT: zaagizibatoo vai; run out with
s.o. zaagiziba' vta; zaagizibatwaazh
/zaagizibatwaaN-/ vta; run out with s.t.
zaagizibatwaadan vti; they run out
together zaagiziba'idiwag /zaagiziba'idi-/
vai
STICK OUT HEAD: stick out one's head
zaagikweni vai
TAKE OUT: take s.o. out zaagizi' vta; take
s.t. out zaagizitoon vti2; take (s.t.) out for
s.o. zaagizitaw vta
OUT FROM SHORE
GO OUT FROM SHORE ON THE ICE:
niminaaweyaadagaako vai
PADDLE OUT FROM SHORE:
niminaawe'o vai
OUT OF
OUT OF: be out of s.o. jaagin vta; be out of
s.t. jaaginan vti
OUT OF SIGHT
GO OUT OF SIGHT: ani-naagozi vai; ani-
naagwad vii; go out of sight (as around a
corner) aagawe vai
OUT OF SORTS
FEEL OUT OF SORTS: maazhendam vai2
OUT OF THE WAY
STAND OUT OF THE WAY: ikogaabawi
vai
OUTBOARD MOTOR
OUTBOARD MOTOR: akikoons, -ag na
OUTDOORS
OUTDOORS: agwajiing/x
OUTHOUSE
OUTHOUSE: zaaga'amoowigamig, -oon ni
OUTLET
OUTLET: be an outlet biinjidawaa vii
OUTSIDE
OUTSIDE: agwajiing/x:
CHASE OUTSIDE: chase s.o. outside
zaagijinizhikaw vta
TELL TO GO OUTSIDE: tell s.o. to go
outside zaagijinaazha' /zaagijinaazha'w-/
vta
THROW OUTSIDE: throw s.o. outside
zaagijiwebin vta; throw s.t. outside
zaagijiwebinan vti; throw things outside
zaagijiwebinige vai
THROWN OUTSIDE: be thrown outside
zaagijiwebinigaade,
zaagijiwebinigaademagad vii
OVEN
ROAST IN THE OVEN: roast s.o. in the oven
giboz /gibozw-/ vta; roast s.t. in the oven
gibozan vti; roast things in the oven
gibozige vai
OVER
OVER: be over (of an event) ishkwaakamigad
vii; over it ishpayi'ii pc
CLIMB OVER: baazhidaandawe vai
JUMP OVER: baazhijigwaashkwani vai
STEP OVER: step over s.o. baazhida'
/baazhida'w-/ vta; step over s.t.
baazhida'an vti
THROW OVER: throw s.o. over
baazhijiwebin vta; throw s.t. over
baazhijiwebinan vti
OVERCOME
OVERCOME: overcome s.o. zhaagooji* vta;
overcome s.o. with speech zhaagoozom
vta; overcome s.t. zhaagoojitoon vti2;
overcome people zhaagooji'iwe vai
OVERCOOK
OVERCOOK: overcook s.o. onzaamiz
/onzaamizw-/ vta; overcook s.t.
onzaamizan vti
OVERCOOKED
OVERCOOKED: be overcooked onzaamide,
onzaamidemagad vii; onzaamizo vai
OVERDO
OVERDO: overdo things onzaamichige vai

overexcited—pail 
224
OVEREXCITED
OVEREXCITED: be overexcited
onzaamenimo vai
OVERFILL
OVERFILL: overfill s.o. with solids
onzaamashkina' vta; overfill s.t. (with a
liquid) onzaamibadoon vti2; overfill s.t.
with solids onzaamashkinadoon vti2
OVERFLOW
OVERFLOW: overflow (as a liquid)
bazhidebii, bazhidebiimagad vii
FILL TO OVERFLOWING: fill s.o. to
overflowing with solids ziigashkina* vta; fill
s.t. to overflowing with a liquid
ziigibadoon vti2; fill s.t. to overflowing
with solids ziigashkinadoon vti2
OVERHEAT
OVERHEAT: overheat s.o. onzaamiz
/onzaamizw-/ vta; overheat s.t.
onzaamizan vti
OVERNIGHT
GONE OVERNIGHT: be gone overnight
nikanendi vai
STAY OVERNIGHT: stay overnight with s.o.
nibendaw vta; stay overnight with people
nibendaage vai
OVERSEAS
OVERSEAS: agaamakiing pc
OVERSHOE
OVERSHOE: biitookizinaan, -an ni, also
biitookizin
WEAR OVERSHOES: biitookizine vai
OVERSLEEP
OVERSLEEP: onzaamingwaam vai
OVERTAKE
OVERTAKE: overtake s.o. adim vta; overtake
s.t. adindan vti
OVERTAKE IN A BOAT: overtake s.o. in a
boat adima' /adima'w-/ vta
OVERWORK
COLLAPSE FROM OVERWORK:
gawanokii vai
OWE
OWE: mazina'ige vai; owe (s.t.) to s.o.
mazina'amaw vta
OWL
OWL: gookooko'oo, -g na
SCREECH OWL: gaakaabishiinh, -yag na
OWN
OWN: own s.o. ayaaw vta; dibenim vta; own
s.t. ayaan /ayaam-/ vti3; dibendan vti;
own for oneself dibendaaso vai
OWNED
OWNED: be owned dibendaagozi vat;
dibendaagwad vii; dibenjigaade,
dibenjigaademagad vii; dibenjigaazo vai
P
PACK
PACK: bimiwanaan, -an ni
CARRY A BIG PACK: mangiwane vai
CARRY A LIGHT PACK: naangiwane vai
CARRY A PACK ALONG: bimiwane vai
HARDLY BE ABLE TO CARRY THE
PACK: hardly be able to carry a pack
bwaawane vai
LIFT A PACK: lift a pack to one's back
ombiwane vai
MAKE A PACK: make a pack of s.t.
ozhiwanikaadan vti
PACK TOO MUCH OF A LOAD:
onzaamiwane vai
PACK UP: ozhiwanike vai
SET DOWN PACK: set down one's pack
bagijiwane vai
PACK FRAME
PACK FRAME: bimoonjigan, -an ni
PACKAGE
PACKAGE: gashkibijigan, -an ni
WRAPPED PACKAGE: wiiweginigan, -an ni
PACKET
PACKET: gashkibijigan, -an ni
PADDING
LIE AS PADDING: apishin vai; apisin vii
PADDLE
PADDLE: abwi, -in ni; jiime vai
ARRIVE PADDLING: bagamishkaa vai
PADDLE A CERTAIN WAY: inakwazhiwe
vai
PADDLE ABOUT: babaamishkaa vai
PADDLE AGAINST THE WIND:
onjishkawa'o vai, also onjishkawa'am
PADDLE ALONG: bimakwazhiwe vai;
bimishkaa vai
PADDLE ALONG THE SHORE:
jiigewe'am vai2; jiigewe'o vai;
jiigewekwazhiwe vai
PADDLE AWAY: animishkaa vai
PADDLE BACKWARDS: azhe'o vai
PADDLE FAST: gizhiikaakwazhiwe vai
PADDLE FOR STIRRING BOILING
MAPLE SAP: gaashkakokwe'igan, -an ni
PADDLE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondakwazhiwe vai
PADDLE HERE: biidakwazhiwe vai;
biidaasarnishkaa vai
PADDLE OFF: maajiikwazhiwe vai
PADDLE OUT FROM SHORE:
niminaawe'o vai
PADDLE SUDDENLY INTO VIEW:
zaagewe'o vai; zaagewekwazhiwe vai
PADDLE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: ina'o
vai; inakwazhiwe vai
PAIL
PAIL: akik, -oog na
WASH PAIL: giziibiiginakokwe vai
WATER PAIL: nibiiwakik, -oog na

225
pain—patched
PAIN
PAIN: be in pain wiisagine vai
CHEST PAINS: have chest pains while
breathing jakanaamo vai
SUFFER PAIN: wiisagendam vai
WAKE FROM PAIN: amajine vai
PAINT
PAINT: zhizhoobii'igan, -an ni; paint s.o.
zhizhoobii" /zhizhoobii'w-/ via; paint s.t.
zhizhoobii an vti; paint (s.t.) for s.o.
zhizhoobii"amaw vta; paint things
zhizhoobii ige vai
PAINT BRUSH
PAINT BRUSH: zhizhoobii'iganaatig, -oon
ni
PAINTED TURTLE
PAINTED TURTLE: miskwaadesi, -wag na
PAINTER
PAINTER: zhizhoobii'igewinini, -wag na
PAIR
CERTAIN NUMBER OF PAIRS: a certain
number of pairs daswewaan pc
PALATE
PALATE: my palate ninagaskway
/-nagaskway-/ nid
PALE
PALE FACED: be pale faced waabiingwe vai
PALM
PALM: my palm ninagaakininj, -tin
/-nagaakininjy-/ nid
PAN
PAN: akik, -oog na; jiibaakwewakik, -oog na
FRYING PAN: abwewin, -an ni
LARGE PAN: gichi-onaagan ni
ROASTING PAN: giboziganaabik, -oon ni
PANCAKE
PANCAKE: gwekiwebinigan. -ag na
PANT
PANT: nesezo vai
PANTHER
PANTHER: mishibizhii, -g na
PANTS
PANTS: giboodiyegwaazon, -ag na
PUT ON PANTS: put on one's pants
biichigiboodiyegwaazone vai
TAKE OFF PANTS: take off one's pants
giichigiboodiyegwaazone vai
WEAR PANTS: gigigiboodiyegwaazone vai
PAPER
PAPER: mazina'igan, -an ni
PAPER BAG
PAPER BAG: rnazina'rgani-mashkimodens,
-an ni
PARALYZED
PARALYZED: be paralyzed niboowi vai
BECOME PARALYZED: niboowise vai
PARCH
PARCH: parch s.t. gaapizan vti; parch s.t.
(e.g., wild rice) gidasan vti; parch things
gaapizige vai; parch things (e.g., wild rice)
gidasige vai
PARENT
PARENT: my parent ingitiziim, -ag
/-gitiziim-/ nad
PARENTS: my parents plural niniigi'igoog
/-niigi'igw-/ nad
PARENT-IN-LAW
PARENT-IN-LAW: my fellow parent-in-law
indindawaa, -g /-dindawaa-/ nad
PAROLE
ON PAROLE: be on parole
ganawaabanjigaazo vai; ganawenjigaazo
vai
PARROT
PARROT: gaagiigidoo-bineshiinh, -yag na
PART
PART: bakise vai; bakise, bakrsemagad vii
PARTICLES
IN PARTICLES: be in particles biisaa,
biisaamagad vii; biisizi vai
PULL INTO PARTICLES: pull s.o. into par-
ticles biisibizh /biisibiN-/ vta; pull s.t. into
particles biisibidoon vti2
PARTITION
CLOTH PARTITION: gibagoojigan, -an ni
PARTNER
PARTNER: wiijiiwaagan, -ag na
PARTRIDGE
PARTRIDGE: bine, -wag na
PASS
PASS: pass (as time) izhise, izhisemagad vii;
ojijise, ojijisemagad vii
COME TO PASS: bagami-ayaa, bagami-
ayaamagad vii
PASS BY: pass s.o. by gabikaw vta; pass s.t.
by gabikan vti
PASS THROUGH: zhaabose,
zhaabosemagad vii; zhaabwii vai
PAST
GOING PAST: bimi-pvZ
PAST TENSE
PAST TENSE: past verb prefix gn-pvl
PASTE
PASTE: agokiwasigan, -an ni; paste some-
thing on s.o. agokiwas /agokiwasw-/ vta;
paste something on s.t. agokiwasan vti
PASTED
PASTED: be pasted on agokiwaso vai;
agokiwate, agokiwatemagad vii
PASTRY
PASTRY: waashkobizid bakwezhigan na-pt;
wiishkobi-bakwezhigan, -ag na
PATCH
PATCH: bagwa'igan, -an ni; patch s.o.
bagwa* /bagwa'w-/ vta; patch s.t.
bagwa'an vti; patch (s.t.) for s.o.
bagwa'amaw vta; patch things bagwa'ige
vai
WEAR PATCHES: bagwa'igaazo vai
PATCHED
PATCHED: be patched bagwa'igaade,
bagwa'igaademagad vii; bagwa'igaazo
vai

pattern—phonograph
226
PATTERN
PATTERN: pattern (in sewing) naabizhigan,
-an m
HAVE A SQUARE PATTERN: gakakishin
i>ai; gakakisin vii
PAY
PAY: pay for s.o. diba' /diba'w-/ vta; pay for
s.t. diba'an vti; pay (s.t.) to s.o.
diba'amaw vta; pay s.o. for (s.t.)
diba'amaw vta; pay things diba'ige vai;
pay people for (s.t.) diba'amaage vai; they
pay each other for (s.t.) diba'amaadiwag
/diba'amaadi-/ vai
PAY OFF: diba'igese, diba'igesemagad vii
PAY ATTENTION
PAY ATTENTION: babaamendam vai2; pay
attention to s.o. babaamenim vta; pay at-
tention to s.t. babaamendan vti
PEA
PEAS: peas plural anijiiminan /anijiimin-/ ni
PEA SOUP
PEA SOUP: anijiiminaaboo ni
PEACEFUL
PEACEFUL: be peaceful bangan vii
PEACH
PEACH: miishiijiimin, -ag na
PEANUT
PEANUT: bagaan, -ag na
PEANUT BUTTER
PEANUT BUTTER: bagaani-bimide ni, also
bagaanensi-bimide
PEARL
PEARL: miigis, -ag na
PEDAL
PEDAL: ditibiwebishkige vai
PEDDLER
PEDDLER: babaamadaawewinini, -wag na,
also babaamadaawaagewinini; be a
peddlar babaamadaawe vai
PEEK
PEEK: giimaabi vai; giimoozaabi vai; inaabi
vai; peek at s.o. giimaabam vta
PEEK THROUGH AN OPENING: dapaabi
vai; peek through an opening at s.o.
dapaabam vta; peek through an opening
at s.t. dapaabandan vti
PEEL
PEEL FROM SUNBURN: bishagaaso vai
PEEL OFF: bishagishkaa vai; bishagishkaa,
bishagishkaamagad vii
PEEL TIMBER USING SOMETHING:
bishagaakwa'ige vai
PEEL WIGOB: peel wigob (inner bark of
basswood) bisha'igobii vai
PEEL WITH A KNIFE: peel s.o. with a knife
bishagikozh /bishagikoN-/ vta; peel s.t.
with a knife bishagikodan vti
PEEL WITH HANDS: peel s.o. with hands
bishagibizh /bishagibiN-/ vta; peel s.t.
with hands bishagibidoon vti2; peel things
with hands bishagibijige vai
PELICAN
PELICAN: zhede, -g na
PEN
PEN: ozhibii'iganaak, -oon ni
PENCIL
PENCIL: ozhibii'iganaak, -oon ni
PENINSULA
PENINSULA: neyaashi, -wan ni; there is a
peninsula neyaashiiwan vii
PENIS
PENIS: my penis niinag /-iinag-/ nid
PENNY
PENNY: miskwaabikoons, -ag na;
ozaawaabikoons, -ag na
PEOPLE
MANY PEOPLE: there are many people
anishinaabekaa vii
PEPPER
PEPPER: gaa-wiisagang ni-pt
PERCEIVE
PERCEIVE A CERTAIN WAY: perceive s.o.
a certain way izhinaw vta; perceive s.t. a
certain way izhinan vti
PERCH
PERCH: asaawe, -g na
PERCHED
PERCHED UP: be perched up on something
agoozi vai
PERFORM
PERFORM TRICKS: mamaandaagochige
vai
PERFUME
PERFUME: minomaagochigan, -an ni
USE PERFUME: minomaagochige vai
PERHAPS
PERHAPS: ganabajpc; maagizhaa pc, also
maarhaa
PERSISTENTLY
PERSISTENTLY: awanjish pc
PERSON
PERSON: anishinaabe, -g na; bemaadizid
na-pt
PERSUADE
PERSUADE: persuade s.o. gagaanzom vta
PESTLE
PESTLE: bootaaganaak, -oon ni
PET
PET: bami'aagaans, -ag na
PHARMACIST
PHARMACIST: mashkikii-adaawewinini,
-wag na, also mashkikiiwi-adaawewinini
PHARMACY
PHARMACY: mashkikii-adaawewigamig,
-oon ni, oho mashkikiiwi-adaawewigamig
PHEASANT
PHEASANT: mayagi-bine, -wag na
PHLEGM
PHLEGM: agig na
PHONE
CALL ON THE PHONE: call s.o. on the
phone ganoozh /ganooN-/ vta
PHONOGRAPH
PHONOGRAPH: gaagiigidoo-makakoons,
-an ni; nagamoo-makak, -oon ni

227
photograph—pin
PHOTOGRAPH
PHOTOGRAPH: mazinaakizon, -an ni; pho-
tograph s.o. mazinaakiz /mazinaakizw-/
vta; photograph s.t. mazinaakizan vti;
photograph things mazinaakizige vai
PHOTOGRAPHED
PHOTOGRAPHED: be photographed
mazinaakide, mazinaakidemagad vii;
mazinaakizo vai
PIANO
PIANO: madwewechigan, -an ni
PICK
PICK: pick s.o. onaabam vta; pick s.t.
onaabandan vti; pick things onaabanjige
vai
PICK BERRIES: mawinzo vai
PICK FROM: piick from s.o. gagiigin vta; pick
from s.t. gagiiginan vti
PICK TEETH: pick one's teeth
zesegwaabide'o vai
PICK UP
PICKUP: pick s.o. up mami /mam-/ vta;
maamigin vta; odaapin vta; pick s.t. up
mamoon vti2; maamiginan vti;
odaapinan vti; pick (s.t.) up from s.o.
mamaw vta; odaapinamaw vta; pick up
things mamige vai; odaapinige vai
PICK UP A NET: naadasabii vai
PICK UP IN MOUTH: pick s.o. up in mouth
niimam vta; pick s.t. up in mouth
niimandan vti
PICK UP USING SOMETHING: pick s.o.
up (as or as with something stick- or wood-
like) niimaakwa' /niimaakwa'w-/ vta; pick
s.o. up using something niima* /niima'w-/
vta; pick s.t. up (as or as with something
stick- or wood-like) niimaakwa'an vti; pick
s.t. up using something niima'an vti
PICKED
PICKED: be picked onaabanjigaade,
onaabanjigaademagad vii;
onaabanjigaazo vai
PICKED UP
PICKED UP: be picked up mamigaade,
mamigaadcimagad vii; mamigaazo vai;
naajigaade, naajigaademagad vii;
naajigaazo vai
PICKEREL
PICKEREL: ogaa, -wag na
PICKLE
PICKLE: zhaawaabookaadeg
bipakoombens ni; zhiiwi-bipakoombens,
-an ni
PICKLED
PICKLED: be pickled zhiiwaabookaade,
zhiiwaabookaademagad vii
PICTURE
PICTURE: mazinaakizon, -an ni
TAKE PICTURES: mazinaakizige vai; take
pictures of s.o. mazinaakiz
/mazinaakizw-/ vta; take pictures of s.t.
mazinaakizan vti
PICTURED
PICTURED: be pictured mazinaakide,
mazinaakidemagad vii; mazinaakizo vai
PIE
PIE: biitoosijigan, -ag na; biitoosijigani-
bakwezhigan, -ag na
PIECE
BITE A PIECE OFF: bite a piece off s.o.
bakwem vta; bite a piece off s.t.
bakwendan vti
CHOP A PIECE OFF: chop a piece off s.o. (as
something of wood) bakwega'
/bakwega'w-/ vta; chop a piece off s.t. (as
something of wood) bakwega'an vti
CUT A PIECE OFF: cut a piece off s.o.
bakwezh /bakwezhw-/ vta; cut a piece off
s.t. bakwezhan vti
TAKE A PIECE OFF BY HAND: take a piece
off s.o. by hand bakwen vta; take a piece
off s.t. by hand bakwenan vti
TAKE A PIECE OFF USING
SOMETHING: take a piece off s.o. using
something bakwe' vta; take a piece off s.t.
using something bakwe'an vti
TEAR A PIECE OFF: tear a piece off of s. o.
bakwebizh /bakwebiN-/ vta; tear a piece
off of s.t. bakwebidoon vti2
PIECES
CUT TO PIECES: cut s.o. to pieces
bigishkizh /bigishkizhw-/ vta; cut s.t. to
pieces bigishkizhan vti
FALL TO PIECES: bigishkanad vii;
bigishkanani vai
GO TO PIECES: bigishkise vai; bigishkise,
bigishkisemagad vii
TEAR TO PIECES: tear s.o. to pieces
bigishkibizh /bigishkibiN-/ vta; tear s.t. to
pieces bigishkibidoon vti2
PIG
PIG: gookoosh, -ag na
PIGEON
PIGEON: omiimii, -g na
PIKE
NORTHERN PIKE: ginoozhe, -g na
PILE
PILE: pile s.o. okoshim vta; pile s.t.
okosidoon vti2
LIE IN A PILE: okoshin vai; okosin vii
PILL
PILL: bebiikominagak ni-pt; mashkikiins, -an
ni
PILLOW
PILLOW: apikweshimon, -an ni
PILLOWCASE
PILLOWCASE: apikweshimoniigin, -oon ni
PIN
PIN: zagaakwa'igan, -an ni; zagaakwa'on,
-ag na; pin s.o. zagaakwa' /zagaakwa'w-/
vta; pin s.t. zagaakwa'an vti; pin things
zagaakwa'ige vai
COMMON PIN: oshtigwaanzhaabonigan,
-an ni

pin—plum
228
HAIRPIN: wiinizisimaani-zagaakwa'igan,
-an ni
PINCH
PINCH: pinch s.o. jiisibizh /jiisibiN-/ vta
PINCHERRY
PINCHERRY: bawa'iminaan, -an ni
PINCHERRY BUSH
PINCHERRY BUSH: bawa'iminagaawanzh,
-iig na
PINE
JACK PINE: okikaandag, -oog na, also
wakikaandag
WHITE PINE: zhingwaak, -wag na
PINE BOUGH
PINE BOUGH: zhingwaakwaandag, -oog na
PINNED
PINNED: be pinned zagaakwa'igaade,
zagaakwa'igaademagad vii;
zagaakwa'igaazo vai
PINNED DOWN: be pinned down dasoozo
vai
PIPE
PIPE: pipe (for smoking) opwaagan, -ag na
LIGHT A PIPE: zaka'ipwaagane vai
STONE PIPE: asinii-opwaagan na
PIPE BAG
PIPE BAG: gashkibidaagan, -ag na
PIPE STEM
PIPE STEM: okij, -iin ni
PIPESTONE
PIPESTONE: opwaaganasin, -iig na
PITCH
PITCH: bigiw ni
APPLY PITCH: bigiike vai; apply pitch to s.t.
(e.g., a canoe) bigiikaadan vti
PITCHER
PITCHER: pitcher (in baseball)
apagijigewinini, -wag na
PITIABLE
PITIABLE: be pitiable inigaazi vai
PITIED
PITIED: be pitied zhawendaagozi vai
PITY
PITY: pity s.o. gidimaagenim vta; zhawenim
vta
HAVE PITY: zhawenjige vai
PLACE
PLACE A BET: achige vai
PLAIN
PLAIN: mashkode, -n ni
PLAIN VIEW
IN PLAIN VIEW: mizhishapc
PLAN
PLAN: plan s.t. onaakonan vti
CHANGE PLANS: aandaakonige vai
PLANE
PLANE: airplane bemisemagak, -in ni~pt
PLANE
PLANE: plane (tool) mookojigan, -an ni
PLANT
PLANT: gitige vai; plant s.o. gitigaazh
/gitigaaN-/ vta; plant s.t. gitigaadan vti
PLANT IN: plant s.o. in badakizh /badakiN-/
vta; plant s.t. badakidoon vti2; plant
things in bagidinige vai
PLANTED
PLANTED: be planted gitigaade,
gitigaademagad vii; gitigaazo vai
PLANTED IN: be planted in badakide,
badakidemagad vii; badakizo vai
PLATE
PLATE: onaagan, -an ni
DINNER PLATE: desinaagan, -an ni
SMALL PLATE: onaagaans, -an ni
PLATFORM
PLATFORM: desa'on, -an ni
PLAY
PLAY: odamino vai
PLAY A GUITAR: madweyaabiigibijige vai
PLAY A WIND INSTRUMENT:
noondaagochige vai; play s.t. as a wind
instrument noondaagotoon vti2
PLAY BASEBALL: bakitejii'ige vai
PLAY IN A CERTAIN PLACE:
danakamigizi vai; dazhitaa vai
PLAY LACROSSE: baaga'adowe vai
PLAY MUSIC: madwewechige vai; play
music for s.o. madwewctaw vta, also
madwewetamaw
PLAY POOL: nemaabii vai
PLAY SHINNY: bapasikawe vai
PLAY THE DISH GAME: bagese vai
PLAY THE FLUTE: bibigwe vai
PLAY THE MOCCASIN GAME:
makizinataage vai; they play the moccasin
game with each other makizinataadiwag
/makizinataadi-/ vai
PLAY WITH: play with s.o. wiiji' vta
PLAYING CARD
PLAYING CARD: ataadiwin, -ag na
PLAYTHING
PLAYTHING: odaminwaagan, -an ni
PLEASE
PLEASE: please s.o. zhoobi' vta; please! daga
pc
PLIERS
PLIERS: dakwanjigan, -an ni
PLOW
PLOW: biigwakamigibijigan, -ag na;
biigwakamigibijige vai; plow s.t.
biigwakamigibidoon vti2
PLUCK
PLUCK: pluck s.o. (e.g., a bird) bashkobizh
/bashkobiN-/ vta; pluck s.t.
bakwajibidoon vti2; pluck s.t. (as a plant)
bashkwashkibidoon vti2
PLUG
PLUG: gibaakwa'igan, -an ni; plug s.o. giba*
/giba'w-/ vta; plug s.t. giba'an vti; plug
things giba'ige vai; gibaakwa'ige vai
PLUGGED
PLUGGED: be plugged giba'igaade,
giba'igaademagad vii; giba'igaazo vai
PLUM
PLUM: bagesaan, -ag na

229
plum bush—Potawatomi
PLUM BUSH
PLUM BUSH: bagesaaniminagaawanzh, -iig
na
PLUM TREE
PLUM TREE: bagesaanaatig, -oog na
PNEUMONIA
HAVE PNEUMONIA: giehi-gizhizo vai
POCKET
POCKET: mashkimodegwaajigan, -an ni
POINT
POINT A CERTAIN WAY: point to s.o. a
certain way izhinoo* vta; point to s.t. a cer-
tain way izhinoo'an vii; point to (s.t.) for
s.o. izhinoo'amaw via
POINT WITH LIPS: point a certain way with
lips izhidoorieni vai; point s.o. out with
lips izhidooriem via; point (s.t.) out to s.o.
with lips izhidoonetaw vta
POINT
POINT: point of land neyaashi, -wan ni; there
is a point of land neyaashiiwan vii
GO OVER A POINT: gakiiwe vai
POINTED
POINTED: be pointed bajiishkaa,
bajiishkaamagad vii; bajiishkizi vai
CHOP POINTED: chop s.o. pointed
bajiishkiga' /bajiishkiga'w-/ vta; chop s.t.
pointed bajiishkiga'an vii
POISON
POISON: maji-rnashkiki, -wan ni
POKER
POKER: fire poker jiichiishkinzhe'igan, -an m
POLE
POLE: pole s.t. gaandakii'an vti
LIGHT POLE: waazakonenjiganaatig, -oon
ni
POLE A BOAT: gaandakii'ige vai;
gaandakii'o vai
POLE A BOAT ALONG: bima'oodoo vai;
bima'ookii vai
POLE A BOAT TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
ina'oodoo vai
POLE IN A BOAT: pole s.t. along in a boat
bima'oodoon vti2; pole s.o. along in a
boat bima'oozh /bima'ooN-/ vta
POLE LOGS: gaanjweba'ige vai
POLICE CAR
POLICE CAR: dakoniwewidaabaan, -ag na
POLICE STATION
POLICE STATION: dakoniwewigamig,
-oon ni
POLICEMAN
POLICEMAN: dakoniwewinini, -wag na
POLISH
POLISH: polish s.o. waasikwa' vta; polish s.t.
waasikwa'an vii
POLITICS
IN POLITICS: be in politics dibaakonige vai
POND
POND: be a pond waanzhibiiyaa,
waanzhibiiyaiamagad vii
PONDER
PONDER: maarninonendam vai2
POOL
PLAY POOL: nemaabii vai
POOL HALL
POOL HALL: nemaabiiwigamig. -oon ni
POOR
POOR: be poor gidimaagizi vai; inigaazi vai
LOOK POOR: gidimaaginaagozi vai;
gidimaaginaagwad vii
POOR HEALTH
IN POOR HEALTH: be in poor health
maanamanji'o vai; maazhi-ayaa vai
POOR JOB
POOR JOB: do a poor job mamaazhii vai
POORLY
RUN POORLY: run poorly (e.g., a car)
maazhibizo vai; run poorly (e.g., a ma-
chine) maazhibide, maazhibidemagad vii
POPLAR
POPLAR: azaadi, -wag na
BALSAM POPLAR: maanazaadi, -wag na
PORCUPINE
PORCUPINE: gaag, -wag na
PORK
PORK: gookoosh, -ag na; gookooshi-wiiyaas
ni
SALT PORK: zhiiwitaagani-gookoosh na
PORTAGE
PORTAGE: gakiiwe vai
CARRY OVER A PORTAGE: carry things
over a portage gakiiwenige vai
POSSESSED
POSSESSED: be possessed by an evil spirit
maji-manidoowaadizi vai
POST
POST: post s.t. up agwaakwa'an vti
POST OFFICE
POST OFFICE: mazina'iganiiwigamig, -oon
ni
POSTAGE STAMP
POSTAGE STAMP: oshtigwaanens, -an ni
POSTER
POSTER: agwaakwa'igan, -an ni
POSTMAN
POSTMAN: mazina'iganiiwinini, -wag na
POSTURE
HAVE GOOD POSTURE: gwayakogaabawi
vai
POT
POT: akik, -oog na
COOKING POT: jiibaakwewakik, -oog na
POT LID
POT LID: gibaabowe'igan, -an ni
POT SCRUBBER
POT SCRUBBER: mimigwaabika'igan, -an
ni
POTATO
POTATO: opin, -iig na
WILD POTATO: bagwajipin, -iig na, also
bagwaji-opin
POTAWATOMI
POTAWATOMI: boodewaadamii, -g na

potbelly—prisoner
230
POTBELLY
POTBELLY: have a potbelly bikonagizhii vai
POTHOLDER
POTHOLDER: apaabikinigan, -an ni
POTHOLE
POTHOLE: be a pothole of water
waanzhibiiyaa, waanzhibiiyaamagad vii
POUND
POUND IN: pound s.o. in ginjida' /ginjida'w-/
vta; pound s.t. in ginjida'an vti
POUND ON DRUM: baaga'akokwe vai
POUND
CERTAIN NUMBER OF POUNDS: a
certain number of pounds daso-
dibaabiishkoojigan pc
POUR
POUR: pour s.t. ziiginan vti; pour things
ziiginige vai
POUR ON: pour liquid on s.o. ziiga'andaw
vta; pour liquid on s.t. ziiga'andan vti
POUR OUT: ziigise, ziigisemagad vii
POUT
POUT: mindawe vai
POWDER
FACE POWDER: waabishkiingwechigan ni
POWER
HAVE POWER: gashki'ewizi vai
POWERED
POWERED: waasamoo- pv4
PRACTICE
PRACTICE RIDING: practice riding on
horseback gagwedoomigo vai
PRACTICE SHOOTING: gagweda'aakwe
vai
PRACTICE SINGING: goji-nagamo vai
PRAIRIE
PRAIRIE: mashkode, -n ni
PRAIRIE CHICKEN
PRAIRIE CHICKEN: aagask, -wag na
PRAY
PRAY: anami'aa vai; pray for s.o.
anama'etaw vta
PRAYER BOOK
PRAYER BOOK: anama'e-mazina'igan, -an
ni
PREACH
PREACH: gagiikwe vai; preach to s.o.
gagiikim vta
PREACHER
PREACHER: gagiikwewinini, -wag na
PREACHING
EDUCATION BY PREACHING AND EX-
HORTATION: gagiikimaawasowin ni
PREGNANT
PREGNANT: be pregnant anjiko vai;
bimiwijige vai; gigishkawaawaso vai;
gigishkaajige vai; be pregnant with s.o.
gigishkaw vta
PREOCCUPIED
PREOCCUPIED: be preoccupied
ondamendam vai2; be preoccupied with
s.o. ondamenim via; be preoccupied with
s.t. ondamendan vti
PREPARE
PREPARE: ozhiitaa vai
PRESERVES
PRESERVES: baashkiminasigan, -an ni
PRESS
PRESS: press on s.o. maagon vta; press on s.t.
maagonan vti
PRETTY
PRETTY: be pretty onizhishi vai; onizhishin
vii
MADE PRETTY: be made pretty
wawezhichigaade,
wawezhichigaademagad vii
PREVAIL
PREVAIL: prevail over s.o. gashki' vta;
mamaazhi' vta; prevail over s.t.
mamaazhitoon vti2
PREVENT
PREVENT: prevent s.o. (from doing some-
thing) nanagin vta
PREVIOUSLY
PREVIOUSLY: gayatpc
PRICE
CHARGE A HIGH PRICE: ishpagindaaso
vai; charge a high price for s.t.
ishpagindan vti
HAVE A CERTAIN PRICE: inaginde,
inagindemagad vii; inaginzo vai
HAVE A PRICE OF A CERTAIN HEIGHT:
apiitagindej apiitagindemagad vii;
apiitaginzo vai
SET A CERTAIN PRICE: set a certain price
on s.o. inagim vta; set a certain price on
s.t. inagindan vti; set a certain price on
(s.t.) for s.o. inagindamaw vta
SET A PRICE: onagindaaso vai; set a price
on s.o. onagim vta; set a price on s.t.
onagindan vti
SET A PRICE OF A CERTAIN HEIGHT:
set a price of a certain height on s.o.
apiitagim vta; set a price of a certain
height on s.t. apiitagindan vti
PRICK
PRICK: prick s.o. badaka' /badaka'w-/ vta;
prick s.t. badaka'an vti; prick things
badaka'ige vai
PRICKED
GET PRICKED: badakijin vai
PRIEST
PRIEST: mekadewikonayed na-pt;
mekadewikonayewinini, -wag na
PRINCESS
PRINCESS: ogimaakwens, -ag na
PRINTED
PRINTED A CERTAIN WAY: be printed a
certain way izhisin vii
PRISON
PRISON: gibaakwa'odiiwigamig, -oon ni
PRISONER
PRISONER: gebaakwa'ond na-pt

231
privy—push
PRIVY
PRIVY: zaaga'amoowigamig, -oon ni
PROGRESS
IN PROGRESS: ani- pv2, ako ni-
PROHIBITION
PROHIBITION: there is a prohibition
gina'amaadim vii
PROJECT
PROJECT: anokaajigan, -an ni
PROJECTOR
MOVIE PROJECTOR: mazinaatewebinigan,
•an ni
PROMISE
PROMISE: promise (s.t.) to s.o.
waawiindannaw via; promise (s.t.) to
people waawiindamaage vai
PROP
PROP UP TO BE A LEVEL SURFACE: prop
s.t. up to be a level surface desa'an vti
PROPER
LIVE A PROPER LIFE: gwayako-bimaadizi
vai
PROPERLY
PROPERLY: wawiinge pc; weweni pc
PROPERTY
PROPERTY: daniwin, -an ni
PROTECT
PROTECT YOUNG: protect one's young
gizhaawaso vai
PROTECTION
LAY SOMETHING FOR PROTECTION:
lay something on or under s.t. for protec-
tion apisidoon vti2
PROUD
PROUD: be proud ishpenimo vai; be proud
of oneself apiitenimo vai
PROUD THOUGHTS: have proud thoughts
maminaadendam vai2
PROUD TO A CERTAIN EXTENT: be
proud of s.o. to a certain extent apiitenim
vta; be proud of s.t. to a certain extent
apiitendan vti
PUBIC HAIR
PUBIC HAIR: ray pubic hair nimiishigwaan,
-an /-miishigwaan-/ nid
PUDDLE
PUDDLE: be a puddle waanzhibiiyaa,
waanzhibiiyaamagad vii
PULL
PULL: pull s.o. wiikobizh /wiikobiN-/ vta;
pull s.o. (as with something string-like)
wiikwaabiignn vta; pull s.t. wiikobidoon
vti2; pull s.t. (as with something string-
like) wiikwaabiiginan vti; pull (s.t.) for s.o.
wiikobidaw vta; pull things wiikobijige vai
PULL APART TO FORM A GAP: pull s.o.
apart to form a gap dawibizh /dawibiN-/
vta; pull s.t. apart to form a gap
dawibidoon vti2; pull things apart to form
a gap dawibijige vai
PULL ASHORE!: pull s.o. ashore agwaabizh
/agwaabiN-/ vta; pull s.t. ashore
agwaabidoon vti2
PULL BACK: pull s.o. back azhebizh
/azhebiN-/ vta; pull s.t. back azhebidoon
vti2
PULL DOWN: pull s.o. down niisibizh
/niisibiN-/ vta; pull s.t. down niisibidoon
vti2
PULL DOWN WITH HANDS: pull s.o.
down with hands gawiwebin vta; pull s.t.
down with hands gawiwebinan vti
PULL FREE: pull s.o. free gidiskibizh
/gidiskibiN-/ vta; pull s.t. free
gidiskibidoon vti2
PULL FROM THE WATER: pull s.o. from
the water agwaabizh /agwaabiN-/ vta; pull
s.t. from the water agwaabidoon vti2
PULL IN TWO: pull s.o. in two bookobizh
/bookobiN-/ vta; pull s.t. in two
bookobidoon vti2
PULL INTO PARTICLES: pull s.o. into par-
ticles biisibizh /biisibiN-/ vta; pull s.t. into
particles biisibidoon °uti2
PULL OFF: pull s.o. off gijibizh /gijibiN-/ vta;
pull s.t. off gijibidoon vti; giichigobidoon
vti2; giichigobizh /giichigobiN-/ vta
PULL OFF WITH TEETH: pull s.o. off with
teeth giichigwam vta; pull s.t. off with
teeth giichigwandan vti
PULL SHUT: pull s.t. shut (as something
stick- or wood-like) gibaakobidoon vti2
PULL STRAIGHT: pull s.o. straight
gwayakobizh /gwayakobiN-/ vta; pull s.t.
straight gwayakobidoon vti2
PULL UP: pull s.t. up bakwajibidoon vti2
PULLED
PULLED: be pulled wiikobijigaade,
wiikobijigaademagad vii; wiikobijigaazo
vai
PUMP
PUMP: wiikwa'ibaan, -an ni
PUMP WATER: wiikwa'ibii vai
TIRE PUMP: boodaajii'igan, -an ni
PUMPKIN
PUMPKIN: okosimaan, -an ni;
ozaawikosimaan, -an ni
PUNK
PUNK: zagataagan, -ag na
PUPPY
PUPPY: animoons, -ag na
PURSE
PURSE: zhooniyaa-mashkimod, -an ni, also
zhooniyaa-mashkimodens
PUS
PUS: mini /miny-/ ni
PUSH
PUSH: push s.o. gaandin vta; push s.t.
gaandinan vti; push (s.t.) for s.o.
gaandinamaw vta; push things gaandinige
vai
PUSH WITH A STICK: push s.o. with a stick
gaanjida' /gaanjida'w-/ vta; push s.t. with
a stick gaanjida'an vti; push things with a
stick gaanjida'ige vai

push—quick
PUSH WITH FOOT OR BODY: push s.o.
with foot or body gaanzikaw via; push s.t.
with foot or body gaanzikan vti
PUSH POLE
PUSH POLE: gaandakii'iganaak, -oon ni,
also gaandakii'iganaatig
PUT
PUT ALONG: put s.o. along (as something
stick- or wood-like) bimaakoshim vta; put
s.t. along (as something stick- or wood-
like) bimaakosidoon vti2
PUT AWAY: be put away zagakinigaade,
zagakinigaademagad vii; zagakinigaazo
vai; put s.o. away nanaa'in vta; zagakin
vta; put s.t. away nanaa'inan vti;
zagakinan vti; put things away zagakinige
vai
PUT HEAD A CERTAIN WAY: put one's
head a certain way inikweni vai
PUT IN: be put in biina'igaade,
biina'igaademagad vii; biina'igaazo vai;
put s.o. in biina" /biina'w-/ via; put s.t. in
biina'an vti
PUT IN A CERTAIN PLACE: be put in a
certain place achigaade, achigaademagad
vii; achigaazo vai; put s.o. in a certain
place ashi /aS-/ vta; put s.t. in a certain
place atoon vti2; put (s.t.) in a certain
place for s.o. ataw vta; put things in a
certain place achige vai
PUT IN A TIGHT PLACE: put s.o. in a tight
place zhegoshim vta; put s.t. in a tight
place zhegosidoon vti2
PUT IN MOUTH: put (something) in one's
mouth zhakamo vai; put s.o. in one's
mouth agwanem vta; put s.t. in one's
mouth agwanendan mi; put things in
one's mouth agwanenjige vai
PUT IN ORDER: put s.o. in order nanaa'in
vta; onin vta; zagakishim vta; put s.t. in
order nanaa'inan vti; oninan vti;
zagakisidoon vti2; put things in order
zagakisijige vti; na'isijige vai; oninige vai
PUT IN THE KETTLE: put (s.t.) in the
kettle boodaakwe vai+o
PUT IN THE RIGHT POSITION: put s.o. in
the right position minoshim vta; put s.t. in
the right position minosidoon vti2
PUT IN TO SOAK: be put in to soak
agonjijigaade, agonjijigaademagad vii;
agonjijigaazo vai; put s.o. in to soak
agonjim vta; put s.t. in to soak agonjidoon
vti2
PUT IN WATER: put s.o. in water
gondaabiigin vta; put s.t. in water
gondaabiiginan vti
PUT LOOSELY: put s.o. loosely
geshawishim vta; put s.t. loosely
geshawisidoon vti2
PUT ON A ROOF: apakwe vai
PUT OUT: put s.o. out zaagidin vta; put s.t.
out zaagidinan vti
PUT OUT OF THE WAY: put s.o. out of the
way ikoshim vta; put s.t. out of the way
ikosidoon vti2
232
PUT THROUGH: put s.o. through zhaabon
vta; put s.t. through zhaabonan vti
PUT TOUCHING: put s.o. touching
daangishim vta; put s.t. touching
daangisidoon vti2
PUT TURNED: put s.o. turned gwekishim
vta; put s.t. turned gwekisidoon vti2
PUT UNDER THE GROUND: put s.o.
under the ground ningwakamigin vta
PUT WOOD ON THE FIRE: bagidinise vai
PUT ON
PUT ON: put s.t. on (e.g., clothes) biizikan
vti; put s.o. on (e.g., clothes) biizikaw vta
PUT ON CLOTHES: put on one's clothes
biizikonaye vai
PUT ON COAT: put on one's coat
biichibabiinzikawaagane vai
PUT ON DRESS: put on one's dress
biitagoode vai
PUT ON HAT: put on one's hat
biichiwakwaane vai
PUT ON MITTENS: put on one's mittens
biichiminjikaawane vai
PUT ON MOCCASINS: put on one's
moccasins babiichii vai
PUT ON PANTS: put on one's pants
biichigiboodiyegwaazone vai
PUT ON SHIRT: put on one's shirt
biichibabagiwayaane vai
PUT ON SHOES: put on one's shoes
babiichii vai
PUT ON SOCKS: put on one's socks
biitazhigane vai
PUT OUT
PUT OUT: put s.t. out (e.g., fire or light)
aate'an vti
PUT OUT A FIRE: put out a fire on s.o. with
hands aatebizh /aatebiN-/ vta
PUT OUT QUICKLY: put s.t. out quickly
(e.g., fire or light) aatewebinan vti
PUTTY
PUTTY: bigiike vai; putty s.t. bigiikaadan vti
Q
QUARREL
QUARREL: quarrel with s.o. giikaam vta;
they quarrel with each other giikaandiwag
/giikaandi-/ vai
QUEEN
QUEEN: ogimaakwe, -g na; queen (card)
ikwe, -wag na
QUESTION
YES-NO QUESTION: yes-no question word ina
pc, also na
QUICK
QUICK: be quick dadaatabii vai

233
quickly—rations
QUICKLY
QUICKLY: weiwiib pc
QUIET
QUIET: bizaan pc; be quiet bangan vii;
bekaadizi vai; bizaan-ayaa vai, also
bizaani-ayaa; goshkwaawaadizi vai
QUIET HOUSE: be a quiet house bangate,
bangatemaigad vii
QUIETLY
SIT QUIETLY: goshkwaawaadabi vai
STAND QUIETLY: bizaanigaabawi vai
QUILT
QUILT: maawandoogwaason, -an ni
QUIT
QUIT: quit s.o. boon!' vta; quit s.t. boonitoon
vti2
QUIT WORKING: aanizhiitam vai2
QUITE
QUITE: aapiji pc
QUIVER
QUIVER: jiichiibishkaa vai
QUOTE
QUOTE: quote s.o. a certain way inootaw
vta; quote pieople inootaage vai
R
RABBIT
RABBIT: waabooz, -oog na
COTTONTAIL RABBIT: manidoo-
waabooz, -oog na
HUNT FOR RABBITS: nandawaaboozwe
vai
JACK RABBIT: misaabooz, -oog na
RABBIT SKIN
RABBIT SKIN: waaboozwayaan. -ag na
RABBIT SOUP
RABBIT SOUP: waaboozwaaboo ni
RACCOON
RACCOON: esiban, -ag na
RACE
RACE: race s.o. gagwejikazh /gagwejikaN-/
vta; race people gagwejikazhiwe vai; they
race each other gagwejikanidiwag
/gagwejikanidi-/ vai
RACE IN BOATS: race s.o. in boats
gagwejikada' /gagwejikada'w-/ vta; they
race each other in boats
gagwejikada'odiwag/gagwejikada'odi-/
vai
RACE CAR
RACE CAR: gagwejikazhiwewidaabaan, -ag
na
RACK
HANGING RACK FOR FOOD DRYING:
agoojiwanaanaak, -oon ni
RADIO
RADIO: bizindamowin, -an ni; bizindamoo-
makak, -oon ni
RADISH
RADISH: wiisagi-jiisens, -an ni
RAFTER
RAFTER: abanzh, -iin ni
RAIN
RAIN: gimiwan vii
COLD RAIN: be cold rain dakibiisaa,
dakibiisaamagad vii
RAIN COMES: biijibiisaa, biijibiisaamagad
vii
RAIN GOES ALONG: bimibiisaa,
bimibiisaamagad vii
RAIN GOES AWAY: animibiisaa,
animibiisaamagad vii
RAIN IS HEARD: madwebiisaa,
madwebiisaamagad vii
RAIN IS ON THE WAY: bagamibiisaa,
bagamibiisaamagad vii
SPRINKLING RAIN: be sprinkling rain
awanibiisaa, awanibiisaamagad vii
START TO RAIN: maajibiisaa,
maajibiisaamagad vii
STOP RAINING: ishkwaabiisaa,
ishkwaabiisaamagad vii
RAINBOW
RAINBOW: nagweyaab, -iin ni
RAINCOAT
RAINCOAT: gimiwanoowayaan, -an ni
RAISE
RAISE: raise s.o. (e.g., a child) nitaawigi' via;
raise s.t. nitaawigitoon (e.g., a crop) vti2
RAISE USING SOMETHING: raise s.o. (as
or as with something stick- or wood-like)
ombaakwa' /ombaakwa'w-/ vta; raise s.t.
(as or as with something stick- or wood-
like) ombaakwa'an vti
RAISIN
RAISIN: zhoominens, -an ni
RAKE
RAKE: binaakwe'igan, -an ni;
jiishakamiga'igan, -an ni; rake things
binaakwe'ige vai
RANCID
SMELL RANCID: zaatemaagozi vai;
zaatemaagwad vii
TASTE RANCID: zaatepogozi vai;
zaatepogwad vii
TURN RANCID: zaateshin vai; zaatesin vii
RANK
AT A CERTAIN RANK: be at a certain rank
apiitendaagozi vai; apiitendaagwad vii
RASP
RASP: zisiboojigan, -an ni
RASPBERRY
RASPBERRY: miskomin, -ag na
RATHER
RATHER: indawaaj pc
RATIONS
RATIONS: ashandiwin, -an ni

rattle—reduce
234
RATTLE
RATTLE: zhiishiigwan, -ag na
RATTLESNAKE
RATTLESNAKE: zhiishiigwe, -g na
RAVEN
RAVEN: gaagaagiw, -ag na, also gaagaagi*
RAW
RAW:ashki-pa4
RAW MEAT: be raw (as meat) ashkin vii;
ashkini vai
RAZOR
RAZOR: gaashkibaajigan, -an ni
REACH
REACH: reach s.o. odish /odiS-/ vta; reach s.t.
oditan vti
READ
READ: agindaaso vai; be read aginjigaade,
aginjigaademagad vii; read s.t. agindan
vti; read (s.t.) for s.o. agindamaw vta; read
(s.t.) for people agindamaage vai
READY
GET READY: ozhiitaa vai
REAL
REAL: enda- pv4
REALIZE
REALIZE: realize of s.o. that maaminonenim
vta; realize of s.t. that maaminonendan vti
REALLY
REALLY: geget pc; enda- pv4
REAR END
REAR END: my rear end indiy l-diy-l nid, also
indiyaash
LIE WITH REAR END STICKING OUT: lie
with one's rear end sticking out
jaangidiyeshin vai
REASON
FOR A CERTAIN REASON: onji- pv3
RECENTLY
RECENTLY: bijiinag pc; noomaya pc
RECOGNIZE
RECOGNIZE: recognize s.o. aawekaazh
/aawekaaN-/ vta; aawenim vta; recognize
s.t. aawendan vti; they recognize each
other nisidawinaadiwag /nisidawinaadi-/
vai
RECOGNIZE BY SIGHT: recognize s.o. by
sight aawenaw vta; nisidawinaw vta; rec-
ognize s.t. by sight aawenan vti;
nisidawinan vti
RECOGNIZE BY SMELL: recognize s.o. by
smell nisidomaam vta; recognize s.t. by
smell nisidomaandan vti
RECOGNIZE BY SOUND: recognize s.o. by
sound aawetaw vta; nisidotaw vta;
recognize s.t. by sound aawetan vti;
nisidotan vti
RECOLLECT
RECOLLECT: mikwendam vai2; recollect
s.o. mikwenim vta; recollect s.t.
mikwendan vti
RECOLLECTED
RECOLLECTED: be recollected
mikwendaagozi vai; mikwendaagwad vii
RECORD PLAYER
RECORD PLAYER: gaagiigidoo-
makakoons, -an ni; nagamoo-makak,
-oon ni
RECOVER
RECOVER FROM AN ILLNESS: noojimo
vai
RECREATION BUILDING
RECREATION BUILDING:
odaminoowigamig, -oon ni
RECTUM
RECTUM: my rectum injiid, -iin /-jiidy-/ nid,
also injiidiish
RED
RED: misko- pv4; be red miskozi vai;
miskwaa. miskwaamagad vii; be red (as
something mineral) miskwaabikad vii;
miskwaabikizi vai; be red (as something
sheet-like) miskwegad vii; miskwegizi
vai; be red (as something stick- or wood-
like) miskwaakozi vai; miskwaakwad vii;
be red (as something string-like)
miskwaabiigad vii; miskwaabiigizi vai
COLORED RED: be colored red
miskwaande, miskwaandemagad vii;
miskwaanzo vai
DRESS IN RED: miskwaakonaye vai
RED CHEEK: have a red cheek miskwanowe
vai
RED CLOUDS: be red clouds
miskwaanakwad vii
RED LEAVES: have red leaves miskobagizi
vai; there are red leaves on the trees
miskobagaa, miskobagaamagad vii
RED NOSE: have a red nose miskojaane vai
WEAR RED: misko'o vai
RED CEDAR
RED CEDAR: miskwaawaak, -oog na
RED LAKE
RED LAKE: Red Lake Reservation
Miskwaagamiiwi-zaaga'iganiing/>/ac£
RED OSIER
RED OSIER: red osier (locally known as
dogwood) miskwaabiimizhj -iig na
RED SQUIRREL
RED SQUIRREL: ajidamoo, -g na
RED-HEADED
RED-HEADED: be red-headed miskondibe
vai
RED-HEADED WOODPECKER
RED-HEADED WOODPECKER: meme, -g
na
RED-HOT
RED-HOT: be red-hot (as something mineral)
miskwaabikide, miskwaabikidemagad
vii; miskwaabikizo vai
REDHORSE
REDHORSE: redhorse (fish)
meskwaazhigwaneshi, -wag na
REDUCE
REDUCE TO NOTHING: reduce s.o. to
nothing ango* vta; reduce s.t. to nothing
angotoon vti2

235
reed—residence
REED
REED: anaakanashk, -oon ni;
gichigamiiwashk, -oon m
REFLECT
REFLECT: reflect (as something mineral)
waasaabikide, waasaabikidemagad vii;
waasaabikizo vai
REFLECT IN WATER: ojichaagobiishin vii;
ojichaagobiisin vii
REFRIGERATOR
REFRIGERATOR: dakisijigan, -an ni;
mikwamii-makak, -oon ni
REGARD
REGARD TO A CERTAIN DEGREE: regard
s.t. to a certain degree apiitendan vti
REGRETS
REGRETS: have regrets minjinawezi vai
REINDEER
REINDEER: adik, -wag na
REJECT
REJECT: reject s.o. aanawenim via; reject s.t.
aanawendan mi; reject things
aanawenjige vai
REJECTED
REJECTED: be rejected aanawendaagozi vai;
aanawendaagwad vii
RELATED
RELATED: be related to s.o. inawem vta;
they are related to each other inawendiwag
/inawendi-/ vai
RELAXED
RELAXED: be relaxed neshangishin vai
RELEASE
RELEASE: release s.o. bagidin vta; release s.t.
bagidinan vti; release (s.t.) to s.o.
bagidinamaw vta; release things
bagidinige vai
RELEASE FROM MIND: release s.o. from
one's mind bagidenim vta; release s.t.
from one's mind bagidendan vti; release
things from one's mind bagidenjige vai
RELEASE QUICKLY: release s.o. quickly
bagijwebin vta; release s.t. quickly
bagijwebinan vti
RELEASED
RELEASED: be released bagidinigaade,
bagidinigaaclemagad vii; bagidinigaazo
vai
RELIGION
PRACTICE A CERTAIN RELIGION:
izhitwaa vai
RELY
RELY ON: rely on (s.t.) apenimo vai+o
REMAIN
REMAIN TRANQUILLY IN PLACE:
goshkwaawaadabi vai
REMEMBER
REMEMBER: mikwendam vai2; remember
s.o. mikwenim vta; minjimenim vta; re-
member s.t. mikwendan vti;
minjimendain vti
TRY TO REMEMBER: try to remember s.o.
nanda-mikwenim vta; try to remember s.t.
nanda-mikwendan vti
VAGUELY REMEMBER: gezrkwendam
vai2; vaguely remember s.o. gezikwenim
vta; vaguely remember s.t. gezikwendan
vti
REMEMBERED
REMEMBERED: be remembered
mikwendaagozi vai; mikwendaagwad vii
REMOVE
REMOVE USING SOMETHING: remove
s.o. using something gida' /gida'w-/ vta;
remove s.t. using something gida'an vti
REMOVE WITH HANDS: remove s.o. with
hands gijibizh /gijibiN-/ vta; remove s.t.
with hands gijibidoon vti
REMOVE WITH SOMETHING SHARP:
remove s.o. with something sharp
gijigwaazh /gijigwaaN-/ vta; remove s.t.
with something sharp gijigwaadan vti
RENT
RENT: rent (s.t.) from people adaawange
vai+o; rent (s.t.) from s.o. adaawam vta;
rent (s.t.) to people awi'iwe vai
REPAIR
REPAIR: repair s.t. nanaa'itoon vti2; repair
(s.t.) for s.o. nanaa'itaw vta, also
nanaa'itamaw; repair things nanaa'ichige
vai
REPAIR A CAR: nanaa'idaabaane vai
REPAIR GARAGE
REPAIR GARAGE: odaabaanikewigamig,
-oon ni
REPEAT
REPEAT: repeat what s.o. says naabinootaw
vta; repeat what people say naabinootaage
vai
REPLY
REPLY: reply to s.o. nakom vta; they reply to
each other nakondiwag /nakondi-/ vai
REPORT
REPORT: dadibaajimo vai; report what
people say inootaage vai
REPRESENTATIVE
REPRESENTATIVE: giigidoowinini, -wag
na
REPRIMAND
REPRIMAND: reprimand s.o. aanimim vta
RESERVATION
RESERVATION: ishkonigan, -an ni
RESERVE
RESERVE: reserve s.o. ishkon vta; reserve s.t.
ishkonan vti; reserve (s.t.) for s.o.
ishkonamaw vta
RESERVED
RESERVED: be reserved ishkonigaade,
ishkonigaademagad vii; ishkonigaazo vai
RESIDENCE
MOVE RESIDENCE: move one's residence
gozi vai
MOVE RESIDENCE ABOUT: move one's
residence about babaamigozi vai

residence—rink 
236
MOVE TO A NEW RESIDENCE: aanji-gozi
vai
RESORT
RESORT: niibinishiiwigamig, -oon ni
RESOUND
RESOUND: baswewe vai; baswewe,
baswewemagad vii
RESPECTED
RESPECTED: be respected
minwaabamewizi vai
RESPIRATION
HAVE FAST RESPIRATION:
dadaatabanaamo vai
RESPIRATORY
HAVE A RESPIRATORY ILLNESS:
ozosodamwaapine vai
REST
REST: anwebi vai
REST LYING DOWN: anweshin vai
RESTAURANT
RESTAURANT: wiisiniiwigamig, -oon ni
RETURN
RETURN: azhegiiwe vai; giiwe vai; return
s.o. azhen vta; return s.t. azhenan vti; re-
turn (s.t.) to s.o. azhenamaw vta; return
(s.t.) to people azhenamaage vai
RETURN TO OWN COUNTRY: return to
one's own country giiwekii vai
THINK ABOUT RETURNING:
giiweyendam vai2
REVEAL
REVEAL: reveal s.o. naago' vta; reveal s.t.
naagotoon vti2
REVIVE
REVIVE: aabaakawad vii; aabaakawizi vai;
aabijiibaa vai; revive s.o. aabaakawi* vta
REVOLVE
REVOLVE: gizhibaabide,
gizhibaabidemagad vii; gizhibaabise vai;
gizhibaabise, gizhibaabisemagad vii;
gizhibaabizo vai
RHEUMATISM
RHEUMATISM: have rheumatism
okanaapine vai
RHUBARB
RHUBARB: zhiiwibag, -oon ni
RIB
RIB: my rib nipigemag, -oon /-pigemagw-/
nid
CANOE RIB: waaginaa. -g na
RIBBON
RIBBON: zenibaanh, -yag na
RICE
MAKE RICE: manoominike vai
WHITE RICE: waabi-manoomin ni
WILD RICE: manoomin ni, also anishinaabe-
manoomin
RICE BAG
RICE BAG: manoomini-mashkimod3 -an ni;
manoominiwazh. -an ni
RICE BIRD
RICE BIRD: manoominikeshiinh, -yag na
RICE KNOCKER
RICE KNOCKER: rice knocker (stick for wild
rice harvesting) bawa'iganaak, -oog na
RICH
RICH: be rich dani vai
RICHES
RICHES: daniwin. -an ni
RICING LICENSE
RICING LICENSE: manoominike-
mazina'igaans, -an ni
RIDE
CATCH A RIDE: catch a ride with s.o.
boozinodaw vta
GIVE A RIDE: give a ride to s.o. boozi' vta
PRACTICE RIDING: practice riding on
horseback gagwedoomigo vai
RIDE ABOUT ON HORSEBACK:
babaamoomigo vai
RIDE ALONG DRAWN BY HORSES:
birniba'igo vai
RIDE ALONG ON HORSEBACK:
bimoomigo vai
RIDE AWAY ON HORSEBACK:
animoomigo vai
RIDE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE ON
HORSEBACK: ondoomigo vai
RIDE HERE ON HORSEBACK: biidoomigo
vai
RIDE TO A CERTAIN PLACE ON HORSE-
BACK: ride to a certain place on horse-
back inoomigo vai
RIDE TO A CERTAIN PLACE WITH
HORSES: apa'igo vai
RIDGE
RIDGE: there is a ridge oshedinaa,
oshedinaamagad vii
RIGHT
RIGHT: gwayakpc; right? naayanh pc
CONSIDER RIGHT: consider s.t. right
gwayakwendan vti
CONSIDERED RIGHT: be considered right
gwayakwendaagozi vai;
gwayakwendaagwad vii
DO RIGHT: do things right gwayakochige
vai
HEAR RIGHT: hear the right thing
gwayakotam vai2
MAKE RIGHT: make things right
gwayakochige vai
RIGHT ACROSS
RIGHT ACROSS: dibishkookamig/x
RIGHT AT THE TIME
RIGHT AT THE TIME: na'idaa pc
RIGHT
RIGHT HAND: right hand usually possessed
gichinik ni
RING
RING: madweshin vai; madwesin vii; ring
s.t. madwesidoon vti2
RING
RING: didibininjiibizon, -ag na
RINK
RINK: zhooshkwaada'ewigamig, -oon ni

237
rip—roasted meat
RIP
RIP: giishkikaa vai; giishkikaa,
giishkikaamiagad vii; rip s.o. biigobizh
/biigobiN-/ vta; rip s.t. biigobidoon vti2;
rip things biigobijige vai
RIP OPEN: rip s.o. open aabibizh /aabibiN-/
vta; rip s.t. open aabibidoon vti2
RIPE
RIPE: be ripe atiso vai, also adiso; atite,
atitemagad vii, also adite; giizhigi vai;
giizhigin vii
FULLY RIPE: be folly ripe giizhaande,
giizhaandernagad vii; giizhaanzo vai
RIPPED
RIPPED: be ripped biigobijigaade,
biigobijigaademagad vii: biigobijigaazo
vai
RIPPLE
FLOW WITH A RIPPLE: zaasijiwan vii
RIPSAW
RIPSAW: daashkiboojigan, -ag na
RISE
RISE: rise (as the sun) mooka'am vai2
RIVER
RIVER: ziibi, -wan ni
BIG RIVER: gichi-ziibi, -wan ni
NARROW RIVER: be narrow (as a river)
agaasadetigweyaa,
agaasadetigweyaamagad vii
RIVER BRANCHES: branch (as a river)
baketigweyaa, baketigweyaamagad vii
RIVER DIVIDES: divide (as a river)
baketigweyaa, baketigweyaamagad vii
RIVER FLOWS ALONG: flow along (as a
river) bimitigweyaa, bimitigweyaamagad
vii
RIVER FLOWS AROUND A BEND: flow
around a bend (as a river)
washkitigweyaa, washkitigweyaamagad
vii
RIVER FLOWS TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
flow to a certain place (as a river)
izhitigweyaa, izhitigweyaamagad vii
RIVER FORKS: fork (as a river)
niingidawitigweyaa,
niingidawitigweyaamagad vii
WIDE RIVER: be wide (as a river)
mangitigweyaa, mangitigweyaamagad
vii
ROACH HEADDRESS
ROACH HEADDRESS: miskwaanzigan, -an
ni
ROAD
ROAD: miikana, -n ni; be a road
miikanaawa.n vii
ACROSS THE ROAD: across the road or trail
agaamikana pc
ALONG THE SIDE OF THE ROAD:
opimekana pc
ALONGSIDE THE ROAD: zhishwajikana pc
ASPHALT ROAD: bigii-miikana, -n ni
AT THE END OF THE ROAD: at the end of
die road or trail gabekana pc
BAD ROAD: be bad (as a road or trail)
maanadamon /maanadamo-/ vii
BY A ROAD: by a road or trail jiigikana/n
CONCRETE ROAD: asinii-miikana, -n ni
GRAVEL ROAD: bingwii-miikana, -n ni
ICY ROAD: be icy (as a road or trail)
mikwamiiwadamon
/mikwamiiwadamo-/ vii
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE ROAD: in the
middle of the road or trail naawikanapt
MAKE A ROAD: make a road or trail
miikanaake vai
NARROW ROAD: be narrow (as a road or
trail) agaasademon /agaasademo-/ vii
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE ROAD: on
the other side of the road or trail
agaamikana pc
ON THIS SIDE OF THE ROAD:
ondaasikana pc
ROAD FORKS: fork (as a road or trail)
niingidawadamon /niingidawadamo-/ vii
ROAD GOES ACROSS: go across (as a road
or trail) aazhoodamon /aazhoodamo-/ vii
ROAD GOES OFF TO THE SIDE: go off to
the side (as a road or trail) bakemon
/bakemo-/ vii
ROAD LEADS ALONG: lead along (as a road
or trail) bimamon /bimamo-/,
bimamoomagad vii
ROAD LEADS FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
lead from a certain place (as a road or trail)
ondadamon /ondadamo-/ vii
ROAD LEADS TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
lead to a certain place (as a road or trail)
inamon /inamo-/ vii
SLIPPERY ROAD: be slippery (as a road or
trail) ozhaashadamon /ozhaashadamo-/
vii; zhooshkwadamon
/zhooshkwadamo-/ vii; be slippery with
ice (as a road or trail) ozhaashikwadamon
/ozhaashikwadamo-/ vii
WET ROAD: be wet (as a road or trail)
nibiiwadamon /nibiiwadamo-/ vii
WIDE ROAD: be wide (as a road or trail)
mangademon /mangademo-/ vii, also
mangadademon
ROAD WORKER
ROAD WORKER: miikanaakewinini, -wag
na
ROAR
ROAR: roar (as waves) mamadweyaashkaa,
mamadweyaashkaamagad vii
ROAST
ROAST: roast (s.t.) abwe vai+o; roast s.o.
abwaazh /abwaaN-/ vta; roast s.t.
abwaadan vti; roast things abwaajige vai
ROAST IN THE OVEN: roast s.o. in the oven
giboz /gibozw-/ vta; roast s.t. in the oven
gibozan vti; roast things in the oven
gibozige vai
ROASTED FISH
ROASTED FISH: abwaajigan, -an ni
ROASTED MEAT
ROASTED MEAT: abwaajigan, -an ni

roasting pan—rub
238
ROASTING PAN
ROASTING PAN: giboziganaabik, -oon ni
ROB
ROB: rob s.o. of (s.t.) makam vta; rob people
makandwe vai
ROBBER
ROBBER: gimoodishkiiwinini. -wag ua
ROBIN
ROBIN: opichi, -wag na
ROCK
ROCK: asin, -iig na; be of rock asiniiwan vii
MANY ROCKS: there are many rocks
asiniikaa, asiniikaamagad vii
ON ROCK: on something mineral (e.g., metal,
glass, rock) agidaabik pc, also ogidaabik*,
wagidaabik
ON TOP OF A ROCK: agidasin pc, also
ogidasin*, wagidasin
ROCK CLIFF: aazhibik, -oon ni; there is a
rock cliff giishkaazhibikaa,
giishkaazhibikaamagad vii
ROCK FOR SWEAT LODGE:
madoodoowasin, -iig na
STEEP ROCK FACE: be a steep rock face
giishkaabikaa, giishkaabikaamagad vii
ROCKING CHAIR
ROCKING CHAIR: didibise-apabiwin, -an
ni; wewebizoo-apabiwin, -an ni
ROLL
ROLL: didibibide, didibibidemagad vii;
didibibizo vai; ditibise vai; ditibise,
ditibisemagad vii; roll s.o. didibin vta; roll
s.t. didibinan vti
ROLL ALONG: ditibibide, ditibibidemagad
vii
ROLL ALONG KICKING: roll things along
by kicking ditibiwebishkige vai
ROLL OVER: gotigobide, gotigobidemagad
vii; gotigobizo vai; roll s.o. over
gotigobizh /gotigobiN-/ vta; roll s.t. over
gotigobidoon vti2
ROLL UP SLEEVE: roll up one's sleeve
ikwanagweni vai
ROLL
ROLL: bakwezhigaans, -ag na
ROLLED OATS
ROLLED OATS: daataagwa'igan, -an ni
ROOF
PUT ON A ROOF: apakwe vai
ROOFING
ROOFING: apakwaan. -an ni
ROOM
ROOM: abiwin, -an ni; be room dawaa,
dawaamagad vii
COLD ROOM: be cold (as a house or room)
dakate, dakatemagad vii
DARK ROOM: be dark (as in a room or
house) dibikate, dibikatemagad vii
NEXT ROOM: in the next room aajisagpc
SMALL ROOM: be small (as a room or
house) agaasate, agaasatemagad vii
ROOMY
ROOMY: be roomy mangate,
mangatemagad vii
ROOSTER
ROOSTER: naabese, -g na
ROOT
ROOT: ojiibik, -an ni
HAVE ROOTS: ojiibikaawan vii; ojiibikaawi
vai
ROOT HOUSE
ROOT HOUSE: akiiwigamig, -oon ni
ROPE
ROPE: biiminakwaan, -an ni
MAKE ROPE: biiminakwe vai
ROSARY
ROSARY: rosary plural anama'eminensag na
ROSE
ROSE: oginii-waabigwan, -iin ni
ROSE HIP
ROSE HIP: ogin, -iig na
ROTARY FAN
ROTARY FAN: gizhibaayaasijigan, -an ni
ROTTEN
ROTTEN: be rotten bigishkanad vii;
bigishkanani vai
ROUGE
ROUGE: miskwanowechigan, -an ni
USE ROUGE: miskwanowechige vai
ROUGH
ROUGH: be rough gaawaa, gaawaamagad
vii; gaawizi vai; be rough (as something
mineral) gaawaabikad vii; gaawaabikizi
vai; be rough (as something sheet-like)
gaawegad vii; gaawegizi vai
ROUND
ROUND: be round waawiyeyaa,
waawiyeyaamagad vii; waawiyezi vai; be
round (as something ball-like)
waawiyeminagad vii; waawiyeminagizi
vai; be round (as something mineral)
waawiyeyaabikad vii; waawiyeyaabikizi
vai; be round (as something stick- or
wood-like) waawiyeyaakozi vai;
waawiyeyaakwad vii
MAKE ROUND: make s.o. round waawiye*
vta; make s.t. round waawiyetoon vti2
ROUND TRIP
MAKE A ROUND TRIP: make a round trip
in one day biskaabii vai
ROW
LIE SIDE BY SIDE IN A ROW: they lie side
by side in a row niibidesinoon /niibidesin-/
vii; they lie side by side in a row
niibideshinoog /niibideshin-/ vai
SIT SIDE BY SIDE IN A ROW: they sit side
by side in a row niibidebiwag /niibidebi-/
vai
ROW
ROW: row (a boat) azheboye vai
RUB
RUB: rub s.o. with something zinigon vta; rub
s.t. with something zinigonan vti

239
rubbing alcohol—run
RUBBING ALCOHOL
RUBBING ALCOHOL: giziibiigazhewaaboo
ni
RUG
RUG: anaakan, -an ni
BRAIDED RUG: okaadenigan, -an ni
RUIN
RUIN: ruin s.o. goopaaji* vta; ruin s.t.
gopajitoon t>ti2
RULE
RULE: rule s.o. dibenim via; ogimaakandaw
vta; rule s.t. ogimaakandan vti
RUMBLE
RUMBLE: jiingwe, jiingwemagad vii;
zegwewe, zegwewemagad vii
RUMP
RUMP: my rump indiy /-diy-/ nid, also
indiyaash
RUN
ARRIVE ON THE RUN: bagamibatoo vai;
they arrive on the run together
bagamiba'icliwag /bagamiba'idi-/ vai
HEARD RUNNING HERE: be heard running
here biidwewebatoo vai
HEARD RUNNING HERE ON THE
GROUND: be heard running here on the
ground biidwewekamigibatoo vai
RUN ABOUT: babaamibatoo vai; they run
about together babaamiba'idiwag
/babaamiba'idi-/ vai
RUN ACROSS: aazhoobatoo vai, also
aazhawibatoo; they run across together
aazhogeba'idiwag /aazhogeba'idi-/ vai;
aazhooba'idiwag /aazhooba'idi-/ vai
RUN ACROSS WADING:
aazhawagaaziibatoo vai
RUN ALONG: bimibatoo vai; they run along
together bimiba'idiwag /bimiba'idi-/ vai
RUN ALONG IN FLIGHT: biminizhimo
vai; run along in flight from someone
bimiba'iwe vai
RUN ALONG THE SHORE: jiigewebatoo
vai; jiigeweyaazhagaamebatoo vai
RUN AROUND: run around s.t.
giiwitaabatwaadan vti; run around some-
thing giiwitaabatoo vai
RUN ASHORE: agwaabatoo vai
RUN AT: run at s.o. mawinazh /mawinaN-/
vta
RUN AT A CERTAIN SPEED: apiichibatoo
vai; run at a certain speed (e.g., a machine)
apiichibide, apiichibidemagad vii;
apiichibizo vai
RUN AWAY: animibatoo vai; run away (in
the other direction) with s.o.
animibatwaazh /animibatwaaN-/ vta; run
away (in the other direction) with s.t.
animibatwaadan vti; they run away (in the
other direction) together animiba'idiwag
/animiba'idi-/ vai
RUN AWAY FOR GOOD: aapijibatoo vai
RUN AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewebatoo vai
RUN AWAY SCARED: animinizhimo vai
RUN BACK: giiwebatoo vai
RUN DOWN: niisaandawebatoo vai
RUN DOWNHILL: niisaakiiwebatoo vai
RUN FAST: gizhiibatoo vai; gizhiikaabatoo
vai
RUN FROM CERTAIN PLACE IN
FLIGHT: run from a certain place in flight
onjinizhimo vai
RUN FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjibatoo vai
RUN HERE: biijibatoo vai; they run here
together biijiba'idiwag /biijiba'idi-/ vai
RUN HOME: giiwebatoo vai
RUN IN A CERTAIN WAY: apatoo vai
RUN INLAND: gopibatoo vai
RUN INSIDE: biindigebatoo vai; they run
inside together biindigeba'idiwag
/biindigeba'idi-/ vai; run inside with s.o.
biindigebatwaazh /biindigebatwaaN-/
vta; run inside with s.t.
biindigebatwaadan vti; run inside from
people biindigeba'iwe vai
RUN INTO THE WATER: bakobiibatoo vai
RUN OFF: maajiibatoo vai; they run off
together maajiiba'idiwag /maajiiba'idi-/
vai
RUN OFF TO THE SIDE: bakebatoo vai
RUN OUT: zaagizibatoo vai; run out with
s.o. zaagiziba' vta; zaagizibatwaazh
/zaagizibatwaaN-/ vta; run out with s.t.
zaagizibatwaadan vti; they run out to-
gether zaagiziba'idiwag /zaagiziba'idi-/
vai
RUN POORLY: run poorly (e.g., a car)
maazhibizo vai; run poorly (e.g., a
machine) maazhibide, maazhibidemagad
vii
RUN SLOWLY: bejibatoo vai; bezikaabatoo
vai
RUN SUDDENLY INTO VIEW:
zaagewebatoo vai
RUN THE WRONG WAY: wanibatoo vai
RUN THROUGH: zhaabobatoo vai
RUN TO A CERTAIN PLACE: apatoo vai;
run with s.o. to a certain place apa' vta
RUN TO A CERTAIN PLACE IN FLIGHT:
izhinizhimo vai
RUN TO A CERTAIN PLACE TOGETH-
ER: they run to a certain place together
apa'idiwag /apa'idi-/ vai
RUN TO GET: run to get s.o. naajibatwaazh
/naajibatwaaN-/ vta; run to get s.t.
naajibatwaadan vti
RUN TO THE SHORE: madaabiibatoo vai
RUN UPHILL: agidaakiiwebatoo vai
RUN WELL: run well (e.g., a machine)
minobide, minobidemagad vii; minobizo
vai
RUN WITH SAP: onjigaa, onjigaamagad vii
START TO RUN: maajiibatoo vai; start to
run (e.g., a machine) maajiibide,
maajiibidemagad vii; maajiibizo vai
START TO RUN WITH SAP: maajigaa,
maajigaamagad vii
STOP RUNNING: noogibatoo vai

run—sap-boiling pole
240
TURN RUNNING: gwekibatoo vai
RUN AWAY
RUN AWAY: run away from s.o. ginjiba' vta;
run away from people ginjiba'iwe vai
RUN AWAY TO A CERTAIN PLACE: run
away from people to a certain place
apa'iwe vai
RUNOUT
RUN OUT: jaagise vai+o; jaagise,
jaagisemagad vii
RUN OUT OF FUEL: iskaakizige vai
RUN SHORT
RUN SHORT: noondese vai; run short of s.o.
noondesa' vta; run short of s.t.
noondesatoon vti2; run short of things
noondesachige vai
RUSH
RUSH: rush s.o. ojaanimi' vta
RUSH
RUSH: anaakanashk, -oon m
RUSTLESS
RUSTLESS: be rustless zhooshkwaabikad
vii; zhooshkwaabikizi vai
RUSTY
RUSTY: be rusty agwaagwaabikad vii;
agwaagwaabikizi vai
TURN RUSTY: agwaagwaabikishin vai;
agwaagwaabikisin vii
RUTABAGA
RUTABAGA: jiis, -an ni
s
SACK
SACK: mashkimod, -an ni
GUNNYSACK: mandaaminiwazh, -an ni
SAD
SAD: be sad gashkendam vai2;
osidaawendam vai2
SADDLE
SADDLE: bimoomigoo-apabiwin, -an ni
SAFETY PIN
SAFETY PIN: zagaakwa'igan, -an ni
SAIL
SAIL: ningaasimoonowin ni; sail (in a boat)
ningaasimoono vai
SAIL ABOUT: babaamaashi vai;
babaamaasin vii
SAIL ALONG: bimaashi vai; bimaasin vii
SAIL ASHORE: agwaayaashi vai
SAIL AWAY: animaashi vai; animaasin vii
SAIL FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: ondaashi
vai; ondaasin vii
SAIL HERE: biidaashi vai; biidaasin vii
SAIL IN: bagamaashi vai; bagamaasin vii
SAIL TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inaashi vai;
inaasin vii
SAILBOAT
SAILBOAT: ningaasimoo-jiimaan, -an ni
SAILOR
SAILOR: ningaasimoowinini, -wag na
SALIVA
SALIVA: zikowin ni
SALT
SALT: zhiiwitaagan ni; salt s.o.
zhiiwitaagana* /zhiiwitaagana'w-/ vta; salt
s.t. zhiiwitaagana'an vti; salt things
zhiiwitaagana'ige vai
SALT PORK
SALT PORK: zhiiwitaagani-gookoosh na
SALTY
SALTY: be salty (as a liquid)
zhiiwitaaganaagamin
/zhirwitaaganaagami-/ vii
TASTE SALTY: zhiiwitaaganipogozi vai;
zhiiwitaaganipogwad vii
SAME
SAME: be the same bezhigwan vii; the same
naasaab pc
AT THE SAME TIME: bekish pc
SAME AGE: they are the same age
wiijigindiwag /wiijigindi-/ vai
STEP IN THE SAME TRACKS:
naaba'anidizo vai
THE SAME AGE: be the same age as s.o.
wiijigim vta
SAND
SAND: bingwi ni
MUCH SAND: be much sand bingwiikaa,
bingwiikaamagad vii
SANDHILL CRANE
SANDHILL CRANE: ajijaak, -wag na
SANDY
SANDY BEACH: be a sandy beach
mitaawangaa, mitaawangaamagad vii
SAP
FINISH BOILING SAP: ishkwaagamizige
vai
GATHER SAP: naadoobii vai
MAPLE SAP: wiishkobaaboo ni;
ziinzibaakwadwaaboo ni
START TO RUN WITH SAP: maajigaa,
maajigaamagad vii
THE LAST RUN OF SAP: be the last run of
sap ishkwaagaa, ishkwaagaamagad vii
SAP BUCKET
SAP BUCKET OF FOLDED BIRCH BARK:
biskitenaagan, -an ni
SAP-BOILING FRAME
SAP-BOILING FRAME: frame for holding
sap-boiling kettles iskigamiziganaak, -oon
ni
SAP-BOILING LODGE
SAP-BOILING LODGE:
iskigamizigewigamig, -oon ni
SAP-BOILING POLE
SAP-BOILING POLE: iskigamiziganaatig,
-oon ni

241
satin—scoop
SATIN
SATIN: zenibaaiwegin, -oon ni
SATISFIED
SATISFIED: be satisfied debizi vai
FEEL SATISFIED: debisewendam vai2
SATISFY
SATISFY: satisfy s.o. debi' vta
SATURATED
SATURATED: be saturated zhaabobii,
zhaabobiimagad vii
SATURDAY
SATURDAY: be Saturday giziibiigisaginige-
giizhigad vii; ishwaajanokii-giizhigad vii
SAUCER
SAUCER: desinaagaans, -an ni
SAUSAGE
SAUSAGE: onagizh, -iin ni, also onagizhiins
SAVE
SAVE BACK: save s.o. back ishkon vta; save
s.t. back ishkonan vti; save (s.t.) back for
s.o. ishkonamaw vta
SAVE LIFE: save the life of s.o. bimaaji' vta
SAVED
SAVED BACK: be saved back ishkonigaade,
ishkonigaademagad vii; ishkonigaazo vai
SAW
CROSSCUT SAW: giishkiboojigan, -an ni
SAW APART LENGTHWISE: saw s.o. apart
lengthwise daashkiboozh /daashkibooN-/
vta; saw s.t. apart lengthwise
daashkiboodoon va2; saw things apart
lengthwise daashkiboojige vai
SAW OFF: saw s.o. off giishkiboozh
/giishkibooN-/ vta; saw s.t. off
giishkiboodoon vti2; saw things off
giishkiboojige vai
SAW STRAIGHT: saw s.o. straight
gwayakoboozh /gwayakobooN-/ vta; saw
s.t. straight gwayakoboodoon vti2
SAW MILL
SAW MILL: daashkiboojigan, -ag na
SAY
SAY: ikido vai; say so to s.t. idan vti; say to
s.o. izhi /iN-/ vta; they say to each other
idiwag/idi-/rv«
SAY AFTER: say something after s.o.
gikinootaw vta
SCAB
SCABS: have scabs omigii vai
SCABS ON FACE: have scabs on one's face
omigiingwe vai
SCALE
SCALE: scale s.o. jiiga'azh /jiiga'aN-/ vta
SCALE FISH: jiiga'e vai
SCALES: my scales plural ninaga'ayag
/-naga'ay-/ nod
SCALE
SCALE: dibaabiishkoojigan, -an ni
SCALE TIMBER
SCALE TIMBER: diba'aatigwe vai
SCALP
DIRTY SCALP: have a dirty scalp
wiinishagaandibe vai
SCANDINAVIAN
SCANDINAVIAN: agongos, -ag na
SCANDINAVIAN LANGUAGE
SPEAK A SCANDINAVIAN LANGUAGE:
agongosimo vai
SCAR
HAVE A SCAR: ojiishigi vai
HAVE SCAR ON ARM: have scar on one's
arm ojiishinike vai
HAVE SCAR ON FACE: have scar on one's
face ojiishiingwe vai
HAVE SCAR ON HAND: have scar on one's
hand ojiishininjii vai
SCARE
SCARE: scare s.o. zegi* vta
SCARE AWAY: scare s.o. away (e.g., game)
oshaakaw vta
SCARED
SCARED: be scared zegizi vai
RUN AWAY SCARED: animinizhimo vai
SCARF
SCARF: giizhoopizon, -ag na
SCARY
CONSIDERED SCARY: be considered scary
zegendaagozi vai; zegendaagwad vii
LOOK SCARY: zeginaagozi vai;
zeginaagwad vii
SCARY DREAM: have a scary dream
zegaabandam vai2
SCARY MOVIE: be a scary movie zegaatese,
zegaatesemagad vii
SCATTER
SCATTER: biiwise vai; biiwise,
biiwisemagad vii; scatter s.o. biiwiwebin
vta; scatter s.t. biiwiwebinan vti
SCATTER USING SOMETHING: scatter
s.t. using something zaswe'an vti
SCATTER WITH FOOT OR BODY: scatter
s.o. with foot or body zasweshkaw vta;
scatter s.t. with foot or body zasweshkan
vti
SCATTER WITH HANDS: scatter s.o. with
hands zaswebizh /zaswebiN-/ vta; scatter
s.t. with hands zaswebidoon vti2
SCHOOL
SCHOOL: gikinoo'amaadiiwigamig, -oon ni
GO TO SCHOOL: gikinoo'amaagozi vai
SCHOOL CUSTODIAN
SCHOOL CUSTODIAN: boodawewinini,
-wag na
SCHOOLBOOK
SCHOOLBOOK: gikinoo'amaadii-
mazina'igan ni
SCISSORS
SCISSORS: moozhwaagan, -an ni
SCOLD
SCOLD: scold s.o. naniibikim vta
SCOOP
SCOOP UP: scoop s.o. up gwaaba' vta; scoop
s.t. up gwaaba'an vti; scoop (s.t.) up for
s.o. gwaaba'amaw vta; scoop up things
gwaaba'ige vai
SCOOP UP WATER: gwaaba'ibii vai

score—seek
242
SCORE
SCORE IN A GAME: gabenaage vai
SCOUT
SCOUT: nandawaatoo vai
SCRAPE
SCRAPE HIDES: jiishaakwa'ige vai; scrape
s.o. to remove hair (e.g., a hide)
jiishaakwa' /jiishaakwa'w-/ vta
SCRAPE USING SOMETHING: scrape s.o.
using something gaaskaaska'
/gaaskaaska'w-/ vta; scrape s.t. using
something gaaskaaska'an vti
SCRAPER
HIDE SCRAPER: jiishaakwa'igan, -an ni
SCRATCH
SCRATCH: scratch (leaving a visible mark)
jiichiigii vai; scratch s.o. baazagobizh
/baazagobiN-/ vta; scratch s.o. (leaving a
visible mark) jiichiigibizh /jiichiigibiN-/
vta; scratch s.t. (leaving a visible mark)
jiichiigibidoon vti2
SCRATCH BACK: scratch s.o.'s back
jiichiigaawiganebizh
/jiichiigaawiganebiN-/ vta
SCREAM
SCREAM: aazhikwe vai
SCREECH OWL
SCREECH OWL: gaakaabishiinh, -yag na
SCREW
SCREW: biimiskonigan, -an ni;
biimiskwa'igaans, -an ni; screw s.t.
biimiskwa'an vti
SCREWDRIVER
SCREWDRIVER: biimiskwa'igan, -an m
SCRUB BRUSH
SCRUB BRUSH: mimigosaga'igan, -an ni
SCULPT
SCULPT: sculpt s.o. onadin vta; sculpt s.t.
onadinan vti
SCYTHE
SCYTHE: giishkizhigan, -an ni
SEA
SEA: gichigami, -in ni
SEAGULL
SEAGULL: gayaashk, -wag na
SEARCH
SEARCH: search for s.o. nandawaabam vta;
search for s.t. nandawaabandan vti; search
for things nandawaabanjige vai
SEASICK
SEASICK: be seasick giiwashkwe'ogo vai
SEASON
SEASON: season (s.t.) apaabowe vai+o
SEAT
SEAT: seat s.o. onabi' vta; seat people
onabi'iwe vai
CHANGE SEAT: aandabi vai
TAKE A SEAT: onabi vai
SEATED
SEATED: be seated wawenabi vai
SECOND
SECOND: the second eko-niizhing/K
THE SECOND DAY OF THE MONTH: be
the second day of the month
niizhogonagizi vai
SECOND PERSON
SECOND PERSON: second person prefix before
consonants in nouns and verbs gi= pre;second
person prefix before vowels in verbs and non-
dependent nouns gid= pre; second person prefix
before vowels in dependent nouns g= pre
SECOND PERSON PLURAL: you second
person plural personal pronoun giinawaa pr;
only you second personal plural personal
pronoun giinetawaapr; your turn second
person plural personal pronoun giinitamawaa
pr
SECOND PERSON SINGULAR: you second
person singular personal pronoun gnn pr; only
you second person singular personal pronoun
giinetapr; your turn secondperson singular
personal pronoun giinitam pr
SECONDHAND CLOTHING STORE
SECONDHAND CLOTHING STORE:
zhiigoshkigani-adaawewigamig, -oon ni
SECRET
SECRET: be secret giimoodad vii
SECRETARY
SECRETARY: secretary (female)
ozhibii'igewikwe, -g na
SECRETLY
SECRETLY: giimooj pc
EAT SECRETLY: eat things secretly
giimoodanjige vai
LAUGH SECRETLY: giimoodaapi vai
SEE
SEE: waabi vai; see s.o. waabam vta; see s.t.
waabandan vti; see oneself waabandizo
vai; they see each other waabandiwag
/waabandi-/ vai
FAIL TO SEE: fail to see s.o. gwiinawaabam
vta; fail to see s.t. gwiinawaabandan vti
SEE A CERTAIN WAY: see s.o. a certain way
izhinaw vta; see s.t. a certain way izhinan
vti
SEE A CERTAIN WAY AS IN A DREAM:
see s.o. a certain way as in a dream
inaabam vta; see s.t. a certain way as in a
dream inaabandan vti
SEE AT A DISTANCE: see s.o. at a distance
debaabam via; see s.t. at a distance
debaabandan vti
SEE CLEARLY: bagakaabi vai; see s.o.
clearly bagakaabam vta; see s.t. clearly
bagakaabandan vti
SEE THROUGH: see through s.o.
zhaabwaabam vta; see through s.t.
zhaabwaabandan vti
SEE WELL: minwaabi vai
SEED
SEED: miinikaan, -an ni
SEEK
SEEK: nanda- pv4; seek s.o. nooji' vta; seek
s.t. noojitoon vti2; seek people nooji'iwe
vai

243
seek—set line
SEEK TO KNOW: seek to know s.o. nanda-
gikenim ma; seek to know s.t. nanda-
gikendan vti
SEEK TO LEARN: seek to learn s.t. nanda-
gikendan vti
SEEM
SEEM TO BE A CERTAIN WAY:
inendaagozi vai; inendaagwad vii
SEEN
SEEN: be seen waabanjigaade,
waabanjigaademagad vii; waabanjigaazo
vai
SEIZE
SEIZE: seize s.o. nawadin vta; seize s.t.
nawadinan vti; seize (s.t.) of s.o.'s
nawadinamaw vta; seize people
nawadiniwe vai
SELDOM
SELDOM: wiikaapc
SELECT
SELECT FROM: select from s.o. gagiigin vta;
select from s.t. gagiiginan vti
SELF-CONFIDENCE
LACK SELF-CONFIDENCE: zhaagwenimo
vai
SELL
SELL: sell (s.t.) adaawaage vai+o
SELL OUT: sell out (of s.t.) jaagadaawaage
vai+o
SEND
SEND: send for s.o. naajinizha'
/naajinizha'w-/ vta; send for s.t.
naajinizha'an vti; send (s.t.) to s.o.
niindaa* vta; send (s.t.) to people
niindaa'iwe vai
SEND A LETTER HERE: biijibii'ige vai
SEND ALONG: send s.o. along biminizhikaw
vta; send people along biminaazhikaage
vai
SEND OFF: send s.o. off maajinaazha'
/maajinaazha'w-/ vta; maajinizha'
/maajinizha'w-/ vta; send s.t. off
maajinizha'an vti; send (s.t.) off to s.o.
maajinizha'amaw vta
SEND TO A CERTAIN PLACE: send s.o. to
a certain place izhinaazhikaw vta;
izhinizha* /izhinizha'w-/ vta; send s.t. to a
certain place izhinizha'an vti; send (s.t.) to
s.o. to a certain place izhinizha'amaw vta
SENSELESS
KNOCK SENSELESS: knock s.o. senseless
giiwashkweganaarn vta
KNOCKED SENSELESS IN IMPACT: be
knocked senseless in impact
giiwashkweshin vai
SENT
SENT TO A CERTAIN PLACE: be sent to a
certain place izhinizha'igaadej
izhinizha'igaademagad vii;
izhinizha'igaazo vai
SENTENCE
SENTENCE A CERTAIN WAY: sentence
s.o. a certain way inaakon vta
SENTENCED
SENTENCED: be sentenced dibaakonigaazo
vai
SENTENCED A CERTAIN WAY: be
sentenced a certain way inaakonigaazo vai
SEPARATE
SEPARATE: they separate from each other
webinidiwag /webinidi-/ vai
SEPTEMBER
SEPTEMBER: waatebagaa-giizis na, also
waatebago-giizis; manoominike-giizis na
SERVE
SERVE FOOD: serve food to people ashange
vai
SET
SET A CERTAIN PRICE: set a certain price
on s.o. inagim vta; set a certain price on
s.t. inagindan vti; set a certain price on
(s.t.) for s.o. inagindamaw vta
SET A CERTAIN WAY: put s.o. a certain
way izhishim vta; set s.t. a certain way
izhisidoon vti2
SET A NET: bagida'waa vai; set a net under
the ice ziibaaskobijige vai
SET A PRICE: onagindaaso vai; set a price
on s.o. onagim vta; set a price on s.t.
onagindan vti
SET A PRICE OF A CERTAIN HEIGHT:
set a price of a certain height on s.o.
apiitagim vta; set a price of a certain
height on s.t. apiitagindan vti
SET A SNARE: agoodoo vai; set a snare for
s.o. agoodaw vta
SET DOWN: be set down bagidinigaade,
bagidinigaademagad vii; bagidinigaazo
vai; set s.o. down bagidin vta; set s.t. down
bagidinan vti; set (s.t.) down for s.o.
bagidinamaw vta; set things down
bagidinige vai
SET DOWN OFF BACK: set s.o. down off
one's back bagidoom vta; set s.t. down off
one's back bagidoondan vti
SET DOWN PACK: set down one's pack
bagijiwane vai
SET IN THE GROUND: set s.o. in the
ground badakishim vta; set s.t. in the
ground badakisidoon vti2; set things in the
ground badakisijige vai
SET OUT OF THE WAY: be set out of the
way ikonigaade, ikonigaademagad vii;
ikonigaazo vai; set s.o. out of the way ikon
vta; set s.t. out of the way ikonan vti
SET THE TABLE: ozisinaagane vai
SET TO COOL: set s.o. to cool dakishim vta;
set s.t. to cool dakisidoon vti2
SUN SETS: set as the sun; conjunct
bangishimog in the west bangishimon
/bangishimo-/ vii
SET
CERTAIN NUMBER OF SETS: a certain
number of sets daswewaan pc
SET LINE
FISH WITH SET LINES: bagidaabii vai

set up—shaking tent
244
SETUP
SET UP: set s.t. up onakidoon vti2; set s.o. up
onakizh /onakiN-/ vta
FINISH SETTING UP: finish setting s.o. up
giizhakizh /giizhakiN-/ vta; finish setting
s.t. up giizhakidoon vti2
SET UP AS A FRAME: set s.t. up as a frame
onaakosidoon vti2
SET UP CAMP: gabeshi vai
SETTLE DOWN
TELL TO SETTLE DOWN: tell s.o. to settle
down zagakim vta
SEVEN
SEVEN: niizhwaaswi nm; niizhwaaso- pv4;
seven (card) niizhwaasoobii'igan, -ag na;
they are seven niizhwaachinoon
/niizhwaachin-/ vii; niizhwaachiwag
/niizhwaachi-/ vai
AND SEVEN: ashi-niizhwaaswi nm; ashi-
niizhwaaso- pv4
SEVEN ACRES: niizhwaaso-diba'igaans pc
SEVEN DAYS: niizhwaaso-giizhik pc;
niizhwaasogon pc; be seven days
niizhwaasogonagad vii
SEVEN DAYS OLD: be seven days old
niizhwaasogonagizi vai
SEVEN DOLLARS: niizhwaaswaabik pc
SEVEN EACH: neniizhwaaswi nm
SEVEN FEET: niizhwaasozid/n
SEVEN HOURS: niizhwaaso-diba'igan pc
SEVEN HUNDRED: niizhwaaswaak nm
SEVEN INCHES: niizhwaasoninj pc
SEVEN MILES: niizhwaaso-diba'igan pc
SEVEN MINUTES: niizhwaaso-diba'igaans
pc
SEVEN MONTHS: niizhwaaso-giizis pc
SEVEN NIGHTS: niizhwaaso-dibikpc
SEVEN O'CLOCK: be seven o'clock
niizhwaaso-diba'iganed vii
SEVEN PAIRS: niizhwaaswewaan pc
SEVEN SETS: niizhwaaswewaan pc
SEVEN THOUSAND: niizhwaasosagoons
nm
SEVEN TIMES: niizhwaaching/x
SEVEN WEEKS: niizhwaaso-anama'e-
giizhik pc; be seven weeks niizhwaaso-
anama'e-giizhigad pc
SEVEN YEARS: niizhwaaso-biboon pc; be
seven years niizhwaaso-biboonagad vii
SEVEN YEARS OLD: be seven years old
niizhwaaso-biboonagizi vai
SEVENTEEN
SEVENTEEN: ashi-niizhwaaswi nm;
midaaswi ashi-niizhwaaswi nm
SEVENTH
THE SEVENTH DAY OF THE MONTH:
be the seventh day of the month
niizhwaasogonagizi vai
SEVENTY
SEVENTY: niizhwaasimidana nm
SEW
SEW: gashkigwaaso vai; sew s.o. (e.g., a pair
of pants) gashkigwaazh /gashkigwaaN-/
vta; sew s.t. gashkigwaadan vti
MAKE A MISTAKE SEWING: wanigwaaso
vai; make a mistake sewing on s.o.
wanigwaazh /wanigwaaN-/ vta; make a
mistake sewing on s.t. wanigwaadan vti
SEW ON: sew s.o. on agogwaazh
/agogwaaN-/ vta; sew s.t. on agogwaadan
vti; sew something on agogwaaso vai
SEW SHUT: sew s.o. shut giboogwaazh
/giboogwaaN-/ vta; sew s.t. shut
giboogwaadan vti
SEW TOGETHER: maawandoogwaaso vai;
sew s.o. together maawandoogwaazh
/maawandoogwaaN-/ vta; sew s.t. to-
gether (e.g., pieces for a quilt)
maawandoogwaadan vti
SEWING MACHINE
SEWING MACHINE: gashkigwaason, -ag na
SEWING THREAD
SEWING THREAD: gashkigwaasoneyaab,
-iin ni
SEWN
SEWN: be sewn gashkigwaade,
gashkigwaademagad vii; gashkigwaazo
vai
SHADE
SHADE: shade s.o. agawaateshkaw vta;
shade s.t. agawaateshkan vti; there is
shade agawaateyaa, agawaateyaamagad
vii
IN SHADE: be in shade agawaateshin vai;
agawaatesin vii
WINDOW SHADE: gibiiga'iganiigin, -oon ni
SHADOW
SHADOW: there is shadow agawaateyaa,
agawaateyaamagad vii
CAST A SHADOW: cast a shadow on s.o.
agawaateshkaw vta; cast a shadow on s.t.
agawaateshkan vti
CAST A SHADOW FLYING: agawaatese
vai; agawaatese, agawaatesemagad vii
IN SHADOW: be in shadow agawaateshin
vai; agawaatesin vii
SHAKE
SHAKE: baapagishkaa vai; baapagishkaa,
baapagishkaamagad vii; shake s.o. bawin
vta; shake s.t. bawinan vti
SHAKE AWAKE: shake s.o. awake
amajwebin vta
SHAKE HANDS: shake hands with s.o.
zagininjiin vta; they shake hands with each
other zagininjiinidiwag /zagininjiinidi-/
vai
SHAKE HEAD: shake one's head at s.o.
wewebikwetaw vta
SHAKE OUT: hold and shake s.o. out
baapaawin vta; hold and shake s.t. out
baapaawinan vti; shake s.o. out (as some-
thing sheet-like) bawegin vta; shake s.t.
out (as something sheet-like) baweginan
vti
SHAKE WINGS: shake one's wings
bapawaangeni vai
SHAKING TENT
SHAKING TENT: jiisakaan, -an ni

245
shaking tent—shoot
PRACTICE DIVINATION IN A SHAKING
TENT: jiisakii vai
SEER WHO USES A SHAKING TENT:
jiisakiiwinfni, -wag na
SHALLOW
SHALLOW: be shallow baagwaa,
baagwaamagad vii
SHAME
FOR SHAME: for shame! ise pc
SHAMEFUL
SHAMEFUL: be shameful agadendaagwad
vii
SHARE
SHARE: maada'ookii vai; share (s.t.) out to
s.o. maada'oozh /maada'ooN-/ via; they
share (s.t.) rnaada'oonidiwag
/maada'oonidi-/ vai
SHARP
SHARP: be sharp giinaa, giinaamagad vii;
giinizi vai
FILE SHARP: file s.o. sharp giiniboozh
/giinibooN-/ vta; file s.t. sharp
giiniboodoon vti2
SHATTER
SHATTER: shatter (e.g., glass or china)
baasikaa, baasikaamagad vii; shatter on
impact baasishin vai; baasisin vii; shatter
s.o. baasishim vta; shatter s.t. baasisidoon
vti2
SHATTER BY HEAT: shatter s.o. by heat
baasiz /baasizw-/ vta; shatter s.t. by heat
baasizan vti
SHATTER FROM HEAT: baaside,
baasidemagad vii; baasizo vai
SHATTER USING SOMETHING: shatter
s.o. using something baasa' /baasa'w-/ vta;
shatter s.t. using something baasa'an vti;
shatter things using something baasa'ige
vai
SHATTER WnrH FOOT OR BODY: shatter
s.o. with foot or body baasikaw vta; shatter
s.t. with foot or body baasikan vti
SHAVE
SHAVE: gaashkibaazo vai; shave s.o.
gaashkibaaxh /gaashkibaaN-/ vta
SHAWL
SHAWL: moshwe, -g na
SHE
SHE: she third person singular personal pronoun
wiin pr
SHEATH
KNIFE SHEATH: biinjikomaan, -an ni
SHED
SHED: ataasoowigamig, -oon in
SHEEP
SHEEP: maanishtaanish, -ag na, also
maanitaanish
SHEEPSHEAD
SHEEPSHEAD: sheepshead (fish)
maanashigan, -ag na
SHEEPSKIN
SHEEPSKIN: maanishtaanishiwayaan ni
SHEET
SHEET: apishimoniigin, -oon ni;
waabishkiigin, -oon ni
SHELF
SHELF: desaabaan, -an ni
SHELL
SHELL: es, -ag na
MIDE SHELL: miigis, -ag na
SHELTER
SHELTER: dabinoo'igan, -an ni
SHERIFF
SHERIFF: dakoniwewinini, -wag na
SHIFT
SHIFT: shift s.o. (e.g., a car) biindaabikibizh
/biindaabikibiN-/ vta
GEAR SHIFT: aandaabikinigan, -an ni
SHIFT GEARS: aandaabikinige vai;
biindaabikibijige vai
SHIFTLESS
SHIFTLESS: be shiftless bagandizi vai
SHIN
SHIN: my shin nikakwan, -an /-kakwan-/ nid
SHINE
SHINE: shine (as something mineral)
waasaabikide, waasaabikidemagad vii;
waasaabikizo vai; shine s.o. waasikwa'
via; shine s.t. waasikwa'an vti
SHINE FOR GAME OR FISH: waaswaa vai
SHINNY
PLAY SHINNY: bapasikawe vai
SHINY
SHINY: be shiny (as something sheet-like)
waaseyiigad vii; waaseyiigizi vai
MAKE SHINY: make s.o. shiny waasiko' vta;
make s.t. shiny waasikotoon vtiZ
SHIP
SHIP: ishkode-jiimaan, -an ni; naabikwaan,
-an ni
SHIRT
SHIRT: babagiwayaan, -an ni, also
bagiwayaan
PUT ON SHIRT: put on one's shirt
biichibabagiwayaane vai
TAKE OFF SHIRT: take off one's shirt
giichibabagiwayaane vai
WEAR A SHIRT: gigibabagiwayaane vai
SHOE
SHOE: makizin, -an ni
MAKE SHOES: makizinike vai
PUT ON SHOES: put on one's shoes
babiichii vai
TAKE OFF SHOES: take off one's shoes
gagiichii vai
TENNIS SHOE: babagiwayaanekizin, -an ni,
also bagiwayaanekizin
SHOELACE
SHOELACE: makizineyaab, -iin ni
SHOOT
SHOOT: shoot s.o. baashkiz /baashkizw-/
vta; shoot s.t. baashkizan vti; shoot oneself
baashkizodizo vai; shoot things
baashkizige vai

shoot—shove
246
HEARD SHOOTING: be heard shooting
madwezige vai
PRACTICE SHOOTING: gagweda'aakwe
vai
SHOOT ACCIDENTALLY: shoot s.o. acci-
dentally bichinaw vta; shoot s.t. acciden-
tally bichinan vti; shoot oneself accidental-
ly bichinaadizo vai; shoot things acciden-
tally bichinaage vai
SHOOT AND HIT: shoot and hit s.o.
miikonaw vta; shoot and hit s.t. miikonan
vti
SHOOT AND MISS: bishkonaage vai; shoot
at s.o. and miss bishkonaw vta; shoot at
s.t. and miss bishkonan vti
SHOOT AND WOUND: shoot and wound
s.o. maakinaw vta
SHOOT IN A CERTAIN WAY OR PLACE:
ina'e vai
SHOOT WITH AN ARROW: shoot s.o. with
an arrow or other missile bimo /bimw-/
vta; shoot s.t. with an arrow or other
missile bimodan vti; shoot things with an
arrow or other missile bimojige vai
SIGNAL BY SHOOTING: nandwewezige
vai
SHOP
SHOP: maa'ishkam vai2
SHORE
ALONG THE SHORE: jiigewpc; jiigibiigpc
CARRY TO THE SHORE: carry s.o. to the
shore madaabiiwizh /madaabiiwiN-/ ma;
carry s.t. to the shore madaabiiwidoon
vti2
DRIVE ALONG THE SHORE: jiigewebizo
vai; jiigewedaabii'iwe vai
GO ALONG THE SHORE: bimaazhagaame
vai; jiigewe vai
GO TO THE SHORE: madaabii vai
ON THE SHORE: agamiingpc
PADDLE ALONG THE SHORE:
jiigewe'am vai2; jiigewe'o vai;
jiigewekwazhiwe vai
RUN ALONG THE SHORE: jiigewebatoo
vai; jiigeweyaazhagaamebatoo vai
RUN TO THE SHORE: madaabiibatoo vai
SPEED ALONG THE SHORE: jiigewebizo
vai
TAKE TO THE SHORE: take s.o. to the
shore madaabiiwizh /madaabiiwiN-/ vta;
take s.t. to the shore madaabiiwidoon vti2
WALK ALONG SHORE TO A CERTAIN
PLACE: inaazhagaame vai
WALK ALONG THE SHORE:
jiigeweyaazhagaame vai
SHORT
SHORT: be short dakoozi vai; dakwaa,
dakwaamagad vii; be short (as something
mineral) dakwaabikad vii; dakwaabikizi
vai; be short (as something sheet-like)
dakwegad vii; dakwegizi vai; be short (as
something stick- or wood-like)
dakwaakozi vai; dakwaakwad vii; be
short (as something string-like)
dakwaabiigad vii; dakwaabiigizi vai
CUT SHORT: cut s.o. short (as something
string-like) dakwaabiigizh
/dakwaabiigizhw-/ vta; cut s.t. short (as
something string-like) dakwaabiigizhan vti
SHORT BOAT: be short (as a boat)
dakoonagad vii
SHORT HAIR: have short hair
dadaakwaanikwe vai
SHORT SLEEVES: have short sleeves
dadaakwanagweyaa,
dadaakwanagweyaamagad vii
SHORT
SHORT: be short of (s.t.) manezi vai-o
RUN SHORT: run short noondese vai; run
short of s.o. noondesa* vta; run short of
s.t. noondesatoon vti2; run short of things
noondesachige vai
SHORT OF BREATH: be short of breath
akwanaamo vai
SHORT OF TOBACCO: be short of tobacco
manepwaa vai
SHORT WHILE
A SHORT WHILE: noomagpc
SHOT
TAKE A BAD SHOT: maana'e vai
SHOTGUN
SHOTGUN: zhiishiibanwii-baashkizigan, -an
ni
SHOTGUN SHELL
SHOTGUN SHELL: anwi, -in ni
SHOULD
SHOULD: should modal daa- pvl; it should
have been done naanabem pc
SHOULDER
SHOULDER: my shoulder indinimaangan,
-an /-dinimaangan-/ nid
HAUL ON SHOULDER: haul s.o. on one's
shoulder aawajinigaazh /aawajinigaaN-/
vta; haul s.t. on one's shoulder
aawajinigaadan vti; haul things on one's
shoulder aawajinige vai
WEAR ACROSS THE SHOULDER: wear
s.t. across the shoulder aazhooningwa'an
vti
SHOULDER BLADE
SHOULDER BLADE: my shoulder blade
indiniigan, -ag /-diniigan-/ nad
SHOUT
SHOUT: biibaagi vai; shout at s.o. biibaagim
vta; shout at s.t. biibaagindan vti
SHOVE
SHOVE: shove s.o. gaanjwebin vta; shove s.t.
gaanjwebinan vti
SHOVE ASIDE: shove aside s.o. ikowebin
vta; shove aside s.t. ikowebinan vti
SHOVE AWAY USING SOMETHING:
shove s.o. away using something weba*
/weba'w-/ vta; shove s.t. away using
something weba'an vti
SHOVE OUT OF THE WAY WITH
SOMETHING: shove s.o. out of the way
with something ikoweba* /ikoweba'w-/

247
shove—side
vta; shove s.t. out of the way with
something ikoweba'an vti
SHOVE USING SOMETHING: shove s.o.
using something gaanjweba'
/gaanjweba.'w-/ vta; shove s.t. using
something gaanjweba'an vti; shove things
using something gaanjweba'ige vai
SHOVE WITH FOOT OR BODY: shove s.o.
with foot or body gaanjwebishkaw vta;
shove s.t. with foot or body
gaanjwebishkan vti
SHOVEL
SHOVEL: mangaanibaajigan, -an ni;
mangaanibii vai; shovel (for dirt)
gwaaba'waawangwaan, -an ni; shovel s.o.
(e.g., snow) mangaanibaazh
/mangaanibaaN-/ vta; shovel s.t.
mangaanibaadan vti; shovel things
mangaanibaajige vai
SHOW
SHOW: waabanda'iwewin, -an ni; show (s.t.)
to s.o. waabanda' vta; show (s.t.) to
people waabanda'iwe vai
MAKE SHOW: make s.o. show naago' vta;
make s.t. show naagotoon vti2
SHRINK
SHRINK: odaapishkaa, odaapishkaamagad
vii; odaapishkaa vai
SHRIVELLED
SHRIVELLED: be shrivelled gaaskide,
gaaskidemagad vii; gaaskizo vai
SHUT
SHUT: be shut (as or as with something stick-
or wood-like) gibaakwa'igaade,
gibaakwa'igaademagad vii; shut s.o. (as
or as with something stick- or wood-like)
gibaakwa' /gibaakwa'w-/ vta; shut s.t. (as
or as with something stick- or wood-like)
gibaakwa'an vti
FROZEN SHUT: be frozen shut gibaakwadin
vii; gibaakwaji vai
GLUE SHUT: glue s.o. shut gibokiwas vta;
glue s.t. shut gibokiwasan vti
GLUED SHUT: be glued shut
gibokiwasigaade, gibokiwasigaademagad
vii; gibokiwasigaazo vai
PULL SHUT: pull s.t. shut (as something
stick- or wood-like) gibaakobidoon vti2
SEW SHUT: sew s.o. shut giboogwaazh
/giboogwaaN-/ vta; sew s.t. shut
giboogwaadan vti
SHUT EYES: shut one's eyes basangwaabi
vai
SLAM SHUT: slam s.t. shut (as something
stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door)
gibaakowebinan vti
TIE SHUT: tie s.o. shut gashkapizh
/gashkapiN-/ vta; tie s.t. shut
gashkapidoon vti2
SHY
SHY: be a shy person agajishki vai; be shy
agaji vai; be shy in front of s.o. agajiitaw
vta
FEEL SHY: agadendam vai2
SHYPOKE
SHYPOKE: American bittern (locally called
shypoke) mooshka'osi, -wag na
SIBLING
SIBLING: my sibling of the opposite sex
(brother or sister) indawemaa, -g
/-dawemaaw-/ nod
YOUNGER SIBLING: my younger sibling
(brother or sister) nishiime, -yag
/-shiimey-/ nad
SIBLING-IN-LAW
SIBLING-IN-LAW: my sibling-in-law of the
opposite sex niinim, -oog /-iinimw-/ nad
SICK
SICK: be sick aakozi vai+o
LOOK SICK: aakoziiwinaagozi vai
MAKE SICK: make s.o. sick (especially of a
substance consumed); inverse forms of:
aakoziishkaw- vta
PRETEND TO SICK: pretend to be sick
aakoziikaazo vai
SICK IN A BODY PART: be sick (in s.t.)
aakozi vai+o
SICK IN A CERTAIN WAY: be sick in a
certain way inaapine vai
START TO GET SICK: mizizi vai
VERY SICK: be very sick aanimizi vai;
onzaamine vai
SICKLY
CONSIDERED SICKLY: be considered
sickly aakoziiwendaagozi vai
SICKNESS
SICKNESS: aakoziwin, -an ni
MUCH SICKNESS: there is much sickness
aakoziwinikaa, aakoziwinikaamagad vii
SIDE
ALONG THE SIDE OF THE ROAD:
opimekana^c
ALONG THE SIDE OF THE TRAIL:
opimekanapL
DRIVE OFF TO THE SIDE: bakebide,
bakebidemagad vii; bakebizo vai
FALL ON THE SIDE: opimese vai
GO OFF TO THE SIDE: bake vai
LAY ON SIDE: lay s.o. on side opimeshim
vai; lay s.t. on side opimesidoon vti2
LIE ON SIDE: opimesin vii; lie on one's side
opimeshin vai
ON THE SIDE: on the side of it opime-ayi'ii
pc, also opimeya'ii
ON THIS SIDE: ondaaspc; on this side of it
ondaasayi'ii pc
ON THIS SIDE OF THE FIRE:
ondaasishkode pc
ON THIS SIDE OF THE ROAD:
ondaasikana/it
ON THIS SIDE OF THE TRAIL:
ondaasikana pc
ON THIS SIDE OF THE WATER:
ondaasagaam pc
ROAD GOES OFF TO THE SIDE: go off to
the side (as a road or trail) bakemon
/bakemo-/ vii
RUN OFF TO THE SIDE: bakebatoo vai

side—six
248
SPEED OFF TO THE SIDE: bakebide,
bakebidemagad vii; bakebizo vai
TRAIL GOES OFF TO THE SIDE: go off to
the side (as a road or trail) bakemon
/bakemo-/ vii
SIFT
SIFT: sift s.o. zhaaboshkaas
/zhaaboshkaasw-/ via; sift s.t.
zhaaboshkaatoon vti2; sift things
zhaaboshkaacbige vai
SIFTER
SIFTER: zhaaboshkaachigan, -an ni
SIGHT
DISTANT SIGHT: be a distant sight
naawinaagozi vai; naawinaagwad vii
HAVE IN SIGHT: have s.o. in sight
debaabam vta; have s.t. in sight
debaabandan vti
IN SIGHT: be in sight debaabaminaagozi
vai; debaabaminaagwad vii
SIGN
SIGN: sign s.t. daangigwanenan vti; sign
things daangigwanenige vai
SIGN
SIGN: agwaakwa'igan, -an ni
SIGNAL
SIGNAL BY SHOOTING: nandwewezige
vai
SIGNS
FIND SIGNS: find signs of s.o.'s presence
name* vta
LEAVE SIGNS: leave signs of its presence
namesin vii; leave signs of one's presence
nameshin vai; nametoo vai
SILK
SILK: zenibaanh, -yag na; zenibaawegin,
-oon ni
SILVER
SILVER: zhooniyaawaabik, -oon ni
SINCE
SINCE: ako- pv3
SINEW
SINEW: my sinew injiitad, -an /-jiitad-/ nid
SING
SING: nagamo vai; sing for s.o. nagamotaw
vta
GO ALONG SINGING: bima'amaazo vai
GO AWAY SINGING: anima'amaazo vai
PRACTICE SINGING: goji-nagamo vai
SING A CERTAIN WAY: ina'am vai2
SING AN ACCOMPANIMENT: sing an ac-
companiment (of women) zhaabowe vai
SING WAR SONGS: bwaanzhii-nagamo vai
START TO SING: maajii'am vai2
SINGE
SINGE: singe s.o. banzo /banzw-/ vta; singe
s.t. banzan vti
SINGED
SINGED: be singed bande, bandemagad vii;
banzo vai
SINGING
SINGING: nagamowin ni
SINK
SINK: sink in water gonzaabii,
gonzaabiimagad vii
SINKER
SINKER: net sinker asinaab, -iig na; sinker
(fishing tackle) gonzaabiishkoojigan. -an
ni
SISTER
OLDER SISTER: my older sister nimisenh,
-yag /-miseny-/ nod
YOUNGER SISTER: my younger sister
nishiime, -yag /-shiimey-/ nod
SISTER-IN-LAW
SISTER-IN-LAW: my (female's) sister-in-law
indaangwe, -g /-daangwew-/ nad; my
(male's) sister-in-law niinim, -oog
/-iinimw-/ nad
SIT
SIT: namadabi vai
SIT A CERTAIN WAY: inabi vai
SIT ALONE: nazhikewaakwadabi vai
SIT ASIDE: ikwabi vai
SIT ASTRIDE: desabi vai
SIT AT THE END: ishkwebi vai
SIT COMFORTABLY: minwabi vai
SIT DOWN: namadabi vai; wawenabi vai
SIT FACING BACKWARDS: animikwabi
vai
SIT FACING IN A CERTAIN WAY:
inaasamabi vai
SIT FACING THIS WAY: biidaasamabi vai
SIT IN A CERTAIN PLACE: abi vai
SIT IN FRONT: niigaanabi vai
SIT ON THE BARE GROUND: mitabi vai
SIT OUT OF THE WAY: move out of the
way sitting ikwabi vai
SIT QUIETLY: goshkwaawaadabi vai
SIT SIDE BY SIDE IN A ROW: they sit side
by side in a row niibidebiwag /niibidebi-/
vai
SIT STIFFLY: jiibadabi vai
SIT STILL: bizaanaakwadabi vai
SIT TOGETHER: they sit together
maawandoobiwag /maawandoobi-/ vai
SIT UNCOMFORTABLY: maanabi vai
SIT UP WITH AT A WAKE: sit up with s.o.
(e.g., the deceased at a wake) abiitaw vta
SIT WITH: sit with s.o. wiidabim vta
SIT WITH BACK TO: sit with back to s.o.
animikwabiitaw vta
SIT WITH LEGS CROSSED:
aazhoogaadebi vai
TURN AROUND WHILE SITTING:
gwekabi vai
SITUATED
SITUATED IN A CERTAIN PLACE: be
situated in a certain place dagon /dago-/ vii
SIX
SIX: ingodwaaswi nm, ako ningodwaaswi*;
ingodwaaso- /ningodwaaso-/ pv4, also
ningodwaaso*; six (card)
ingodwaasoobii'igan, -ag na, also
ningodwaasoobii'igan*;
ningodwaasoobii'igan*, -ag na; they are

249
six—skin
six ingodwaachinoon /ningodwaachin-/
mi, also ningodwaachinoon*;
ingodwaachiwag /ningodwaachi-/ vai, also
ningodwaaichiwag*
AND SIX: ashi-ingodwaaso- pv4, also ashi-
ningodwaaso-*; ashi-ingodwaaswi inn,
also ashi-ningodwaaswi*
SIX ACRES: ingodwaaso-diba'igaans pc, also
ningodwaaso-diba'igaans*
SIX DAYS: ingodwaaso-giizhikpt. also
ningodwaaso-giizhik*; ingodwaasogon
pc, also ningodwaasogon*; be six days
ingodwaasogonagad
/ningodwaasogonagad-/ vii, also
ningodwaasogonagad*
SIX DAYS OLD: be six days old
ingodwaasogonagizi
/ningodwaasogonagizi-/ vai, also
ningodwaasogonagizi*
SIX DOLLARS: ingodwaaswaabik pc, also
ningodwaaswaabik*
SIX EACH: neningodwaaswi nm
SIX HOURS: ingodwaaso-diba'igan pc, also
ningodwaaso-diba'igan*
SIX HUNDRED: ingodwaaswaak nm, also
ningodwaaswaak*
SIX INCHES: ingodwaasoninj pc, also
ningodwaasoninj*
SIX MILES: ingodwaaso-diba'igan pc, also
ningodwaaso-diba'igan*
SIX MINUTES: ingodwaaso-diba'igaans pc,
also ningodwaaso-diba'igaans*
SIX MONTHS: ingodwaaso-giizis pc, also
ningodwaaso-giizis*
SIX NIGHTS: ingodwaaso-dibik pc, also
ningodwaaso-dibik*
SIX O'CLOCK: be six o'clock ingodwaaso-
diba'iganed/ningodwaaso-diba'iganed-/
vii, also ningodwaaso-diba'iganed*
SIX PAIRS: ingodwaaswewaan pc, also
ningodwaaswewaan*
SIX SETS: ingodwaaswewaan pc, also
ningodwaaswewaan*
SIX THOUSAND: ingodwaasosagoons
/ningodwaasosagoons-/ pc, also
ningodwaa.sosagoons*
SIX TIMES: irigodwaaching pc, also
ningodwaa.ching*
SIX WEEKS: ingodwaaso-anama'e-giizhik
pc, also ningodwaaso-anama'e-giizhik*;
be six weeks ingodwaaso-anama'e-
giizhigad /ningodwaaso-anama'e-
giizhigad-/ vii, also ningodwaaso-
anama'e-giizhigad*
SIX YEARS: ingodwaaso-biboon pc, also
ningodwaaso-biboon*; be six years
ingodwaaso-biboonagad/ningodwaaso-
biboonagad-/ vii, also ningodwaaso-
biboonagad*
SIX YEARS O LD: be six years old
ingodwaaso-biboonagizi /ningodwaaso-
biboonagizi-/ vai, also ningodwaaso-
biboonagaizi*
SIXTEEN
SIXTEEN: ashi-ingodwaaswi nm, also ashi-
ningodwaaswi*; midaaswi ashi-
ingodwaaswi nm, also midaaswi ashi-
ningodwaaswi*
SIXTH
THE SIXTH DAY OF THE MONTH: be the
sixth day of the month
ingodwaasogonagizi
/ningodwaasogonagizi-/ vai, also
ningodwaasogonagizi*
SIXTY
SIXTY: ingodwaasimidana nm, also
ningodwaasimidana*
SIZE
CERTAIN SIZE: be a certain size inigini vai;
inigokwaa, inigokwaamagad vii; be a cer-
tain size (as something mineral)
inigokwaabikad vii; inigokwaabikizi vai;
be a certain size (as something sheet-like)
inigokwegad vii; inigokwegizi vai; be a
certain size (as something stick- or wood-
like) inigokwaakozi vai; inigokwaakwad
vii; be a certain size (as something string-
like) inigokwaabiigad vii;
inigokwaabiigizi vai
SKATE
SKATE: zhooshkwaada'aagan, -an ni;
zhooshkwaada'e vai
SKATE ABOUT: babaamaada'e vai
SKATE ALONG: bimaada'e vai
SKATE AWAY: animaada'e vai
SKATE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondaada'e vai
SKATE HERE: biidaada'e vai
SKATE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inaada'e
vai
SKI
SKI: zhooshkoshimaan, -ag na;
zhooshkwaagim, -ag na;
zhooshkwaagime vai
SKILFUL
SKILFUL: be skilful wawiingezi vai
SKILFULLY
DO SKILFULLY: wawiingechige vai
MAKE SKILFULLY: make s.o. skilfully
wawiinge* vta; make s.t. skilfully
wawiingetoon vti2
SKILLED
SKILLED: being skilled at nitaa-p»4; be
skilled at things nitaawichige vai
SKILLED IN SPEAKING OR SINGING: be
skilled in speaking or singing nitaawe vai
SKIM
SKIM: skim s.t. bima'an vti; skim things
bima'ige vai
SKIN
SKIN: my skin inzhaga'ay /-zhaga'ay-/ nid;
nishkatay /-shkatay-/ nid
ITCHY SKIN: have itchy skin gizhiibazhe vai
SKIN
SKIN: skin s.o. bakon vta; skin things
bakonige vai

skin—slippery
250
SKIN KNEE: skin one's knee
bishagigidigweshin vai
SKINNY
SKINNY: be skinny bakaakadozo vai
SKIRT
SKIRT: giishkijiiwagooday, -an in
SKULL
SKULL: my skull nishtigwaanigegan, -an
/-shtigwaanigegan-/ nid
SKUNK
SKUNK: zhigaag, -wag na
SKY
SKY: giizhig ra
CLEAR SKY: be clear sky mizhakwad vii
IN THE SKY: ishpiming pc; be in the sky
(e.g., a star, the sun, or the moon) agoojin
vai
SLACK
SLACK: be slack neshangaa,
neshangaamagad vii; neshangizi vai; be
slack (as something string-like)
neshangaabiigad vii; neshangaabiigizi vai
LIE SLACK: neshangisin vii
SLAM
SLAM SHUT: slam s.t. shut (as something
stick- or wood-like, e.g., a door)
gibaakowebinan vti
SLAP
SLAP ON FACE: slap s.o. on the face
basiingwe' /basiingwe'w-/ vta
SLAP ON HEAD: slap s.o. on the head
basindibe' /basindibe'w-/ vta
SLAP ON REAR: slap s.o. on the rear
basidiye' /basidiye'w-/ vta
SLAUGHTER
SLAUGHTER: slaughter s.o. niiwana'
/niiwana'w-/ vta
SLAVE
SLAVE: awakaan, -ag na
SLED
SLED: biboonodaabaanens, -ag na;
odaabaan, -ag na
SLEEP
SLEEP: nibaa vai
DISTURB SLEEP: disturb s.o.'s sleep wapaa'
vta
MAKE NOISE IN SLEEP: make noise in
one's sleep madwengwaam vai
MAKE SLEEP: make s.o. sleep nibe' vta;
make s.o. sleep inverse forms of: nibeshkaw-
vta
PRETEND TO SLEEP: nibekaazo vai
SLEEP DEEPLY: zoongingwashi vai
SLEEP UNCOMFORTABLY:
maazhingwaam vai
SLEEP WITH: sleep with s.o. wiipem vta;
sleep with s.t. wiipendan vti; they sleep
with each other wiipendiwag /wiipendi-/
vai
SLEEP WITH CHILDREN
PROTECTIVELY: wiipemaawaso vai
SLEEPY
SLEEPY: be sleepy giikiibingwashi vai
SLEEVE
SLEEVE: my sleeve ninagway, -an /-nagway-/
nid
HAVE LONG SLEEVES: gagaanonagweyaa,
gagaanonagweyaamagad vii
ROLL UP SLEEVE: roll up one's sleeve
ikwanagweni vai
SHORT SLEEVES: have short sleeves
dadaakwanagweyaa,
dadaakwanagweyaamagad vii
SLEIGH
SLEIGH: biboonodaabaan, -ag na;
odaabaan, -ag na
DRIVE ALONG IN A WAGON OR
SLEIGH: drive along quickly in a wagon
or sleigh bimidaabiiba'igo vai
SLEIGH BELL
SLEIGH BELL: zhinawa'oojigan, -an ni
SLICE
SLICE A CERTAIN WAY: slice s.o. a certain
way inikozh /inikoN-/ vta; slice s.t. a
certain way inikodan vti
SLICE THICK: slice s.o. thick gipagikozh
/gipagikoN-/ vta; slice s.t. thick
gipagikodan vti
SLICE THIN: slice s.o. thin bibagikozh
/bibagikoN-/ vta; slice s.t. thin
bibagikodan vti
SLICK
SLICK: be slick ozhaashaa,
ozhaashaamagad vii; ozhaashizi vai;
zhooshkozi vai; zhooshkwaa,
zhooshkwaamagad vii
SLIDE
SLIDE: slide s.o. with hand zhooshkon vta;
slide s.t. with hand zhooshkonan vti; slide
things zhooshkonige vai
GO SLIDING: zhooshkwajiwe vai
SLIDE OVER SITTING: zhooshkwabi vai
SLIDE WITH HAND: slide s.o. with hand
zhooshkon vta; slide s.t. with hand
zhooshkonan vti
SLINGSHOT
SLINGSHOT: bimojigan, -an ni
SLIP
SLIP AND FALL: ozhaashishin vai
SLIP AND FALL ON THE ICE:
ozhaashikoshin vai
SLIP
SLIP: biitawagoodaan, -an ni
SLIPPERY
SLIPPERY: be slippery ozhaashaa,
ozhaashaamagad vii; ozhaashizi vai; be
slippery (as something mineral)
ozhaashaabikad vii; ozhaashaabikizi vai;
be slippery (as something stick- or wood-
like) ozhaashaakozi vai; ozhaashaakwad
vii
SLIPPERY ICE: there is slippery ice
ozhaashikwaa, ozhaashikwaamagad vii
SLIPPERY ROAD: be slippery (as a road or
trail) ozhaashadamon /ozhaashadamo-/
vii; zhooshkwadamon
/zhooshkwadamo-/ vii; be slippery with

251
slippery—smoke
ice (as a road or trail) ozhaashikwadamon
/ozhaashikwadamo-/ vii
SLIPPERY TRAIL: be slippery (as a road or
trail) ozhaashadamon /ozhaashadamo-/
vii; zhooshkwadamon
/zhooshkwa.damo-/ vii; be slippery with
ice (as a road or trail) ozhaashikwadamon
/ozhaashikwadamo-/ vii
SLIPPERY ELM
SLIPPERY ELM: ozhaashigob, -iig na
SLIVER
SLIVER: sliver (in one's body) gigaatigwaan,
-an ni
HAVE A SLIVER: gigaatigwe vai
SLOP PAIL
SLOP PAIL: ziigwebinigewakik, -oog na
SLOW
SLOW DOWN: slow down! bekaapc
SLOWLY
DRIVE SLOWLY: bejibide, bejibidemagad
vii; bejibizo vai
MOVE SLOWLY: bejibide, bejibidemagad
vii; bejibizo vai; bezikaa vai
RUN SLOWLY: bejibatoo vai; bezikaabatoo
vai
WALK SLOWLY: bedose vai
SMALL
SMALL: be small agaasaa, agaasaamagad
vii; agaashiinyi vai; be small (as something
ball-like) agaasiminagad vii;
agaasiminagizi vai; be small (as something
mineral) agaasaabikad vii; agaasaabikizi
vai; be small (as something sheet-like)
agaasiigad vii; agaasiigizi vai; be small (as
something stick- or wood-like)
agaasaakozi vai; agaasaakwad vii; be
small (as something string-like)
agaasaabiigad vii; agaasaabiigizi vai
APPEAR SMALL: agaasaabaminaagozi vai;
agaasaabaminaagwad vii
LOOK SMALL: agaasaabaminaagozi vai;
agaasaabaminaagwad vii
MAKE SMALL: make s.o. small agaasi' vta;
make s.t. small agaasaatoon vti2
SMALL HILL: there is a small hill
agaasadinaa., agaasadinaamagad vii
SMALL HOUSE: be small (as a room or
house) agaasate, agaasatemagad vii
SMALL ROOM: be small (as a room or
house) agaasate, agaasatemagad vii
SMALL OF BACK
SMALL OF BACK: the small of my back
inzhiigan /-zhiigan-/ nid
SMALLPOX
SMALLPOX: mamakiziwin ni
SMART
SMART: be sma^rt gikendaaso vai
SMASH
SMASH: smash s.o. biigoshim vta; smash s.t.
biigosidoon vti2
SMELL
SMELL: smell s.o. biijimaam vta; smell s.t.
biijimaandan vii
GIVE OFF A SMELL: biijimaagozi vai;
biijimaagwad vii
GIVE OFF A SMELL IN COOKING OR
BURNING: biijimaaso vai; biijimaate,
biijimaatemagad vii
GOOD SMELL: have a good smell
minomaagozi vai; minomaagwad vii
HAVE SMELL A CERTAIN WAY: have s.o.
smell a certain way to one izhimaam vta;
have s.t. smell a certain way to one
izhimaandan vti
LIKE THE SMELL: like the smell of s.o.
minomaam vta; like the smell of s.t.
minomaandan vti
RECOGNIZE BY SMELL: recognize s.o. by
smell nisidomaam vta; recognize s.t. by
smell nisidomaandan vti
SMELL A CERTAIN WAY: izhimaagozi vai;
izhimaagwad vii
SMELL A CERTAIN WAY COOKING OR
BURNING: izhimaaso vai; izhimaate,
izhimaatemagad vii
SMELL BAD: maazhimaagozi vai;
maazhimaagwad vii
SMELL BAD BURNING OR COOKING:
maazhimaaso vai; maazhimaate vii
SMELL FOR: smell for s.o. nandomaam vta;
smell for s.t. nandomaandan vti
SMELL GOOD: have a good smell
minomaagozi vai; minomaagwad vii
SMELL GOOD BURNING OR COOKING:
minomaaso vai; minomaate,
minomaatemagad vii
SMELL RANCID: zaatemaagozi vai;
zaatemaagwad vii
SMELL STRONG BURNING OR
COOKING: mashkawimaaso vai;
mashkawimaate,
mashkawimaatemagad vii
TAKE A SMELL: take a smell of s.o.
gojimaam vta; take a smell of s.t.
gojimaandan vti
SMILE
SMILE: zhoomiingweni vai; smile at s.o.
zhoomiingwetaw vta
SMOKE
SMOKE: bakwene, bakwenemagad vii
FILLED WITH SMOKE: be filled with smoke
mooshkineyaabate,
mooshkineyaabatemagad vii
FULL OF SMOKE: be full of smoke
gibwanaamode, gibwanaamodemagad
vii
GO UPWARDS AS SMOKE: ombaabate vii
SEND SMOKE TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
inaabasige vai
SMOKE OUT: smoke s.o. out gibwanaamoz
/gibwanaamozw-/ vta
SUFFOCATE FROM SMOKE:
gibwanaamozo vai
SMOKE
SMOKE: smoke (tobacco) zagaswaa vai;
smoke s.o. (e.g., tobacco) zagaswaazh

smoke—so many
252
/zagaswaaN-/ vta; smoke s.t. (e.g., kinnic-
kinnick) zagaswaadan vti
GIVE A SMOKE: give a smoke to s.o.
zagaswe' vta
NEED TO SMOKE: manepwaa vai
SHARE A SMOKE: share a smoke with s.o.
(especially a pipe in a ceremony) zagaswe'
vta
SMOKY
SMOKY: be smoky bakwene,
bakwenemagad vii
SMOKY INSIDE: be smoky inside
giikanaamode, giikanaamodemagad vii
SMOOTH
SMOOTH: be smooth zhooshkozi vai;
zhooshkwaa, zhooshkwaamagad vii; be
smooth (as something mineral)
zhooshkwaabikad vii; zhooshkwaabikizi
vai; be smooth (as something sheet-like)
zhooshkwegad vii; zhooshkwegizi vai; be
smooth (as something stick- or wood-like)
zhooshkwaakozi vai; zhooshkwaakwad
vii
SNAGGED
SNAGGED: get snagged on a limb
zagaakwajin vai
SNAIL
SNAIL: biimiskodisii, -g na; obiimiskodisii,
-gna
SNAKE
SNAKE: ginebig, -oog na
SNAKESKIN
SNAKESKIN: ginebigwayaan, -ag na
SNAP
SNAP OFF: snap s.o. off (e.g., something
string-like) bakibizh /bakibiN-/ ma; snap
s.t. off (e.g., something string-like)
bakibidoon vti2
SNAP OFF WITH FOOT OR BODY: snap
s.o. off with foot or body (e.g., something
string-like) bakishkaw vta; snap s.t. off
with foot or body (e.g., something string-
like) bakishkan vti
SNAPPING TURTLE
SNAPPING TURTLE: mikinaak, -wag na;
mishiikenh, -yag na
SNARE
SNARE: agoodwaagan, -an ni; nagwaagan,
-an ni; snare s.o. nagwaazh /nagwaaN-/
vta
CHECK SNARES: check one's snares
naadagoodoo vai
SET A SNARE: agoodoo vai; set a snare for
s.o. agoodaw vta
SNARE WIRE
SNARE WIRE: agoodwaaganeyaab, -iin ni;
nagwaaganeyaab, -iin ni
SNEAK
SNEAK UP: sneak up on s.o. giimoozikaw
vta
SNEEZE
SNEEZE: jaachaamo vai
SNIFF
SNIFF: sniff s.o. nandomaam vta; sniff s.t.
nandomaandan vti
SNIP
SNIP OFF: snip s.o. off (e.g., something
string-like) bakizh /bakizhw-/ vta; snip s.t.
off (e.g., something string-like) bakizhan
vti
SNOT
SNOT: ziinikiigomaan na
SNOUT
SNOUT: my snout nishkoonzh rod
SNOW
SNOW: goon na; zoogipon /zoogipo-/ vii
BRUSH SNOW: brush snow off s.o. by hand
bawaagonen vta; brush snow off s.o. using
something bawaagone' /bawaagone'w-/
vta; brush snow off s.t. by hand
bawaagonenan vti; brush snow off s.t.
using something bawaagone'an vti
CRUST ON THE SNOW: there is a crust on
the snow onaabanad vii
DEEP SNOW: be deep snow ishpaagonagaa,
ishpaagonagaamagad vii
HEAVY WET SNOW: there is heavy wet
snow falling zhakipon /zhakipo-/ vii
MUCH SNOW: be much snow goonikaa,
goonikaamagad vii
SNOW GOES ALONG: bimipon /bimipo-/
vii
SNOW IN LARGE FLAKES:
mamaangadepon /mamaangadepo-/ vii
SOFT SNOW: there is soft snow
zhakaagonagaa, zhakaagonagaamagad
vii
START TO SNOW: maajipon maajipo-/ vii
STOP SNOWING: ishkwaapon /ishkwaapo-/
vii
UNDER THE SNOW: anaamaagon pc, also
anaamaagonag
SNOWSHOE
SNOWSHOE: aagim, -ag na; aagimose vai
BEAR PAW SNOWSHOE: makwasaagim,
SNOWSHOE HARE
SNOWSHOE HARE: waabooz, -oog na
SNUFF
SNUFF: biindaakwaan na
CHEW SNUFF OR TOBACCO: biindaakwe
vai
SO
SO: \i\\\-pv3; so... oonhpc
JUST SO: eniwekpc
SO IT IS SAID: giiwenh pc
SOTHA.T:)\-pvl
SO THE STORY GOES: giiwenh pc
SO MANY
SO MANY: daso- pv3; daswi nm; they are so
many dashiwag /dashi-/ vai; dasinoon
/dasin-/ vii
SO MANY ACRES: daso-diba'igaans pc
SO MANY BAGS: dasooshkin pc
SO MANY BUSHELS: so many bushels daso-
diba'iminaan pc
-ag na

253
so many—sore
SO MANY CUPFULS: dasonaagaans pc
SO MANY DAYS: daso-giizhikpc; dasogon
pc; be so many days dasogonagad vii
SO MANY DOLLARS: daswaabikpc
SO MANY FEET: dasozid pc
SO MANY HOURS: daso-diba'igan pc
SO MANY INCHES: dasoninj pc
SO MANY MILES: daso-diba'igan pc
SO MANY MINUTES: daso-diba'igaans pc
SO MANY MONTHS: daso-giizispc
SO MANY NIGHTS: daso-dibikpc
SO MANY PAIRS: daswewaan pc
SO MANY POUNDS: daso-
dibaabiishkoojigan pc
SO MANY SETS: so many sets daswewaan pc
SO MANY THOUSAND: dasosagoons rm
SO MANY TIMES: dasingpc
SO MANY WEEKS: daso-anama'e-giizhik
pc; be so many weeks daso-anama'e-
giizhikwagad mi, also daswanama'e-
giizhikwagad
SO MANY YEARS: daso-biboon pc; daso-
gikinoonowin pc; be so many years daso-
biboonagad vii
SO MANY YEARS OLD: be so many years
old daso-biboonagizi vai
SOAK
SOAK: soak s.o, agonjim via; soak s.t.
agonjidoon vti2
PUT IN TO SOAK: be put in to soak
agonjijigaade, agonjijigaademagad vii;
agonjijigaazo vai; put s.o. in to soak
agonjim vta; put s.t. in to soak agonjidoon
vti2
SOAP
SOAP: giziibiiga'igan, -an ni
SOBER
SOBER UP: aatebii vai
SOCIAL WORKER
SOCIAL WORKER: ashangewinini, -wag na;
social worker (female) ashangewikwe, -g
na
SOCK
SOCK: azhigan, -an ni
PUT ON SOCKS: put on one's socks
biitazhigane vai
TAKE OFF SOCKS: take off one's socks
giitazhigane vai
WEAR SOCKS: gigazhigane vai
SOD HOUSE
SOD HOUSE: akiiwigamig, -oon ni
SODA
BAKING SODA: ombizigan ni
SOFT
SOFT: be soft niookaa, nookaamagad vii;
nookizi vai; be soft (as something sheet-
like) nookiigad vii; nookiigizi vai
HAVE A SOFT VOICE: bedowe vai
SOFT SNOW: there is soft snow
zhakaagonagaa, zhakaagonagaamagad
vii
SOFT DRINK
SOFT DRINK: menwaagamig, -in ni-pt;
waashkobaagamig, -in ni-pt
SOFTENED
SOFTENED: be softened in water
nookaabaawe vai; nookaabaawe,
nookaabaawemagad vii
SOLDIER
SOLDIER: zhimaaganish, -ag na
SOLE
SOLE: my sole ninagaakizid, -an
/-nagaakizid-/ nid
SOLID
SOLID: be solid zoongan vii; zoongizi vai
MAKE SOLID: make s.o. solid zoongi' vta;
make s.t. solid zoongitoon vti2
SOME
SOME: aanind pc
FOR SOME TIME: gomaapii pc
SOME AMOUNT: gomaapc
SOME DISTANCE: gomaapii pc
SOMEBODY
SOMEBODY: somebody animate indefinite
awiya, -g pr, also awiiya
SOMEONE
SOMEONE: aya'aa, -gpr
SOMETHING
SOMETHING: ayi'ii, -n pr; something
inanimate indefinite gegoo pr
SOMETIME
SOMETIME: ingoding pc, also ningoding*
SOMETIMES
SOMETIMES: ayaangodinongpr, also
aangodinong
SOMEWHAT
SOMEWHAT: eniwekpc
SOMEWHERE
SOMEWHERE: ingoji pc, also ningoji*
SON
SON: my son ingozis, -ag /-gozis-/ nod, also
ingos, ingwizis*
SON-IN-LAW
SON-IN-LAW: na'aangish, -iig na; my son-in-
law niningwan, -ag nad
SONG
SONG: nagamon, -an ni; nagamowin ni
DANCE SONG: niimi'idii-nagamon, -an ni
MOCCASIN GAME SONG: makizinataage-
nagamon, -an ni
SPIRITUAL SONG: manidoo-nagamon, -an
ni
SOON
SOON: wayiibapc; also wiiba*
SORE
SORE: be sore gaagiidizi vai
SORE ARM: have a sore arm gaagiijinike vai
SORE BACK: have a sore back
gaagiidaawigan vai
SORE ELBOW: have a sore elbow
gaagiijidooskwan vai
SORE FINGER: have a sore finger
gaagiijininjii vai
SORE FOOT: have a sore foot gaagiijizide vai
SORE HAND: have a sore hand gaagiijininjii
vai
SORE LEG: have a sore leg gaagiijigaade vai

sore—spectator
254
SORE THROAT: have a sore throat
wiisagigonewe vai
SORES
SORES: have sores omigii vai
SORROWFUL
SORROWFUL: be sorrowful osidaawendam
vcti2
SORT
SORT: sort animate dino, -wag pr, also
dinowa; sort inanimate dino, -wan pr, also
dinowa
SOUL
SOUL: my soul injichaag, -wag /-jichaagw-/
nod
SOUND
LIKE THE SOUND: minotam vai2
MAKE SOUNDS: make sounds on s.t.
madwewetoon vti2; make sounds on
things madwewechige vai
SOUND FOREIGN: mayagitaagozi vai
SOUND GOOD: minotaagozi vai;
minotaagwad vii
SOUND STRANGE: mayagitaagozi vai
SOUNDING GOOD: hear s.o. sounding good
minotaw vta; hear s.t. sounding good
minotan vti
SOUP
SOUP: naboob, -iin ni
BEAN SOUP: mashkodesiminaaboo ni
CHICKEN SOUP: baaka'aakwenhwaaboo
ni
CORN SOUP: mandaaminaaboo ni
DUMPLING SOUP: bisigadanaaboo ni
FISH SOUP: giigoonhwaaboo ni
MAKE SOUP: naboobiike vai
PEA SOUP: anijiiminaaboo ni
RABBIT SOUP: waaboozwaaboo ni
SOUR
SOUR: be sour zhiiwan vii; zhiiwizi vai; be
sour (as a liquid) zhiiwaagamin
/zhiiwaagami-/ vii
SOURDOUGH
SOURDOUGH: zhiiwisijigan, -ag na
SOUTH
SOUTH: zhaawan pc
IN THE SOUTH: zhaawanong pc
SOUTH WIND: zhaawani-noodin ni
TO THE SOUTH: zhaawanong pc
SPACE
SPACE: be space dawaa, dawaamagad vii
SPADE
SPADE SUITE CARD: biig, -wag na
SPANK
SPANK: spank s.o. bapasidiye'
/bapasidiye'w-/ vta
SPARE
SPARE: spare s.o. manaaji* vta; spare s.t.
manaajitoon vti2
SPAWN
SPAWN: they spawn aamiwag /aami-/ vai
SPEAK
SPEAK: gaagiigido vai; giigido vai; speak to
s.o. ganoozh /ganooN-/ vta; speak to s.t.
ganoodan vti; idan vti; they speak to each
other ganoonidiwag /ganoonidi-/ vai
COME SPEAKING: biidwewidam vai2
GO AWAY SPEAKING: animwewidam vai2
HAVE DIFFICULTY SPEAKING:
maazhigiizhwe vai
HEARD SPEAKING AT A DISTANCE: be
heard speaking at a distance debwewidam
vai2
HEARD SPEAKING GOING TO A CER-
TAIN PLACE: be heard speaking going to
a certain place inwewidam vai
HEARD SPEAKING IN A CERTAIN
PLACE: be heard speaking in a certain
place danwewidam vai2
MAKE A MISTAKE SPEAKING:
wanigiizhwe vai
SPEAK A CERTAIN LANGUAGE: inwe vai
SPEAK A SCANDINAVIAN LANGUAGE:
agongosimo vai
SPEAK A STRANGE LANGUAGE:
mayagwe vai
SPEAK AN INDIAN LANGUAGE: speak an
Indian language (especially Ojibwe) to s.o.
anishinaabemotaw vta; speak an Indian
language (especially Ojibwe)
anishinaabemo vai
SPEAK CORRECTLY: gwayakowe vai
SPEAK CREE: omashkiigoomo vai
SPEAK DAKOTA: bwaanimo vai; speak Da-
kota to s.o. bwaanimotaw vta
SPEAK ENGLISH: zhaaganaashiimo vai;
speak English to s.o. zhaaganaashiimotaw
vta
SPEAK FRENCH: wemitigoozhiimo vai
SPEAK IN A CERTAIN WAY: they speak to
each other in a certain way idiwag /idi-/ vai
SPEAK IN AN INDIAN LANGUAGE: speak
in an Indian language (especially in
Ojibwe) anishinaabe-gaagiigido vai
SPEAK LOUD: gizhiiwe vai
SPEAK NASTILY: wiinigiizhwe vai
SPEAK ODAWA: speak Odawa (Ottawa)
odaawaamo vai
SPEAK OJIBWE: ojibwemo vai; speak Ojib-
we to s.o. ojibwemotaw vta; speak an In-
dian language (especially Ojibwe) to s.o.
anishinaabemotaw vta; speak an Indian
language (especially Ojibwe)
anishinaabemo vai
SPEAK SO: ikido vai; speak so to s.o. izhi
UN-/ vta
SPEAK WELL: minowe vai
SPEAKER
SPEAKER: speaker (for others)
aanikanootaagewinini, -wag na
SPEAR
SPEAR: zhimaagan, -an ni; spear s.t.
badaka'an vii; spear things badaka'ige vai
FISH SPEAR: anit, -iin ni
FISH THROUGH THE ICE WITH SPEAR:
akwa'waa vai
SPECTATOR
SPECTATOR: be a spectator waabange vai

255
speech—spoil
SPEECH
SPEECH: giigidowin, -an ni
HAVE ABNORMAL SPEECH:
maazhigiizhwe vai
SPEED
ARRIVE SPEEDING: bagamibide,
bagamibidernagad vii; bagamibizo vai
DRIVE AT A CERTAIN SPEED:
apiichibide, apiichibidemagad vii;
apiichibizo tiai
FLY AT A CERTAIN SPEED: apiichibide,
apiichibidemagad vii; apiichibizo vai
GO A CERTAIN SPEED: apiizikaa vai
GROW AT A CERTAIN SPEED: apiichigi
vai; apiichigin vii
HEARD SPEEDING ALONG: be heard
speeding along bimwewebide,
bimwewebidemagad vii; bimwewebizo
vai
HEARD SPEEDING HERE: be heard
speeding here biidwewebide,
biidwewebidemagad vii; biidwewebizo
vai
RUN AT A CERTAIN SPEED: apiichibatoo
vai; run at a certain speed (e.g., a machine)
apiichibide, apiichibidemagad vii;
apiichibizo vai
SPEED ABOUT: babaamibide,
babaamibidemagad vii; babaamibizo vai
SPEED ALONG: bimibide, bimibidemagad
vii; bimibizo vai
SPEED ALONG THE SHORE: jiigewebizo
vai
SPEED AWAY: animibide, animibidemagad
vii; animibizo vai
SPEED AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewebide, animwewebidemagad
vii; animwewebizo vai
SPEED FAST: gizhiibide, gizhiibidemagad
vii; gizhiibizo vai
SPEED FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onjibide, onjibidemagad vii; onjibizo vai
SPEED HERE: biijibide, biijibidemagad vii;
biijibizo vai
SPEED IN: drive in biinjibide,
biinjibidemagad vii; biinjibizo vai
SPEED INSIDE: biindigebide,
biindigebidemagad vii; biindigebizo vai
SPEED OFF: maajiibide, maajiibidemagad
vii; maajiibizo vai
SPEED OFF TO THE SIDE: bakebide,
bakebidemagad vii; bakebizo vai
SPEED SUDDENLY INTO VIEW:
zaagewebide, zaagewebidemagad vii;
zaagewebizo vai
SPEED TO A CERTAIN PLACE: ipide,
ipidemagad vii; ipizo vai
SPEED UPWARDS: ombibide,
ombibidemagad vii; ombibizo vai
STOP SPEEDING: noogibide,
noogibidemagad vii; noogibizo vai
WIND HAS A CERTAIN SPEED: the wind
has a certain speed apiitaanimad vii
SPEND
SPEND EVERYTHING: jaaginige vai
SPEND TIME
SPEND TIME IN A CERTAIN PLACE:
dazhitaa vai; dazhiike vai
SPIDER
SPIDER: asabikeshiinh, -yag na
SPILE
SPILE: spile (for sugaring) negwaakwaan, -an
ni
SPILL
SPILL: spill s.t. ziiginan vti; ziigwebinan vti;
spill things ziiginige vai
SPILL OUT: ziigise, ziigisemagad vii
SPIN
SPIN: gizhibaabide, gizhibaabidemagad vii;
gizhibaabise vai; gizhibaabise,
gizhibaabisemagad vii; gizhibaabizo vai
SPIRIT
SPIRIT: jiibay, -ag na; manidoo, -g na; be a
spirit manidoowi vai; my spirit injichaag,
-wag /-jichaagw-/ nad
GREAT SPIRIT: gichi-manidoo, -g na
SPIRITUAL
SPIRITUAL NATURE: have a spiritual
nature manidoowaadizi vai
SPIRITUAL POWER
SPIRITUAL POWER: have spiritual power
manidooke vai; take on spiritual power by
one's own authority manidookaazo vai
SPIRITUAL SONG
SPIRITUAL SONG: manidoo-nagamon, -an
ni
SPIT
SPIT: ziko vai; zikowin ni; spit on s.o.
zikwaazh /zikwaaN-/ via; spit on s.t.
zikwaadan vti; spit on things zikwaajige
vai
SPLASH
SPLASH: splash s.o. zaswebiiga'andaw vta
SPLIT
SPLIT: be split daashkaa, daashkaamagad
vii; split (as something of wood)
daashkigishkaa vai; daashkigishkaa,
daashkigishkaamagad vii
SPLIT APART: daashkikaa,
daashkikaamagad vii
SPLIT BY CHOPPING: split s.o. by chopping
(as something of wood) daashkiga'
/daashkiga'w-/ vta; split s.t. by chopping
(as something of wood) daashkiga'an vti
SPLIT BY CUTTING: split s.o. by cutting
daashkizh /daashkizhw-/ vta; split s.t. by
cutting daashkizhan vti
SPLIT FIREWOOD: daashkiga'ise vai
SPLIT LENGTHWISE WITH HANDS: split
s.o. lengthwise with hands daashkibizh
/daashkibiN-/ vta; split s.t. lengthwise with
hands daashkibidoon vti2
SPLIT WOOD: daashkiga'ige vai
SPOIL
SPOIL: banaajishin vai; banaajisin vii; spoil
s.o. banaaji* vta; nishwanaaji* vta; spoil

spoil—stallion
256
s.t. banaajitoon vti2; nishwanaajitoon
vti2; spoil things nishwanaajichige vai
SPOILED
SPOILED: be spoiled banaadad vii; banaadizi
vai
SPONTANEOUSLY
SPONTANEOUSLY: biinizikaapc
SPOOL
SPOOL: spool (for thread) asabaabiiwaatig,
-oon ni
SPOON
SPOON: emikwaanens, -an ni; ladle
emikwaan, -an ni
WOODEN SPOON: mitigwemikwaan, -an ni
SPOON FEED
SPOON FEED: spoon feed s.o. zhakamodaw
vta
SPOON FEED A LIQUID: spoon feed s.o. a
liquid ziigana* /ziigana'w-/ vta
SPOTTED
SPOTTED: be spotted gidagaa,
gidagaamagad mi; gidagizi vai; be spotted
(as something sheet-like) gidagiigad vii;
gidagiigizi vai
SPOUSE
SPOUSE: my spouse niwiidigemaagan, -ag
/-wiidigemaagan-/ na
SPRAIN
SPRAIN ARM: sprain one's arm zeginikeshin
vai
SPRAIN FOOT: sprain one's foot
zegizideshin vai
SPRAIN LEG: sprain one's leg zegigaadeshin
vai
SPREAD
SPREAD ALL OVER: miziweshkaa,
miziweshkaamagad vii
SPREAD THE NEWS ABOUT:
babaamaajimo vai
SPREAD USING SOMETHING: spread s.o.
using something zhizhoo' /zhizhoo'w-/
vta; spread s.t. using something
zhizhoo'an vti; spread things using some-
thing zhizhoo'ige vai
SPREAD OUT
SPREAD OUT: spread s.o. out zhingaden
vta; spread s.t. out zhingadenan vti
LAY SPREAD OUT: lay s.o. spread out
zhingadeshim vta; lay s.t. spread out
zhingadesidoon vti2
LIE SPREAD OUT: zhingadeshin vai;
zhingadesin vii
SPRING
SPRING: be spring ziigwan vii
LAST SPRING: ziigwanong/n
SPEND THE SPRING: spend the spring
somewhere ziigwanishi vai
SPRING BEFORE LAST: awas-ziigwanong
pc
SPRING
SPRING: spring (water source)
mookijiwanibiig ni
SPRINGY
SPRINGY GROUND: be springy ground
dootooban vii
SPRINKLING
SPRINKLING RAIN: be sprinkling rain
awanibiisaa, awanibiisaamagad vii
SPROUT
SPROUT: zaagakii vai; zaagakii,
zaagakiimagad vii; zaagigi vai; zaagigin
vii
SPRUCE
WHITE SPRUCE: gaawaandag, -oog na
SPRUCE ROOT
SPRUCE ROOT: wadab, -iig na
BASKET OF SPRUCE ROOT: wadabii-
makak, -oon ni
SPY
SPY: giimaabi vai; spy on s.o. giimaabam vta
SQUARE
SQUARE: be square gakakaa, gakakaamagad
vii; gakakizi vai; be square (as something
mineral) gakakaabikad vii; gakakaabikizi
vai; be square (as something sheet-like)
gakakiigad vii; gakakiigizi vai; be square
(as something stick- or wood-like)
gakakaakozi vai; gakakaakwad vii
HAVE A SQUARE PATTERN: gakakishin
vai; gakakisin vii
MAKE SQUARE: make s.o. square gakaki'
vta; make s.t. square gakakitoon vti2
SQUASH
SQUASH: okanakosimaan, -an ni;
okosimaan, -an ni
SQUEAK
SQUEAK: giziibwewe vai; giziibwewe,
giziibwewemagad vii; squeak in motion
giziibweweshkaa vai; giziibweweshkaa,
giziibweweshkaamagad vii
SQUEEZE
SQUEEZE: squeeze s.o. maagobizh
/maagobiN-/ vta; ziinibizh /ziinibiN-/ vta;
squeeze s.t. maagobidoon vti2;
ziinibidoon vti2
SQUIRREL
SQUIRREL: red squirrel ajidamoo, -g na
FLYING SQUIRREL: zhagashkaandawe, -g
na
GREY SQUIRREL: misajidamoo, -g na
STAB
STAB: stab s.o. bazhiba' /bazhiba'w-/ vta;
stab s.t. bazhiba'an vti
STACK
STACK: stack s.o. okoshim vta; stack s.o. (as
something stick- or wood-like)
okwaakoshim vta; stack s.t. okosidoon
vti2
STAGE FRIGHT
STAGE FRIGHT: have stage fright
wanaanimizi vai
STAIRWAY
STAIRWAY: akwaandawaagan, -an ni
STALLION
STALLION: naabesim, -oog na

257
stamp—step
STAMP
POSTAGE STAMP: oshtigwaanens, -an ni
STAND
STAND: niibawi vai
STAND AT THE END: ishkwegaabawi vai
STAND BACK: azhegaabawi vai
STAND FACING A CERTAIN WAY:
inaasamigaabawi vai
STAND IN FRONT: niigaanigaabawi vai
STAND IN PLACE OF: stand in place of s.o.
aanikeshkaw via
STAND LEANING AGAINST: stand leaning
against something aatwaakogaabawi vai
STAND OUT OF THE WAY: ikogaabawi
vai
STAND QUIETLY: bizaanigaabawi vai
STAND STIFFLY: jiibadaakogaabawi vai
STAND STRAIGHT: gwayakogaabawi vai
STAND UP: bazigwii vai; make s.o. stand up
niibawi' vta; make s.t. stand up
niibawitoon vti2
STAND UP FROM A SURFACE: badakide,
badakidemagad vii; badakizo vai
STAND UP SUDDENLY: bazigonjise vai
STAND WITH THE BACK OUT:
animikogaabawi vai
STOP AND STAND IN PLACE: stop and
stand in place noogigaabawi vai
TURN STANDING: turn while standing
gwekigaabawi vai; washkigaabawi vai
STAR
STAR: anang, -oog na
START
START: maajise vai; maajise,
maajisemagad vii; maajii- pv4; start (as
an event) maadakamigad vii; start (in
some event) maadakamigizi vai; start s.o.
(e.g., a car) maadwewebizoni' vta; start
s.o. (e.g., a car, a clock) maajiishkaa' vta
START A JOURNEY: maadaadizi vai
START A MONTH: maadaginzo vai
START AN ACTIVITY: maajitaa vai
START EATING: maadanjige vai
START OFF: maajaa vai, also ani-maajaa;
maajii- pv4; they start off in a group
maadaawanidiwag /maadaawanidi-/ vai
START OFF ON THE ICE:
maajiiyaadagaako vai
START TO DRIP: maajigaa,
maajigaamagad vii
START TO FLEE: maajiiba'iwe vai
START TO FLOW: maajijiwan vii
START TO GET SICK: mizizi vai
START TO GROW: maajiigi vai; maajiigin
vii
START TO LEAK: maajigaa,
maajigaamagad vii
START TO MAKE: start to make s.o. maaji'
vta; start to make s.t. maajitoon vti2
START TO MOVE: maajiishkaa,
maajiishkaamagad vii
START TO RAIN: maajibiisaa,
maajibiisaamagad vii
START TO RUN: maajiibatoo vai; start to
run (as a machine) maajiibide,
maajiibidemagad vii; maajiibizo vai
START TO SING: maajii'am vai2
START TO SNOW: maajipon /maajipo-/ vii
START TO TELL: maadaajimo vai; start to
tell of s.o. maadaajim vta; start to tell of
s.t. maadodan vti; start to tell (s.t.) to s.o.
maadaajitnotaw vta
START TO WORK: maadanoki vai; start to
work on s.o. maadanokaazh
/maadanokaaN-/ vta; maajiikaw vta; start
to work on s.t. maadanokaadan vti;
maajiikan vti
STARTLED
STARTLED: be startled goshkokaa vai
STARVE
STARVE: gawanaandam vai2
STATUE
STATUE: mazinichigan, -ag na
STAY
STAY BEHIND: ishkwii vai
STAY IN A CERTAIN PLACE: dazhiike vai
STAY OVERNIGHT: stay overnight with s.o.
nibendaw vta; stay overnight with people
nibendaage vai
STAY WITH: stay with s.o. wiij'ayaaw vta,
also wiiji-ayaaw
STEADY
STEADY: steady s.o. minjimin vta; steady s.o.
with foot or body minjimishkaw vta;
steady s.t. minjiminan vti; steady s.t. with
foot or body minjimishkan vti; steady (s.t.)
for s.o. minjiminamaw via
STEAL
STEAL: steal (s.t.) gimoodi vai+o; steal from
s.o. gimoodim vta; they steal from each
other gimoodindiwag /gimoodindi-/ vai
STEAM
STEAM: baashkinede, baashkinedemagad
vii; baashkinezo vai
STEAMBOAT
STEAMBOAT: ishkode-jiimaan, -an ni
STEEL
STEEL: manidoo-biiwaabik m
STEEP
STEEP BANK: be a steep bank giishkadinaa,
giishkadinaamagad vii
STEER
STEER: odaake vai
STEER A CERTAIN WAY: steer s.o. a
certain way inikwe' /inikwe'w-/ vta; steer
s.t. a certain way inikwe'an vti
STEM
PIPE STEM: okij, -iin ni
STEP
STEP: dakokii vai; step on s.o. dakokaazh
/dakokaaN-/ vta; step on s.t. dakokaadan
vti
STEP IN THE SAME TRACKS:
naaba'anidizo vai

step—stopped
258
STEP OVER: step over s.o. baazhida'
/baazhida'w-/ vta; step over s.t.
baazhida'an vti
STEPDAUGHTER
STEPDAUGHTER: my stepdaughter
indoozhimikwem, -ag /-doozhimikwem-/
nad
STEW
STEW: wiiyaasi-naboob ni
STICK
STICK IN: stick s.o. in badakishim vta;
badakizh /badakiN-/ vta; stick s.t. in
badakidoon vti2; badakisidoon vti2; stick
something in s.o. badaka' /badaka'w-/ vta;
stick something in s.t. badaka'an vti; stick
something in things badaka'ige vai; stick
things in badakisijige vai
STICK IN A FEATHER: stick a feather in
one's hair or hat badakibine'o vai
STICK IN A SURFACE: badakise vai;
badakise, badakisemagad vii
STICK IN A TIGHT PLACE: stick s.o. in a
tight place zhegon vta; stick s.t. in a tight
place zhegonan vti
STICK OUT HEAD: stick out one's head
zaagikweni vai
STICK OUT TONGUE: stick out one's
tongue zaagidenaniweni vai; stick out
one's tongue at s.o. zaagidenaniwetaw vta
STICK
STICK: mitig, -oon ni; mitigoons, -an ni
STICK
STICK: bazagoke vai; bazagoke,
bazagokemagad vii; stick on agoke vai;
agoke, agokemagad vii; stick s.o. on
agokazh /agokaN-/ vta; stick s.t. on
agokadoon vti2
STICKY
STICKY: be sticky bazagozi vai; bazagwaa,
bazagwaamagad vii
STIFF
FREEZE STIFF: freeze s.o. stiff
mashkawaakwajim vta; freeze s.t. stiff
mashkawaakwajidoon vti2
FROZEN STIFF: be frozen stiff
mashkawaakwadin vii; mashkawaakwaji
vai
STIFF ARM: have a stiff arm jiibadaakonike
vai; jiibajinike vai
STIFF HAND: have a hand stiff from cold
mashkawajininjiiwaji vai
STIFF LEG: have a stiff leg jiibadaakogaade
vai; jiibajigaade vai
STIFF NECK: have a stiff neck
jiibajigwayawe vai
STIFFLY
SIT STIFFLY: jiibadabi vai
STAND STIFFLY: jiibadaakogaabawi vai
STILL
STILL: bizaan pc; be still goshkwaawaadizi
vai
LIE STILL: bizaanishin vai
SIT STILL: bizaanaakwadabi vai
STILL
STILL: geyaabi pc
STINGILY
HELD STINGILY: be held stingily
zaagichigaade, zaagichigaademagad vii;
zaagichigaazo vai
STINGY
STINGY: be stingy zazaagizi vai
STIR
STIR: stir s.t. waninawe'an vti
STIR THE FIRE: jiichiishkinzhe'ige vai
STIR TO FORM SUGAR: nase'ige vai; stir
s.t. to form sugar nase'an vti
STIR UP: stir s.o. up ombi' vta
STOMACH
STOMACH: my stomach nimisad, -an
/-misad-/ nid
SWOLLEN STOMACH: have a swollen
stomach ombijiishkaa vai
STOMACHACHE
GIVE A STOMACHACHE: give s.o. a
stomachache; inverse forms of:
aakoshkadekaw- vta
HAVE A STOMACHACHE: aakoshkade vai
STONE
STONE: asm, -iig na; be of stone asiniiwan vii
MANY STONES: there are many stones
asiniikaa, asiniikaamagad vii
STOP
STOP: stop (moving) noogishkaa vai;
noogishkaa, noogishkaamagad vii
COME TO A STOP: noogise vai
MAKE STOP: make s.o. stop (e.g., a car)
nagaashkaa' vta; make s.t. stop
nagaashkaatoon vti2
STOP AN ACTIVITY: ishkwaataa vai
STOP AND STAND IN PLACE: stop and
stand in places noogigaabawi vai
STOP BREATHING: ishkwaanaamo vai
STOP BY HAND: stop s.o. by hand noogin
vta; stop s.t. by hand nooginan vti
STOP CRYING: giishkowe vai
STOP DRIVING: noogibide,
noogibidemagad vii; noogibizo vai
STOP MAKING VOCAL NOISE: giishkowe
vai
STOP MOVING: nagaashkaa vai;
nagaashkaa, nagaashkaamagad vii
STOP RAINING: ishkwaabiisaa,
ishkwaabiisaamagad vii
STOP RUNNING: noogibatoo vai
STOP SNOWING: ishkwaapon /ishkwaapo-/
vii
STOP SPEEDING: noogibide,
noogibidemagad vii; noogibizo vai
STOP TALKING: stop talking to s.o. boonim
vta
STOP UP: stop s.o. up giba' /giba'w-/ vta;
stop s.t. up giba'an vti; stop things up
giba'ige vai
STOPPED
STOPPED UP: be stopped up giba'igaade,
giba'igaademagad vii; giba'igaazo vai

259
stopper—stretch
STOPPER
STOPPER: gibaakwa'igan. -an ni
STORAGE LODGE
STORAGE LODGE: asanjigoowigamig,
-oon ni; ataasoowigamig. -oon ni
STORE
STORE: store something, store (s.t.) ataaso
vai+o
STORE AWAY: store things away na'enimo
vai
STORE
STORE: adaawewigamig, -oon ni
GROCERY STORE: wiisinii-
adaawewigamig. -oon ni
SECOND-HAND CLOTHING STORE:
second-hand clothing store
zhiigoshkigani-adaawewigamig, -oon ni
STORE CLERK
STORE CLERK: adaawewinini, -wag na;
store clerk (female) adaawewininiikwe na
STORM
STORM: be a storm gichi-noodin vii; there is
a severe storm nichiiwad vii
STORM CLOUD
STORM CLOUDS: there are storm clouds
zegaanakwad vii
STORMY
STORMY: be stormy gichi-izhiwebad vii
STORY
STORY: dibaajirnowin, -an ni
TELL A GOOD STORY: minwaajimo vai
TELL A STORY: tell a story of s.o. aajim via;
tell a story of s.t. aadodan vti
TELL A TRADITIONAL STORY:
aadizooke vai
TELL STORIES: dadibaajimo vai; tell stories
to s.o. dadibaajimotaw vta
TRADITIONAL, STORY: aadizookaan, -ag
na
STORYTELLER
STORYTELLER: aadizookewinini, -wag na;
dadibaajimoowinini, -wag na
STOVE
STOVE: gizhaabikizigan, -an ni
COOK STOVE: jiibaakwe-gizhaabikizigan,
-an m
STOVEPIPE
STOVEPIPE: okijaabik, -oon ni
STRAIGHT
STRAIGHT: gwayakpc; be straight
gwayakozi vai; gwayakwaa.
gwayakwaannagad vii; be straight (as
something mineral) gwayakwaabikad vii;
gwayakwaabikizi vai; be straight (as
something stick- or wood-like)
gwayakwaakozi vai; gwayakwaakwad vii;
be straight (as something string-like)
gwayakwaabiigad vii; gwayakwaabiigizi
vai
CUT STRAIGHT: cut s.o. straight
gwayakozh /gwayakozhw-/ vta; cut s.t.
straight gwayakozhan vti
GO STRAIGHT: gwayakoshkaa vai
GROW STRAIGHT: gwayakogi vai;
gwayakogin vii
HOLD HEAD STRAIGHT: hold one's head
straight gwayakokweni vai
LAY STRAIGHT: lay s.o. straight
gwayakoshim vta; lay s.t. straight
gwayakosidoon vti2
LIE STRAIGHT: gwayakoshin vai;
gwayakosin vii
PULL STRAIGHT: pull s.o. straight
gwayakobizh /gwayakobiN-/ vta; pull s.t.
straight gwayakobidoon rn2
SAW STRAIGHT: saw s.o. straight
gwayakoboozh /gwayakobooN-/ vta; saw
s.t. straight gwayakoboodoon vd2
STAND STRAIGHT: gwayakogaabawi vai
TEAR STRAIGHT: tear s.o. straight
gwayakobizh /gwayakobiN-/ vta; tear s.t.
straight gwayakobidoon vti2
STRAIN
STRAIN: strain s.t. zhaabobiiginan vti;
ziikoobiiginan vti
STRAIN
STRAIN IN LIFTING: strain self in lifting
jakiiwii vai
STRAINER
STRAINER: zhaabobiiginigan, -an ni
STRANGE
STRANGE: mayagi- pv4; be strange mayagizi
vai
CONSIDER STRANGE: consider s.o. strange
mayagenim vta
CONSIDERED STRANGE: be considered
strange mayagendaagwad vii
FEEL STRANGE: mayagendam vai2
LOOK STRANGE: mayaginaagozi vai;
mayaginaagwad vii
SOUND STRANGE: mayagitaagozi vai;
mayagitaagwad vii
SPEAK A STRANGE LANGUAGE:
mayagwe vai
SPEAKER OF A STRANGE LANGUAGE:
mayagwewinini, -wag na
STRANGER
STRANGER: biiwide, -g na
STRAP
STRAP: apikan, -an ni
STRAWBERRY
STRAWBERRY: ode'imin, -an ni
STRENGTH
TEST STRENGTH: test one's strength
gagwejii vai
STRETCH
STRETCH: stretch (as something sheet-like)
zhiibiigishkaa, zhiibiigishkaamagad vii;
stretch s.o. on a hide stretcher zhiibaakwa*
/zhiibaakwa'w-/ vta
STRETCH A HIDE: naazhiiga'ige vai
STRETCH BODY: stretch one's body zhiibii
vai
STRETCH BY PULLING: stretch s.o. by
pulling (as something sheet-like)
zhiibiigibizh /zhiibiigibiN-/ vta; stretch s.t.

stretch—suffer
260
by pulling (as something sheet-like)
zhiibiigibidoon vti2
STRETCH USING SOMETHING: stretch
s.o. using something (as something sheet-
like) zhiibiiga' /zhiibiiga'w-/ vta; stretch
s.t. using something (as something sheet-
like) zhiibiiga'an vti
STRETCHER
HIDE STRETCHER: flat hide stretcher
(especially for muskrats)
zhiibaakwa'ataan, -an ni
STRIKE
STRIKE: strike s.o. bakite' /bakite'w-/ vta;
strike s.t. bakite'an vti; strike things
bakite'ige vai; they strike each other
bakite'odiwag /bakite'odi-/ vai
STRING
STRING: string s.o. (e.g., beads) naabidoo'
/naabidoo'w-/ vta; string s.t. naabidoo'an
vti; string things naabidoo'ige vai
STRING A CERTAIN WAY: string s.o. a cer-
tain way inaabiigin vta; string s.t. a certain
way inaabiiginan vti
STRING ALONG: string s.o. along
bimaabiigin vta; string s.t. along
bimaabiiginan vti
STRING
STRING: biiminakwaanens, -an ni
MAKE STRING: biiminakwe vai
STRIPE
HAVE A STRIPE: beshaa, beshaamagad vii;
beshizi vai
MARK WITH A STRIPE: mark s.o. with a
stripe beshibii' /beshibii'w-/ vta; mark s.t.
with a stripe beshibii'an vti; mark things
with a stripe beshibii'ige vai
STRIPS
CUT INTO STRIPS: cut s.t. into strips
baanizhan vti
STROKE
HAVE A STROKE: niboowise vai
STROLL
TAKE A STROLL: babimose vai
STRONG
STRONG: be strong mashkawaa,
mashkawaamagad vii; mashkawizi vai;
zoongan vii; zoongizi vai; be strong (as a
liquid) mashkawaagamin
/mashkawaagami-/ vii; be strong (of a
person) mashkawizii vai
MAKE STRONG: make s.o. strong zoongi'
vta; make s.t. strong zoongitoon vti2
SMELL STRONG BURNING OR
COOKING: mashkawimaaso vai;
mashkawimaate,
mashkawimaatemagad vii
STRONG ARM: have a strong arm
zoonginike vai
STRONG BONES: have strong bones
zoongigane vai
STRONG HAND: have a strong hand
zoongininjii vai
STRUCK
STRUCK: be struck bakite'igaade,
bakite'igaademagad vii; bakite'igaazo
vai
STRUCK BY LIGHTNING: be struck by
lightning baagijigaade,
baagijigaademagad vii; baagijigaazo vai
STUB
STUB TOE: stub one's toe bizozideshin vai
STUBBORN
STUBBORN: be stubborn zhazhiibitam vai2
STUBBORNLY
STUBBORNLY: awanjish pc
STUCK
STUCK: be stuck baataashin vai; baataasin
vii; bwaanawi'o vai
GET STUCK: baataase vai; baataase,
baataasemagad vii
STUDENT
STUDENT: gekinoo'amawind na-pt;
gikinoo'amaagan, -ag na
STUFF
STUFF: stuff s.o. biindashkwaazh
/biindashkwaaN-/ vta; stuff s.t.
biindashkwaadan vti
STUFFED-UP
HAVE A STUFFED-UP NOSE: gibijaane
vai, also gagiibijaane
STUMBLE
STUMBLE: bizogeshin vai; stumble on s.o.
bizokaw vta; stumble on s.t. bizokan vti
STUMP
STUMP: giishkanakad, -oon ni
STURGEON
STURGEON: name, -wag na
STUTTER
STUTTER: gagiibanagaskwe vai
SUCCEED
SUCCEED: gashki'ewizi vai; succeed at s.t.
gashkitoon vti2
SUCCESSION
SOMEONE NEXT IN SUCCESSION TO
THE LEADER: someone next in succes-
sion to the leader (e.g., a vice president)
aanike-ogimaa, -g na
SUCK
SUCK: wiikwamo vai; suck on s.o. wiikwam
vta; suck on s.t. wiikwandan vti; suck on
things wiikwanjige vai
SUCK OUT: suck out of s.o. zoobam vta;
suck out of s.t. zoobandan vti
SUCKER
SUCKER: sucker (fish) namebin, -ag na
SUCKLE
SUCKLE: suckle (of child or offspring) nooni
vai
SUDDENLY
SUDDENLY: gezikapc
SUFFER
SUFFER: aanimizi vai; gagwaadagitoo vai
MAKE SUFFER: make s.o. suffer aanimi' vta
SUFFER EMOTIONALLY: aanimendam
vai2

261
suffer—sweat
SUFFER IN A CERTAIN PLACE: suffer in a
certain place dapine vai
SUFFER IN MIND: suffer in one's mind
gagwaanisagendam vai2
SUFFER MENTALLY: aanimendam vai2
SUFFER PAIN: wiisagendam vai
SUFFICIENT
SUFFICIENT: de- pv4; gwech pc; be
sufficient debise vai; debise,
debisemagad rii
SUFFOCATE
SUFFOCATE FROM SMOKE:
gibwanaamozo vai
SUGAR
SUGAR: ziinzibaakwad m
BOIL TO SUGAR: ombigamizige vai; boil
s.t. to sugar ombigamizan vti
BOILING SUGAR: ombigamizigan, -an m
GRANULATE SUGAR: naseyaawangwe vai
GRANULATED SUGAR: bibine-
ziinzibaakwad ni
MAPLE SUGAR: anishinaabe-ziinzibaakwad
ni; ziinzibaakwad ni
STIR TO FORM SUGAR: stir s.t. to form
sugar nase'an vti
SUGAR OFF: ombigamizige vai
SUGAR BEET
SUGAR BEET: wiishkobi-jiis, -an ni
SUGARBOWL
SUGAR BOWL-: ziinzibaakwad-onaagaans,
-an ni
SUGAR BUSH
SUGAR BUSH: iskigamizigan, -an ni
SUGAR CAKE
SUGAR CAKE: ziiga'igan, -an m
SUGAR CAMP
SUGAR CAMP: iskigamizigan, -an ni
SUGAR CONE
SUGAR CONE: zhiishiigwaans, -ag na;
ziiga'igan, -an ni
CAST SUGAR CONES: ziiga'ige vai
MAKE A SUGAR CONE: ziiga'iganike vai
SUICIDE
COMMIT SUICIDE: nisidizo vai
SUITABLE
SUITABLE: de- pv4; be suitable
nandawendaagozi vai;
nandawendaagwad vii
SUITCASE
SUITCASE: babaamaadizii-makak, -oon ni
SUMMER
SUMMER: be summer niibin vii
LAST SUMMER: niibinongpc
LATE SUMMER: giiwe-niibin vii
SPEND THE SUMMER: spend the summer
somewhere niibinishi vai
SUMMER BEFORE LAST: awas-niibinong
pc
SUMMON
SUMMON: summon s.o. nandom vta
SUN
SUN: giizis, -oog na
SUN SETS: set as the sun bangishimon
/bangishimo-/ vii
SUNBURN
PEEL FROM SUNBURN: bishagaaso vai
SUNBURNED
SUNBURNED: be sunburned gashkaaso vai
SUNDAY
SUNDAY: be Sunday anama'e-giizhigad vii,
also aname-giizhigad
SUNFISH
SUNFISH: agwadaashi. -wag na
SUNNY
SUNNY: be sunny waaseyaa,
waaseyaamagad vii
SUNRISE
SUNRISE: be sunrise mooka'am vai2
SUPPER
EAT SUPPER: onaagoshi-wiisini vai; eat s.t.
for supper onaagoshi-miijin vti3
SUPPORT
SUPPORT: support s.o. bami' vta
SUPPORTED
SUPPORTED ONE: bami'aagan, -ag na
SURE
SURE: geget pc; sure! enange pc
FOR SURE: mii nange pc
SURPRISE
SURPRISE: surprise s.o. goshko' vta
SURPRISE VERBALLY: surprise s.o. verbally
goshkom vta
SURPRISED
SURPRISED: be surprised goshkokaa vai
SURVEY
SURVEY LAND: diba'akii vai
SURVEYOR
SURVEYOR: diba'akiiwinini, -wag na
SURVIVE
SURVIVE: zhaabwii vai
SUSPECT
SUSPECT: suspect s.o. anaamenim vta;
moonenim vta; suspect s.t. anaamendan
vti
SUSPENDED
SUSPENDED IN WATER: be suspended in
water agomo vai; agonde vii
SUSPENDERS
SUSPENDERS: suspenders plural
anikamaanan /anikamaan-/ ni
SWALLOW
SWALLOW: swallow s.o. gonzhi IgonN-l vta;
swallow s.t. gondan vti
SWAMP
SWAMP: waabashkiki, -in ni
SWAMPY
SWAMPY: be swampy waabashkikiiwan vii
SWAN
SWAN: waabizii, -g na
SWEAR
SWEAR: majigiizhwe vai
SWEAT
SWEAT: abwezo vai

sweat bath—take
262
SWEAT BATH
TAKE A SWEAT BATH: madoodoo vai
SWEAT LODGE
SWEAT LODGE: madoodiswan, -an TO
ROCK FOR SWEAT LODGE:
madoodoowasin, -iig na
SWEATY
SWEATY FOOT: have a sweaty foot
abwezide vai
SWEATY HAND: have a sweaty hand
abweninjii vai
SWEEP
SWEEP: jiishada'ige vai
SWEET
SWEET: wiishkobi- pv4; be sweet wiishkoban
vii; wiishkobizi vai; be sweet (as a liquid)
wiishkobaagamin /wiishkobaagamW vii
TASTE SWEET: wiishkobipogozi vai;
wiishkobipogwad vii
SWEET FLAG
SWEET FLAG: wiikenh, -yag na
SWEET GRASS
SWEET GRASS: wiingashk, -oon ni
SWEET ROLL
SWEET ROLL: waashkobizid bakwezhigan,
-ag na-pt; wiishkobi-bakwezhigan, -ag na
SWEETHEART
SWEETHEART: my sweetheart
niinimoshenh, -yag /-iinimosheny-/ nod
SWIM
ARRIVE SWIMMING: bagamaadagaa vai
GO SWIMMING: bagizo vai
HEARD SWIMMING HERE: be heard
swimming here biidweweyaadagaa vai
SWIM ABOUT: babaamaadagaa vai
SWIM ACROSS: aazhawaadagaa vai
SWIM ALONG: bimaadagaa vai; swim along
(as a fish) bimakwazhiwe vai
SWIM ASHORE: agwaayaadagaa vai
SWIM AWAY: animaadagaa vai
SWIM FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondaadagaa vai; swim from a certain place
(as a fish) ondakwazhiwe vai
SWIM HERE: biidaadagaa vai; swim here (as
a fish) biidakwazhiwe vai
SWIM OFF: swim off (as a fish)
maajiikwazhiwe vai
SWIM SUDDENLY INTO VIEW: swim as a
fish suddenly into view zaagewekwazhiwe
vai
SWIM TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inaadagaa
vai; swim to a certain place (as a fish)
inakwazhiwe vai
SWING
SWING: wewebizo vai; wewebizon, -an ni
SWITCH
SWITCH: biskaakonebijigan. -an ni
SWITCH ON: switch s.t. on biskanebidoon
vti2
SWOLLEN
SWOLLEN: be swollen baagishi vai; baagisin
vii
SWOLLEN EYES: have swollen eyes
baagishkiinzhigwe vai
SWOLLEN FACE: have a swollen face
baagiingwe vai
SWOLLEN FOOT: have a swollen foot
baagizide vai
SWOLLEN GLAND: have a swollen gland
(lymph node) baaginiishkwe vai
SWOLLEN HAND: have a swollen hand
baagininjii vai
SWOLLEN NOSE: have a swollen nose
baagijaane vai
SWOLLEN STOMACH: have a swollen
stomach ombijiishkaa vai
SWORD
SWORD: ashaweshk. -oon ni
SYRUP
SYRUP: zhiiwaagamizigan ni
MAKE SYRUP: zhiiwaagamiziganike vai;
zhiiwaagamizige vai
THICKEN INTO SYRUP: zhiiwaagamide,
zhiiwaagamidemagad vii
T
TAB
TAB AT HEEL OF MOCCASIN:
odoondanegwaajigan, -an ni
TABLE
TABLE: adoopowin. -an ni
SET THE TABLE: ozisinaagane vai
TABLE CLOTH
TABLE CLOTH: adoopowiniigin, -oon ni
TADPOLE
TADPOLE: boodoonh, -yag na
TAFFY
MAKE TAFFY: bigiwizige vai
MAPLE TAFFY: bigiwizigan ni
TAIL
ANIMAL TAIL: my tail (of an animal) inzow,
-an /-zow-/ nid
BIRD TAIL: my tail (of a bird) ninashkid, -iin
/-nashkidy-/ nid
FISH TAIL: my tail (of a fish) inzhigwan
/-zhigwan-/ nid
WAG TAIL: wag one's tail wewebaanoweni
vai
TAILPIPE
TAILPIPE: okijaabik, -oon ni
TAKE
TAKE: take s.o. mami /mam-/ ma; take s.o.
offered odaapin vta; take s.t. mamoon
vti2; take s.t. offered odaapinan vti; take
(s.t.) from s.o. mamaw vta; take (s.t.)
offered by s.o. odaapinamaw vta; take
tilings mamige vai; take things offered
odaapinige vai

263
take—take off
ABLE TO TAKE: be able to take s.o.
gashkiwizh /gashkiwiN-/ via; be able to
take s.t. gashkiwidoon mil
TAKE A HANDFUL: take a handful of s.o.
ganakin vta; take a handful of s.t.
ganakinan mi
TAKE A PIECE OFF BY HAND: take a piece
off s.o. by hand bakwen vta; take a piece
off s.t. by hand bakwenan vti
TAKE A PIECE OFF USING
SOMETHING: take a piece off s.o. using
something bakwe' vta; take a piece off s.t.
using something bakwe'an vti
TAKE A TASTE: take a taste of s.o.
godandan vti; take a taste of s.t. godam
vta; gojipidan vti
TAKE ABOUT: take s.o. about babaamiwizh
/babaamiwiN-/ vta; take s.t. about
babaamiwidoon vti2
TAKE ACROSS: take s.o. across
aazhogewizh /aazhogewiN-/ vta; take s.t.
across aazhogewidoon vti2
TAKE ACROSS BY BOAT: take s.o. across
by boat aazhawa'oozh /aazhawa'ooN-/
vta; take s.t. across by boat
aazhawa'oodoon vti2
TAKE ALONG: take s.o. along bimiwizh
/bimiwiN-/ vta; maajiizh /maajiiN-/ vta;
take s.t. along bimiwidoon vti2;
maajiidoori vti2; take (s.t.) along for s.o.
maajiidaw vta; take people along
bimiwizhiwe vai
TAKE ALONG A GUN: niimibaashkizigane
vai
TAKE ALONG FOR A RIDE: take s.o. along
for a ride bimibizoni' vta
TAKE ALONG IN A BOAT: take s.o. along
in a boat bima'oozh /bima'ooN-/ vta; take
s.t. along in a boat bima'oodoon vti2
TAKE ASHORE: take s.o. ashore agwaashim
vta; take s.t. ashore agwaasidoon vtt2
TAKE ASHORE BY BOAT: take s.t. ashore
by boat agwaa'oodoon vd2
TAKE AWAY: take s.o. away animiwizh
/animiwiN-/ vta; maajiizh /maajiiN-/ vta;
take s.t. away animiwidoon vti2;
maajiidoon vti2; take people away
maajiizhiwe vai
TAKE AWAY BY BOAT: take s.o. away by
boat anima'oozh /anima'ooN-/ vta; take
s.t. away by boat anima'oodoon vti2
TAKE BACK: take s.o. back azhen vta; take
s.t. back azhenan vti; take (s.t.) back to
s.o. azhenamaw vta
TAKE DOWN: take s.o. down bina' /bina'w-/
vta; take s.t. down bina'an vti
TAKE EVERYTHING: jaaginige vai
TAKE FORCIBLY: take (s.t.) from s.o.
forcibly makam vta
TAKE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: take s.o.
from a certain place onjiwizh /onjiwiN-/
vta; take s.t. from a certain place
onjiwidoon vti2
TAKE HOME: take s.o. home giiwewizh
/giiwewiN-/ vta; take s.t. home
giiwewidoon vti2; take (s.t.) home for s.o.
giiwewidaw vta
TAKE INLAND: take s.o. inland gopiwizh
/gopiwiN-/ vta; take s.t. inland
gopiwidoon vti2
TAKE INSIDE: take s.o. inside biindigazh
/biindigaN-/ vta; take s.t. inside
biindigadoon vti2
TAKE OFF INTO THE AIR: bazikwa'o vai
TAKE OFF THE FIRE: take s.o. off the fire
agwaabiigin vta; agwaashim vta; take s.t.
off the fire agwaabiiginan vti;
agwaasidoon vti2
TAKE OFF THE WATER: take s.o. off the
water agwaabiigin vta; take s.t. off the
water agwaabiiginan vti
TAKE OFF THE WATER USING
SOMETHING: take s.o. off the water
using something agwaabiiga'
/agwaabiiga'w-/ vta; take s.t. off the water
using something agwaabiiga'an vti
TAKE OUT: take s.o. out zaagizi' vta; take
s.t. out zaagizitoon vti2; take (s.t.) out for
s.o. zaagizitaw vta
TAKE PICTURES: mazinaakizige vai; take
pictures of s.o. mazinaakiz
/mazinaakizw-/ vta; take pictures of s.t.
mazinaakizan vti
TAKE PLACE: take s.o.'s place naabishkaw
vta; take someone's place naabishkaage
vai
TAKE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: take s.o. to
a certain place izhiwizh /izhiwiN-/ vta;
take s.t. to a certain place izhiwidoon vti2;
take (s.t.) to s.o. at a certain place
izhiwidaw vta
TAKE TO A CERTAIN PLACE BY BOAT:
take s.o. to a certain place by boat
ina'oozh /ina'ooN-/ vta; take s.t. to a
certain place by boat ina'oodoon vti2
TAKE TO THE SHORE: take s.o. to the
shore madaabiiwizh /madaabiiwiN-/ vta;
take s.t. to the shore madaabiiwidoon vti2
TAKE WILD RICE INLAND: gopimine vai
TAKE WRONG ONE: take s.o. who/that is
the wrong one wanin vta; take s.t. that is
the wrong one waninan vti
TAKE CARE
TAKE CARE: take care of s.o. ganawenim
vta; take care of s.t. ganawendan vti; take
care of (s.t.) for s.o. ganawendamaw vta;
take care of things ganawenjige vai; they
take care of each other ganawenindiwag
/ganawenindi-/ vai
TAKE CARE OF A CHILD: bamoozhe vai;
ganawendaawaso vai
TAKE OFF
TAKE OFF: take s.o. off gidiskin vta;
giichigon vta; take s.t. off gidiskinan vti;
giichigonan vti
TAKE OFF CLOTHES: take off one's clothes
giizikonaye vai; take s.o. off the body
(e.g., clothes) giizikaw vta; take s.t. off the
body (e.g., clothes) giizikan vti

take off—taste
264
TAKE OFF COAT: take off one's coat
giichibabiinzikawaagane vai
TAKE OFF DRESS: take off one's dress
giitagoode vai
TAKE OFF HAT: take off one's hat
giichiwakwaane vai
TAKE OFF MITTENS: take off one's mittens
giichiminjikaawane vai
TAKE OFF MOCCASINS: take off one's
moccasins gagiichii vai
TAKE OFF PANTS: take off one's pants
giichigiboodiyegwaazone vai
TAKE OFF SHIRT: take off one's shirt
giichibabagiwayaane vai
TAKE OFF SHOES: take off one's shoes
gagiichii vai
TAKE OFF SOCKS: take off one's socks
giitazhigane vai
TAKE PLACE
TAKE PLACE IN A CERTAIN PLACE:
danakamigad vii
TAKEN
TAKEN: be taken mamigaade,
mamigaademagad vii; mamigaazo vai;
odaapinigaade, odaapinigaademagad vii;
odaapinigaazo vai
TAKEN ALONG: be taken along
maajiijigaade, maajiijigaademagad vii;
maajiijigaazo vai
TAKEN ASHORE: be taken ashore
agwaasijigaade, agwaasijigaademagad
vii; agwaasijigaazo vai
TAKEN OFF THE FIRE: be taken off the fire
agwaasijigaade, agwaasijigaademagad
vii; agwaasijigaazo vai
TAKEN TO A CERTAIN PLACE: be taken
to a certain place izhiwijigaade,
izhiwijigaademagad vii; izhiwijigaazo vai
TAKEN CARE
TAKEN CARE: be taken care of
ganawendaagwad vii; ganawenjigaade,
ganawenjigaademagad vii;
ganawenjigaazo vai
TALK
TALK: gaagiigido vai; talk to s.o. gaganoozh
/gaganooN-/ vta; they talk to each other
gaganoonidiwag /gaganoonidi-/ vai
AVOID TALKING: avoid talking to s.o.
boonim vta
STOP TALKING: stop talking to s.o. boonim
vta
TALK A CERTAIN WAY: izhigiizhwe vai
TALK ABOUT: talk about s.o. dazhim vta;
talk about s.t. dazhindan vti; talk about
people dazhinge vai
TALK BACK: talk back to s.o. aazhidem vta
TALK QUICKLY, dadaatabaanagidoon vai
TALK TOO MUCH: onzaamidoon vai
TALK WITHOUT STOPPING:
aabidaanagidoon vai; aapidaanagidoon
vai
TALKED
TALKED ABOUT: be talked about all the
time waawiinjigaade,
waawiinjigaademagad vii;
waawiinjigaazo vai
TALL
TALL: be tall ginoozi vai; be tall (of a person)
ginwaakozi vai
SO TALL: be so tall akoozi vai; akwaa,
akwaamagad vii
TALLOW
TALLOW: mashkawaji-bimide ni
TAMARACK
TAMARACK: mashkiigwaatig, -oog na
TAME
TAME: be tame waangawizi vai; tame s.o.
waangawi" via
TAN
TAN: tan hides aseke vai; tan s.o. (e.g., a
hide) asekaazh /asekaaN-/ vta
TANGLED
TANGLED: be tangled gashka'oode,
gashka'oodemagad vii; gashka'oozo vai
TANK
TANK: atoobaan, -an ni
TANNED HIDE
TANNED HIDE: asekaan, -ag na
TANNING
TANNING: asekewin ni
TAP
TAP: negwaakwaan, -an ni
TAP FOOT: tap one's foot jiichiibizideni vai
TAP IN: tap s.o. in ginjida' /ginjida'w-/ vta;
tap s.t. in ginjida'an vti
TAP TREES: ozhiga'ige vai
TAPE RECORDER
TAPE RECORDER: naabinootaage-makak.
-oon ni
TAR
TAR: bigiw ni; bigiike vai; makade-bigiw na;
tar s.t. bigiikaadan vti
TARGET
HIT THE TARGET: mizhodam vai2
TASTE
TASTE: taste things gojipijige vai
FIND A GOOD TASTE: find a good taste in
s.o. minopozh /minopw-/ vta; find a good
taste in s.t. minopidan vti
HAVE A CERTAIN TASTE: ipogozi vai;
ipogwad vii
LIKE THE TASTE: like the taste of things
minopijige vai
TAKE A TASTE: take a taste of s.o.
godandan vti; gojipozh /gojipw-/ vta; take
a taste of s.t. godam vta; gojipidan vti
TASTE A SAMPLE: taste a sample of s.o.
daangam vta; taste a sample of s.t.
daangandan vti
TASTE BAD: maazhipogozi vai;
maazhipogwad vii; taste bad (as a liquid)
maanaagamin /maanaagami-/ vii
TASTE BITTER: wiisagipogozi vai;
wiisagipogwad vii
TASTE GOOD: minopogozi vai;
minopogwad vii; taste good (as a liquid)
minwaagamin /minwaagami-/ vii

265
taste—ten
TASTE RANCID: zaatepogozi vai;
zaatepogwad vii
TASTE SALTY: zhiiwitaaganipogozi vai;
zhiiwitaaganipogwad vii
TASTE SWEET: wiishkobipogozi vai;
wiishkobipogwad vii
TAUGHT
TAUGHT: be taught gikinoo'amaagozi vai
TAVERN
TAVERN: minikwewigamig, -oon ni;
ziiginigewigamig, -oon ni
TAXI
TAXI: bimiwizhiwewidaabaan, -ag na
TAXI DRIVER
TAXI DRIVER: bimiwizhiwewinini, -wag na
TEA
TEA: aniibiish. -an ni; aniibiishaaboo ni
BLACK TEA: makade-aniibiish ni
GREEN TEA: ozhaawashko-aniibiish ni
MAKE TEA: aniibiishaabooke vai;
aniibiishike vai
TEACH
TEACH: gikinoo'amaage vai; teach (s.t.) to
s.o. gikinoo'amaw via; teach oneself
gikinoo'amaadizo vai
TEACHER
TEACHER: gekinoo'amaaged na-pt;
gikinoo'amaagewinini, -wag na; teacher
(female) gikinoo'amaagewikwe, -g na
TEAKETTLE
TEAKETTLE: aniibiishakik, -oog na
TEAL
TEAL: wewiibingwaange, -g na
TEAR
TEAR: giishkikaa vai; giishkikaa,
giishkikaarnagad vii; tear s.o. biigobizh
/biigobiN-/ vta; tear s.t. biigobidoon vn2;
tear things biigobijige vai
TEAR A PIECE OFF: tear a piece off of s.o.
bakwebizh /bakwebiN-/ vta; tear a piece
off of s.t. bakwebidoon vti2
TEAR APART: tear s.o. apart daashkibizh
/daashkibiN-/ vta; tear s.t. apart
daashkibidoon vti2
TEAR DOWN: tear s.o. down niisibizh
/niisibiN-/ vta; tear s.t. down niisibidoon
vti2
TEAR OFF: tear s.o. off giishkibizh
/giishkibiN-/ vta; tear s.t. off giishkibidoon
vti2; tear things off giishkibijige vai
TEAR STRAIGHT: tear s.o. straight
gwayakobizh /gwayakobiN-/ vta; tear s.t.
straight gwayakobidoon vti2
TEAR TO PIECES: tear s.o. to pieces
bigishkibizh /bigishkibiN-/ vta; tear s.t. to
pieces bigisihkibidoon vri2
TEASE
TEASE: miikindizi vai; tease s.o. miikinji' vta
TEASPOON
TEASPOON: emikwaanens, -an ni
TELEPHONE
TELEPHONE: gaagiigidoo-makakoons, -an
ni; giigidowin, -an ni; giigidoo-
biiwaabikoons, -an ni
TELEPHONE WIRE
TELEPHONE WIRE: giigidoo-
biiwaabikoons, -an m
TELESCOPE
TELESCOPE: zhiibaayaabanjigan, -an ni
TELEVISION
TELEVISION SET: mazinaatesijigan, -an ni
TELL
TELL: dibaajimo vai; tell of s.o. dibaajim vta;
tell of s.t. dibaadodan vti; tell (s.t.) to s.o.
dibaajimotaw vta
COME TELLING NEWS: biidaajimo vai
START TO TELL: maadaajimo vai; start to
tell of s.o. maadaajim vta; start to tell of
s.t. maadodan vti; start to tell (s.t.) to s.o.
maadaajimotaw vta
TELL A CERTAIN WAY: inaajimo vai; tell a
certain way about s.t. inaadodan vti; tell of
s.o. a certain way inaajim vta; tell s.o. of
(s.t.) a certain way inaajimotaw vta
TELL A LEGEND: aadizooke vai; tell a
legend to s.o. aadizookaw vta
TELL A MYTH: aadizooke vai; tell a myth to
s.o. aadizookaw vta
TELL A STORY: tell a story of s.o. aajim vta;
tell a story of s.t. aadodan vti
TELL A TRADITIONAL STORY:
aadizooke vai
TELL ABOUT: tell s.o. about (s.t.)
wiindamaw vta; tell about (s.t.) to people
wiindamaage vai
TELL ALL: giizhaajimo vai
TELL GOOD NEWS: minwaajimo vai; tell
good news of s.o. minwaajim vta; tell good
news of s.t. minwaadodan vti
TELL IN A CERTAIN PLACE: tell of s.o. in
a certain place danaajim vta; tell of s.t. in a
certain place danaadodan vti
TELL ON: tell on s.o. baataam vta
TELL STORIES: dadibaajimo vai; tell stories
to s.o. dadibaajimotaw vta
TELL THE TRUTH: debwe vai
TELL TO GET IN: tell s.o. to get in (a vehicle
or boat) boozinaazha' /boozinaazha'w-/
vta
TELL TO GO ABOARD: tell s.o. to go
aboard boozinaazha' /boozinaazha'w-/
vta
TELL TO HURRY: tell s.o. to hurry
wewiibim vta
TELL TO SETTLE DOWN: tell s.o. to settle
down zagakim vta
TEMPTED
TEMPTED: be tempted zhoobizi vai
TEN
TEN: midaaswi nm; midaaso- pv4; they are
ten midaachinoon /midaachin-/ vii;
midaachiwag /midaachi-/ vai; ten (card)
midaasoobii'igan, -ag na

ten—these
266
TEN DAYS: midaaso-giizhikpc; midaasogon
pc; be ten days midaasogonagad mi
TEN DAYS OLD: be ten days old
midaasogonagizi vai
TEN DOLLARS: midaaswaabikpc
TEN EACH: memidaaswi nm
TEN HOURS: midaaso-diba'igan pc
TEN INCHES: tnidaasoninj pc
TEN MILES: midaaso-diba'igan pc
TEN MINUTES: midaaso-diba'igaans pc
TEN MONTHS: midaaso-giizis pt
TEN NIGHTS: midaaso-dibikpc
TEN O'CLOCK: be ten o'clock midaaso-
diba'iganed mi
TEN PAIRS: midaaswewaan pc
TEN SETS: midaaswewaan pc
TEN THOUSAND: midaasosagoons nm
TEN TIMES: midaaching/n
TEN WEEKS: midaaso-anama'e-giizhik Pi,
midaaso-anama'e-giizhigad pc
TEN YEARS: midaaso-biboon pc; be ten
years midaaso-biboonagad vii
TEN YEARS OLD: be ten years old midaaso-
biboonagizi vai
TENDER
TENDER: be tender nookaa, nookaamagad
vii; nookizi vai
COOK TENDER: cook s.o. tender nookiz
/nookizw-/ vta; cook s.t. tender nookizan
vti
COOKED TENDER: be cooked tender
nookide, nookidemagad vii; nookizo vai
TENNIS SHOE
TENNIS SHOE: babagiwayaanekizin, -an ni,
also bagiwayaanekizin
TENT
TENT: babagiwayaanegamig, -oon ni, also
bagiwayaanegamig
TENTH
THE TENTH DAY OF THE MONTH: be
the tenth day of the month
midaasogonagizi vai
TERRIBLE
TERRIBLE: gagwaanisagakamigpi, be terri-
ble gagwaanisagad vii; gagwaanisagizi vai
CONSIDER TERRIBLE: consider s.o. to be
terrible gagwaanisagenim vta; consider
s.t. terrible gagwaanisagendan vti;
consider things to be terrible
gagwaanisagendam vai2
CONSIDERED TERRIBLE: be considered
terrible gagwaanisagendaagozi vai;
gagwaanisagendaagwad vii
TEST
TEST: test s.t. gagwejitoon vti2
TEST BY TOUCH: test s.o. by touch
gagwedin vta; test s.t. by touch
gagwedinan vti
TEST STRENGTH: test one's strength
gagwejii vai
TEST WITH FOOT OR BODY: test s.o. with
foot or body gagwezikaw vta; gozikaw
vta; test s.t. with foot or body gagwezikan
vti; gozikan vti
TEST WITH HAND: test s.o. with hand
godin vta; test s.t. with hand godinan vti
TESTICLE
TESTICLES: my testicles plural ninishiwag
/-nishiw-/ nad
TESTIFY
TESTIFY AGAINST: testify against s.o.
baataam vta
THANK
THANK: thank s.o. miigwechiwi' vta
THANKS: thanks! miigwechpc
THANKFUL
THANKFUL: be thankful
miigwechiwendam vai2; be thankful for
s.o. miigwechiwenim vta; be thankful for
s.t. miigwechiwendan vti
THANKSGIVING DAY
THANKSGIVING DAY: be Thanksgiving
Day miigwechiwi-giizhigad vii
THAT
THAT: that animate singular demonstrative
a*aw pr, also aw, 'aw, 'a; that inanimate
singular demonstrative i'iw pr, also iw, 'iw,
i'i, 'i; that obviative demonstrative in\w pr,
also niw, ini, ni, aniw*
THAT OVER THERE: that over there ani-
mate singular demonstrative a'awedi pr, also
awedi; that over there inanimate singular
demonstrative iwedi pr, also i'iwedi; that/
those over there obviative demonstrative
iniwedin pr, also niwedin
THAT
THAT: ji- pvl
THAW
THAW: ningide, ningidemagad vii; ningizo
vai
THEATER
MOVIE THEATER: mazinaatesewigamig,
-oon ni, also mazinaatesijigewigamig
THEN
THEN: apii pc; azhigwapc, also zhigwa,
zhigo
AND THEN: mii dash pc, also miish
JUST THEN: na'idaapc
THERE
THERE: imaapc, also maa, i'imaa; izhi- pv3;
dazhi- pv3
OVER THERE: iwidi pc
THEREFORE
THEREFORE: indawaajpc
THESE
THESE: these animate plural demonstrative
ongow pr, also ongo, ogow*, ogo*; these
inanimate plural demonstrative, onow pr;
also ono; this/these obviative demonstrative
onow pr, also ono
THESE OVER HERE: these over here animate
plural demonstrative ongowedig pr, also
ogowedig*; these over here inanimate plur-
al demonstrative onowedin pr; this/these
over here obviative demonstrative onowedin
pr

267
they—thistle
THEY
THEY: they third person plural personal pronoun
wiinawaa pr
THICK
THICK: be thick gipagaa, gipagaamagad vii;
gipagizi vai; be thick (as something min-
eral) gipagaabikad vii; gipagaabikizi vai;
be thick (as something sheet-like)
gipagiigad vii; gipagiigizi vai; be thick (as
something string-like) gipagaabiigad vii;
gipagaabiigizi vai
FROZEN THICK: be frozen thick
gipagaakwadin vii; gipagaakwaji vai
LIE IN A THICK LAYER: gipagishin vai;
gipagisin vii
SLICE THICK: slice s.o. thick gipagikozh
/gipagikoN"/ via; slice s.t. thick
gipagikodairt vti
THICK FUR: have thick fur gipagawe vai
THICKEN
THICKEN INTO SYRUP: zhiiwaagamide,
zhiiwaagamidemagad vii
THICKNESS
CERTAIN THICKNESS: be a certain thick-
ness apiitaa, apiitaamagad vii
HAVE A CERTAIN THICKNESS: apiitizi
vai
THIEF
THIEF: gimoodishkiiwinini, -wag na; be a
thief gimoodishki vai
THIGH
THIGH: my thigh (back of thigh) imbwaam,
•an /-bwaarn-/ nid; my thigh (front of
thigh) injiingwan, -ag /-jiingwan-/ nod
THIMBLE
THIMBLE: gaanda'igwaason, -an ni
THIN
THIN: be thin bibagaa, bibagaamagad vii;
bibagizi vai; be thin (as something min-
eral) bibagaabikaad vii; bibagaabikizi vai;
be thin (as something sheet-like)
bibagiigad vii; bibagiigizi vai; be thin (of a
person) bakaakadozo vai
FROZEN THIN: be frozen thin
bibagaakwadin vii; bibagaakwaji vai
LIE IN A THEN LAYER: bibagishin vai;
bibagisin vii
SLICE THIN: slice s.o. thin bibagikozh
/bibagikoM-/ vta; slice s.t. thin
bibagikodan vti
THING
THING: ayi'ii, -n pr
VARIETY OF THINGS: a variety of things
anooj gegoo pr, also anooji-gegoo
THINK
THINK: maaminonendam vai2;
naagadawendam vaiZ;
naanaagadawendam vai2; think on s.o.
maaminorienim vta; think on s.t.
maaminoriendan vti
COME TO THINK OF: come to think of s.o.
mikwenim vta; come to think of s.t.
mikwenda.n vti
NOT KNOW WHAT TO THINK: gwiinawi-
inendam vai2
THINK A CERTAIN WAY: inendam vai2;
think a certain way of s.t. inendan vti;
think of s.o. a certain way inenim vta
THINK ABOUT: think about s.o.
naagadawenim vta; naanaagadawenim
vta; think about s.t. naagadawendan vti;
naanaagadawendan vti
THINK ABOUT GOING HOME: think
about going home again giiweyendam
vai2
THINK ABOUT RETURNING:
giiweyendam vai2
THINK CORRECTLY: gwayakwendam
vai2
TRY TO THINK: try to think of s.o. nanda-
mikwenim vta; try to think of s.t. nanda-
mikwendan vti
THIRD
THIRD: the third eko-nising pc
THE THIRD DAY OF THE MONTH: be
the third day of the month nisogonagizi
vai
THIRD PERSON
THIRD PERSON: third person prefix before
consonants in verbs and nouns o= pre; third
person prefix before vowels in verbs and non-
dependent nouns od= pre; third person prefix
before initial \\ dependent noun stems w= pre
THIRD PERSON PLURAL: they third person
plural personal pronoun wiinawaa pr; their
turn third person plural personal pronoun
wiinitamawaapr, only them third person
plural personal pronoun wiinetawaapr
THIRD PERSON SINGULAR: she/he third
person singular personal pronoun wiin pr;
his/her turn third person singular personal
pronoun wiinitam pr; only her/him third
person singular pronoun wiinetapr
THIRST
SUFFER FROM THIRST: gawaabaagwe vai
THIRSTY
THIRSTY: be thirsty giishkaabaagwe vai
THIRTEEN
THIRTEEN: ashi-niswi nm; midaaswi ashi-
niswi nm
THIRTY
THIRTY: nisimidana nm
THIS
THIS: this animate singular demonstrative
wa'aw pr; this inanimate singular demon-
strative o'o pr, also o'ow, *ow, 'o, o'o;
this/these obviative demonstrative onow, also
ono pr
THIS OVER HERE: this over here animate
singular demonstrative wa'awedi pr; this
over here inanimate singular demonstrative
o'owedi, also owedi pr; this/these over here
obviative demonstrative onowedin pr
THISTLE
THISTLE: mazaanaatig, -oog na

those—throw
268
THOSE
THOSE: those animate plural demonstrative
ingiw pr, also ingi, igiw*, igi*, agiw*; those
inanimate plural demonstrative iniw pr, also
niw, ini, ni, aniw*; those obviative iniw pr,
also niw, ini, ni, aniw*
THOSE OVER THERE: those over there
animate plural demonstrative ingiwedig pr,
also igiwedig*; those over there inanimate
plural iniwedin pr, also niwedin; those over
there obviative demonstrative iniwedin pr,
also niwedin
THOUGHT
THOUGHT OF A CERTAIN WAY: be
thought of a certain way inendaagozi vai;
inendaagwad vii
THOUSAND
THOUSAND: midaaswaak nm
CERTAIN NUMBER OF THOUSANDS: a
certain number of thousands dasosagoons
nm
EIGHT THOUSAND: ishwaasosagoons nm,
also nishwaasosagoons*
FIVE THOUSAND: naanosagoons nm
FOUR THOUSAND: niiwosagoons nm, also
niiyosagoons
NINE THOUSAND: zhaangasosagoons nm
ONE THOUSAND: ingodosagoons nm, also
ningodosagoons*
SEVEN THOUSAND: niizhwaasosagoons
nm
SIX THOUSAND: ingodwaasosagoons
/ningodwaasosagoons-/ nm, also
ningodwaasosagoons*
TEN THOUSAND: midaasosagoons nm
THREE THOUSAND: nisosagoons nm
TWO THOUSAND: niizhosagoons nm
THREAD
THREAD: asabaab, -iin ni; thread s.o.
naabidoo' /naabidoo'w-/ vta; thread s.t.
naabidoo'an vti; thread things
naabidoo'ige vai
SEWING THREAD: gashkigwaasoneyaab,
-iin ni
THREAD CORRECTLY: thread s.t. correctly
gwayakwaabidoo'an vti
THREE
THREE: niswi nm; niso- pv4; they are three
nisinoon /nisin-/ vii; nisiwag/nisi-/ vai;
three (card) nisoobii'igan, -ag na
AND THREE: ashi-niso- pv4; ashi-niswi nm
THREE ACRES: niso-diba'igaans pc
THREE DAYS: niso-giizhik pc; nisogon pc;
be three days nisogonagad vii
THREE DAYS OLD: be three days old
nisogonagizi vai
THREE DOLLARS: niswaabikpc
THREE EACH: neniswi nm
THREE FEET: nisozid pc
THREE HOURS: niso-diba'igan pc
THREE HUNDRED: niswaak nm
THREE INCHES: nisoninjpc
THREE MILES: niso-diba'igan pc
THREE MINUTES: niso-diba'igaans pc
THREE MONTHS: niso-giizispc
THREE NIGHTS: niso-dibikpc
THREE O'CLOCK: be three o'clock niso-
diba'iganed vii
THREE PAIRS: niswewaan pc
THREE SETS: niswewaan pc
THREE THOUSAND: nisosagoons nm
THREE TIMES: nising pc
THREE WEEKS: niso-anama'e-giizhikpc; be
three weeks niso-anama'e-giizhigad vii
THREE YEARS: niso-biboon pc; be three
years niso-biboonagad vii
THREE YEARS OLD: be three years old
niso-biboonagizi vai
THRESH
THRESH: thresh field crops bakiteshka'ige
vai; thresh s.t. (e.g., wild rice)
mimigoshkan vti
BARREL OR TUB USED IN THRESHING
WILD RICE: mimigoshkamwaagan, -an
ni
THRESH WILD RICE: thresh something
mimigoshkam vai2
THRICE
THRICE: nising pc
THROAT
THROAT: my throat ingondashkway
/-gondashkway-/ nid
SORE THROAT: have a sore throat
wiisagigonewe vai
THROUGH
THROUGH: through it zhaabwayi'ii pc
BITE THROUGH: bite s.o. through (e.g.,
something string-like) bakam vta; bite s.t.
through (e.g., something string-like)
bakandan vti
GO THROUGH: zhaabose, zhaabosemagad
vii; zhaabwii vai
PASS THROUGH: zhaabose,
zhaabosemagad vii; zhaabwii vai
PUT THROUGH: put s.o. through zhaabon
vta; put s.t. through zhaabonan vti
RUN THROUGH: zhaabobatoo vai
SEE THROUGH: see through s.o.
zhaabwaabam vta; see through s.t.
zhaabwaabandan vti
THROUGHOUT
THROUGHOUT: gabe- pv4; throughout it
gabe-ayi'ii pc, also gabeyi'ii
THROW
THROW: throw s.o. apagizh /apagiN-/ vta;
throw s.t. apagidan vti, also apagidoon;
throw (s.t.) at s.o. apagidaw vta; throw
things apagijige vai; they throw (s.t.) at
each other apagidaadiwag /apagidaadi-/
vai
THROW AROUND: throw things around
ombwewebinige vai
THROW AWAY: throw s.o. away webin vta;
throw s.t. away webinan vti; throw things
away webinige vai
THROW DOWN: throw s.o. down
gawiwebin via; throw s.t. down
gawiwebinan vti

269
throw—tied
THROW DOWN QUICKLY: throw s.o.
down quickly bagijwebin vta; throw s.t.
down quickly bagijwebinan vti
THROW HERE: throw s.o. here biijwebin
ma; throw s.t. here biijwebinan vti; throw
(s.t.) here to s.o. biijwebinamaw vta
THROW IN: throw s.o. in biinjwebin vta;
throw s.t. in biinjwebinan vti; throw things
in biinjwebinige vai
THROW INSIDE: throw s.o. inside
biindigewebin vta; throw s.t. inside
biindigewebinan vti; throw things inside
biindigewebinige vai
THROW INTO THE WATER: throw s.o.
into the water bakobiiwebin vta; throw s.t.
into the water bakobiiwebinan vti
THROW OUT OF THE WATER: throw s.o.
out of the water agwaawebin vta; throw
s.t. out of the water agwaawebinan vti;
throw (s.t.) out of the water for s.o.
agwaawebinamaw vta
THROW OUTSIDE: throw s.o. outside
zaagijiwebin vta; throw s.t. outside
zaagijiwebinan vti; throw things outside
zaagijiwebinige vai
THROW OVER: throw s.o. over
baazhijiwebin vta; throw s.t. over
baazhijiwebinan vti
THROW OVER BACKWARDS: throw s.o.
over backwards aazhigidwebin vta; throw
s.t. over backwards aazhigidwebinan vti
THROW SELF DOWN AGAINST
SOMETHING: apagizo vai
THROW UP AGAINST: throw s.o. up against
(as something stick- or wood-like)
aatwaakowebin vta; throw s.t. up against
(as something stick- or wood-like)
aatwaakowebinan vti
THROW UPWARDS: throw s.o. upwards
ombiwebirr vta; throw s.t. upwards
ombiwebinan vti
THROWN
THROWN AWAY: be thrown away
webinigaade, webinigaademagad vii;
webinigaazo vai
THROWN OUTSIDE: be thrown outside
zaagijiwebinigaade,
zaagijiwebinigaademagad vii
THUMB
THUMB: midechininj, -iin ni
THUNDER
THUNDER: come making noise (e.g.,
thunder) biidwewidam vai2; there is
thunder animikiikaa, animikiikaamagad
vii
THUNDERBIRD
THUNDERBIRD: animikii, -g na; binesi,
-wag na
THUNDERCLAP
MAKE A THUNDERCLAP: make a thunder-
clap (of the thunderers) baashkakwa'am
vai2
THUNDERER
THUNDERER: animikii, -g na
THURSDAY
THURSDAY: be Thursday niiwo-giizhigad
vii, also niiyo-giizhigad
THUS
THUS:izhi-pcJ
THWART
THWART: bimidasaa, -g na, also
bimidasaagan, -an
TICK
WOOD TICK: ezigaa, -g na
TICKET
TICKET: mazina'igaans, -an ni
TICKLE
TICKLE: tickle s.o. (at the mid-section)
ginagijiin vta
TIDIED
TIDIED: be tidied zagakinigaade,
zagakinigaademagad vii; zagakinigaazo
vai
TIDY
TIDY: tidy s.o. zagakin vta; tidy s.t.
zagakinan vti; tidy things zagakinige vai
TIE
TIE: tie s.o. dakobizh /dakobiN-/ vta; tie s.t.
dakobidoon vn2; tie things dakobijige vai
TIE IN A BUNCH: tie s.o. in a bunch
okwapizh /okwapiN-/ vta; tie s.t. in a
bunch okwapidoon vti2
TIE IN A BUNDLE: tie s.o. in a bundle
gashkapizh /gashkapiN-/ vta; tie s.t. in a
bundle gashkapidoon vti2
TIE IN PLACE: tie s.o. in place onapizh
/onapiN-/ vta; tie s.t. in place onapidoon
vti2
TIE ON: tie s.o. on zagapizh /zagapiN-/ vta;
tie s.o. on something agwapizh /agwapiN-/
vta; tie s.t. on zagapidoon vtiZ; tie s.t. on
something agwapidoon vti2
TIE SHUT: tie s.o. shut gashkapizh
/gashkapiN-/ vta; tie s.t. shut
gashkapidoon vti2
TIE TIGHT: tie s.o. tight mashkawapizh
/mashkawapiN-/ vta; tie s.t. tight
mashkawapidoon vti2
TIE WILD RICE: dakobidoo vai
TIE WITH A KNOT: tie s.o. with a knot
gashka'oozh /gashka'ooN-/ vta; tie s.t.
with a knot gashka'oodoon vri2
TIED
TIED: be tied dakobide, dakobidemagad vii;
dakobizo vai
TIED IN A BUNCH: be tied in a bunch
okwapide, okwapidemagad vii;
okwapizo vai
TIED IN PLACE: be tied in place onapide,
onapidemagad vii
TIED ON: be tied on agwapijigaade,
agwapijigaademagad vii; agwapijigaazo
vai; zagapide, zagapidemagad vii;
zagapizo vai
TIED TIGHT: be tied tight mashkawapide,
mashkawapidemagad vii; mashkawapizo
vai
TIED WILD RICE: dakobijigan, -an ni

tight place—to
270
TIGHT PLACE
CRAWL IN A TIGHT PLACE: zhegoode
vai
LIE IN A TIGHT PLACE: zhegoshin vai;
zhegosin vii
PUT IN A TIGHT PLACE: put s.o. in a tight
place zhegoshim vta; put s.t. in a tight
place zhegosidoon vti2
STICK IN A TIGHT PLACE: stick s.o. in a
tight place zhegon ma; stick s.t. in a tight
place zhegonan vti
TIMBER
CUT TIMBER: giishka'aakwe vai
PEEL TIMBER USING SOMETHING:
bishagaakwa'ige vai
TIME
AT ONE TIME: aabiding pc; ingoding pc, also
ningoding*
AT THAT TIME: iw apii pr, also i'iw apii
AT THE TIME: apii pc
AT THIS TIME: azhigwapc, also zhigwa,
zhigo
CERTAIN TIME IN HOURS: be a certain
time in hours daso-diba'iganed vii
COMING UP TO IN TIME: ani- pv2, also ni-
FOR SOME TIME: gomaapii pc
TIMES
CERTAIN NUMBER OF TIMES: a certain
number of times dasingpc
SO MANY TIMES: dasingpc
TIMID
TIMID: be timid gotaajishki vai
TINDER
TINDER: zagataagan, -ag na
TINGLE
TINGLE: giikimanizi vai
TINY
TINY: they are tiny babiiwaawan /babiiwaa-/
vii; babiiwizhiinyiwag /babiiwizhiinyi-/
vai; they are tiny (as something ball-like)
babiiwiminagadoon/babiiwiminagad-/
vii; babiiwiminagiziwag
/babiiwiminagizi-/ vai
TIP
TIP: gwanabishkaa vai; tip s.o. gotigobizh
/gotigobiN-/ vta; tip s.t. gotigobidoon vtiZ
TIP OVER BY HAND: tip s.o. over by hand
gawin vta; tip s.t. over by hand gawinan
vti
TIP WITH FOOT OR BODY: tip s.t. with
foot or body gwanabishkan vti
TIP
ON THE TIP: wanakong pt
TIPI
TIPI: bajiishka'ogaarij -an ni
TIRE
FLAT TIRE: have a flat tire nabagijiishin vai
TIRE PUMP
TIRE PUMP: boodaajii'igan, -an ni
TIRED
TIRED: be tired ayekozi vai; zhigajii vai
FEEL TIRED: ayekwamanji'o vai
MAKE TIRED: make s.o. tired ayeko' vta
TIRED OF WAITING: be tired of waiting
zhigajibii'o vai; be tired of waiting for s.o.
zhigajibii' vta; be tired of waiting for s.t.
zhigajibiitoon vti2
TO
TO: to a certain place izhi- pv3
CARRIED TO A CERTAIN PLACE: be
carried to a certain place izhiwijigaade,
izhiwijigaademagad vii; izhiwijigaazo vai
CARRY A BABY TO A CERTAIN PLACE
ON BACK: carry a baby to a certain place
on one's back inoomaawaso vai
CARRY TO A CERTAIN PLACE: carry s.o.
to a certain place izhiwizh /izhiwiN-/ vta;
carry s.t. to a certain place izhiwidoon vti2
CARRY TO A CERTAIN PLACE ON
BACK: carry s.o. to a certain place on
one's back inoom vta; carry s.t. to a
certain place on one's back inoondan vti
CHASE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: chase s.o.
to a certain place izhinaazhikaw vta;
izhinizhikaw vta
CLIMB TO CERTAIN PLACE: climb to a
certain place inaandawe vai
CRAWL TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inoode
vai
DRAG TO A CERTAIN PLACE: drag s.o. to
a certain place izhidaabaazh
/izhidaabaaN-/ vta; drag s.t. to a certain
place izhidaabaadan vti
DRIVE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: ipide,
ipidemagad vii; ipizo vai; izhidaabii'iwe
vai; drive s.o. to a certain place ipizoni'
vta; drive s.t. to a certain place ipizonitoon
vti2
FLOW TO A CERTAIN PLACE: izhijiwan
vii
FLY TO A CERTAIN PLACE: ipide,
ipidemagad vii; ipizo vai; izhise vai;
izhise, izhisemagad vii
FOLLOW A TRAIL TO A CERTAIN
PLACE: follow s.o.'s trail to a certain place
ina'azh /ina'aN-/ vta; follow s.t. as a trail
to a certain place ina'adoon vti2
GO TO A CERTAIN PLACE: izhaa vai;
izhaamagad vii
GO TO A CERTAIN PLACE CRYING:
inademo vai
GO TO A CERTAIN PLACE ON THE ICE:
inaadagaako vai
GO TO A CERTAIN PLACE WITH
LIGHT: inaazakonenjige vai
HAUL TO A CERTAIN PLACE: haul s.o. to
a certain place inaawazh /inaawaN-/ vta;
haul s.t. to a certain place inaawadoon
vti2; haul something to a certain place
inaawadaaso vai
LEAVE TRACKS GOING TO A CERTAIN
PLACE: izhikawe vai
LOOK TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inaabi vai
PADDLE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: ina'o
vai; inakwazhiwe vai
POLE A BOAT TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
ina'oodoo vai

271
to—tongue
RIDE TO A CERTAIN PLACE ON
HORSEBACK: ride to a certain place on
horseback inoomigo vai
RIDE TO A CERTAIN PLACE WITH
HORSES: apa'igo vai
RIVER FLOWS TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
flow to a certain place (as a river)
izhitigweyaa, izhitigweyaamagad mi
ROAD LEADS TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
lead to a certain place (as a road or trail)
inamon /inamo-/ vii
RUN AWAY TO A CERTAIN PLACE: run
away from people to a certain place
apa'iwe vai
RUN TO A CERTAIN PLACE: apatoo vai;
run with s.o. to a certain place apa' vta
RUN TO A CERTAIN PLACE IN FLIGHT:
izhinizhimo vai
RUN TO A CERTAIN PLACE
TOGETHER: they run to a certain place
together apa'idiwag /apa'idi-/ vai
SAIL TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inaashi vai;
inaasin vii
SEND SMOKE; TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
inaabasige vai
SEND TO A CERTAIN PLACE: send s.o. to
a certain place izhinaazhikaw vta;
izhinizha' /izhinizha'w-/ vta; send s.t. to a
certain place izhinizha'an mi; send (s.t.) to
s.o. to a certain place izhinizha'amaw vta
SENT TO A CERTAIN PLACE: be sent to a
certain place izhinizha'igaade,
izhinizha'igaademagad vii;
izhinizha'igaazo vai
SKATE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inaada'e
vai
SPEED TO A CERTAIN PLACE: ipide,
ipidemagad vii; ipizo vai
SWIM TO A CERTAIN PLACE: inaadagaa
vai; swim to a certain place (as a fish)
inakwazhiwe vai
TAKE TO A CERTAIN PLACE: take s.o. to
a certain place izhiwizh /izhiwiN-/ vta;
take s.t. to a certain place izhiwidoon vti2;
take (s.t.) to s.o. at a certain place
izhiwidaw ma
TAKE TO A CERTAIN PLACE BY BOAT:
take s.o. to a certain place by boat
ina'oozh /ina*ooN-/ vta; take s.t. to a
certain place by boat ina'oodoon vti2
TAKEN TO A CERTAIN PLACE: be taken
to a certain place izhiwijigaade,
izhiwijigaademagad vii; izhiwijigaazo vai
TO A CERTAIN PLACE: \iti\-pv3
TRAIL LEADS TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
lead to a certain place (as a road or trail)
inamon /inamo-/ vii
TRAVEL TO A CERTAIN PLACE: travel in
a group to a certain place inaawanidiwag
/inaawanidi-/ vai
WADE TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
inaadagaazii vai
WALK ALONG SHORE TO A CERTAIN
PLACE: iniaazhagaame vai
WALK TO CERTAIN PLACE: walk to a
certain place inose vai
TOAD
TOAD: babiigomakakii, -g na;
obiigomakakii, -g na
TOAST
TOAST BROWN: toast s.t. brown
ozaawaakizan vti
TOBACCO
TOBACCO: asemaa na
CHEW SNUFF OR TOBACCO: biindaakwe
vai
CHEW TOBACCO: agwanenjige vai
MAKE AN OFFERING OF TOBACCO:
biindaakoojige vai; make an offering of
tobacco to s.o. biindaakoozh
/biindaakooN-/ vta
SHORT OF TOBACCO: be short of tobacco
manepwaa vai
TOBACCO BAG
TOBACCO BAG: gashkibidaagan, -ag na
TOBOGGAN
TOBOGGAN: nabagidaabaan, -ag na;
zhooshkodaabaan, -ag na
TODAY
TODAY: noongom pc
TOE
TOE: niibinaakwaanizidaan, -an ni
BIG TOE: midechizid, -an ni
TOGETHER
TOGETHER: maamawi pc; maamawoo- pv4
ADD TOGETHER: asigagindaaso vai; add
s.o. together (e.g., money) asigagim vta;
add s.t. together asigagindan vti
BRING TOGETHER: bring s.t. together
maawandoonan vti
COME TOGETHER: they come together
maawanji'idiwag /maawanji'idi-/ vai
SEW TOGETHER: maawandoogwaaso vai;
sew s.o. together maawandoogwaazh
/maawandoogwaaN-/ vta; sew s.t. to-
gether (e.g., pieces for a quilt)
maawandoogwaadan vti
SIT TOGETHER: they sit together
maawandoobiwag /maawandoobi-/ vai
TOILET
TOILET: miiziiwigamig, -oon ni;
zaaga'amoowigamig, -oon ni
GO TO THE TOILET: zaaga'am vai2
TOILET TISSUE
TOILET TISSUE: giziindime'on, -an ni
TOMATO
TOMATO: gichi-ogin, -iig na; ogin, -iig na
TOMORROW
TOMORROW: be tomorrow waaban vii
DAY AFTER TOMORROW: awas-waabang
pc
TONGUE
TONGUE: my tongue indenaniw, -an
/-denaniw-/ nid
STICK OUT TONGUE: stick out one's
tongue zaagidenaniweni vai; stick out
one's tongue at s.o. zaagidenaniwetaw vta

too—track
272
TOO
TOO: gaye pc, also ge
DRINK TOO MUCH: onzaamibii vai
GIVE TOO MUCH TO DRINK: give s.o. too
much to drink onzaamibazh
/onzaamibaN-/ vta
PACK TOO MUCH OF A LOAD:
onzaamiwane vai
TALK TOO MUCH: onzaamidoon vai
TOO LATE: naanabem pc
TOO MANY: be too many onzaamiinad vii;
onzaamiino vai
TOO MUCH: onzaam pa be too much
onzaamiinad vii; onzaamiino vai
TOOL
TOOL: aabajichigan, -an ni
TOOTH
TOOTH: my tooth niibid. -an /-iibid-/ nid
ABSCESSED TOOTH: have an abscessed
tooth miniiwaabide vai
BRUSH TEETH: brush one's teeth
giziiyaabide'o vai; giziiyaabide'odizo vai
FALSE TEETH: false teeth plural
wiibidaakaajiganan ni3 also
wiibidaakaanan
PICK TEETH: pick one's teeth
zesegwaabide'o vai
TOOTHACHE
TOOTHACHE: have a toothache dewaabide
vai
TOOTHBRUSH
TOOTHBRUSH: giziiyaabide'on, -an ni
TOOTHLESS
TOOTHLESS: be toothless bashkwanige vai
TOOTHPICK
TOOTHPICK: zesegwaabide'on, -an ni
TOP
ON TOP: on top of agiji- pn, also ogiji-*,
wagiji-; on top of it agijayi'ii pc, also
ogijayi'ii*, wagijayi'ii
ON TOP OF A HILL: agidaaki pc, also
ogidaaki*, wagidaaki
ON TOP OF A MOUNTAIN: agidajiw pc,
also ogidajiw*, wagidajiw
ON TOP OF A ROCK: agidasin pc, also
ogidasin*, wagidasin
ON TOP OF THE GROUND: agidakamig
pc, also ogidakamig*, wagidakamig
ON TOP OF THE HOUSE: agidigamig pc,
also ogidigamig*, wagidigamig
ON TOP OF THE ICE: agidiskwam pc, also
ogidiskwam*, wagidiskwam
ON TOP OF THE WATER: agidibiig pc, also
ogidibiig*, wagidibiig
TOP
TOY TOP: ishkwesa'igan, -ag na
TORCH
TORCH: waaswaagan, -an ni
BARK TORCH: biimashkwemaginigan, -an
ni
TORN
TORN: be torn biigobijigaade,
biigobijigaademagad vii; biigobijigaazo
vai
TORN APART: be torn apart daashkaa,
daashkaamagad vii
TORN OFF: be torn off giishkibijigaade,
giishkibijigaademagad vii;
giishkibijigaazo vai
TORNADO
TORNADO: be a tornado wese'an vii
TOSS
TOSS ASIDE: toss s.o. aside ikowebin ma;
toss s.t. aside ikowebinan vii
TOTAL
TOTAL UP: asigagindaaso vai; total up (as
an account) maawandoogindaaso vai;
total up s.t. (as an account)
maawandoogindan vti
TOTEM
TOTEM: my totem indoodem, -ag
/-doodem-/ nad
HAVE A TOTEM: have a totem (clan)
odoodemi vai; they have a mutual totem
(clan) odoodemindiwag /odoodemindi-/
vai
TOUCH
TOUCH: touch s.o. with hand daangin vta;
touch s.t. with hand daanginan vti
LIE TOUCHING: daangishin vai; daangisin
vii
PUT TOUCHING: put s.o. touching
daangishim vta; put s.t. touching
daangisidoon vti2
TEST BY TOUCH: test s.o. by touch
gagwedin vta; test s.t. by touch
gagwedinan vti
TOUCH WRONG ONE: touch s.o. who/that
is the wrong one wanin vta; touch s.t. that
is the wrong one waninan vti
TOURIST
TOURIST: bebaamaadizid na-pt
TOW
TOW: tow s.o. zagapizh /zagapiN-/ vta; tow
s.t. zagapidoon vti2
TOWARD
TOWARD THE SPEAKER: bi-;w2
TOWED
TOWED: be towed zagapide,
zagapidemagad vii; zagapizo vai
TOWEL
TOWEL: giziingwe'on, -an ni
DISH TOWEL: giziiyaabika'igan, -an ni
TOWN
TOWN: oodena, -wan ni
LIVE ON THE END OF TOWN: live at the
end of town ishkwege vai
TOY
TOY: odaminwaagan, -an ni
USE AS A TOY: use (s.t.) as a toy
odaminwaage vai+o
TRACK
TRACK: bimikawaan, -an ni
COME LEAVING TRACKS: biijikawe vai
FIND TRACKS: find s.o.'s tracks okawi' vta;
find the tracks of s.t. okawitoon vti2

273
track—trapped
LEAVE TRACKS GOING ALONG:
bimikawe vai
LEAVE TRACKS GOING AWAY:
animikawe vai
LEAVE TRACKS GOING TO A CERTAIN
PLACE: izhikawe vai
LOOK FOR TRACKS: nandokawechige vai;
look for s.o.'s tracks nandokawe' via
TRADE
TRADE: trade s.o. meshkwadoon vta; trade
s.t. meshkwadoonan vti; trade (s.t.) with
s.o. meshkwadoonamaw vta; trade for
things meshkwadoonige vai; trade things
with people meshkwadoonamaage vai
GO ABOUT TRADING: babaamadaawe vai
TRADER
TRADER: adaawewinini, -wag na; trader
(female) adaawewininiikwe na
TRAIL
TRAIL: miikana, -n ni; be a trail
miikanaawan vii
ALONG THE SIDE OF THE TRAIL:
opimekana pc
AT THE END OF THE TRAIL: at the end of
the road or trail gabekana pc
BAD TRAIL: be bad (as a road or trail)
maanadamon /maanadamo-/ vii
BY A TRAIL: by a road or trail jiigikana pc
FOLLOW A TRAIL: go off following a trail
maada'adoo vai; go off following s.o.'s
trail maada'azh /maada'aN-/ via
FOLLOW A TRAIL ALONG: bima'adoo
vai; follow s.o.'s trail along bima'azh
/bima'aN-/ vta; follow s.t. along as a trail
bima'adoon vti2
FOLLOW A TRAIL AWAY: anima'adoo vai;
follow s.o.'s trail away anima'azh
/anima'aN-/ via; follow s.t. away as a trail
anima'adoon vn2
FOLLOW A TRAIL HERE: biida'adoo vai;
follow s.o.'s trail here biida'azh /biida'aN-/
vta; follow s.t. as a trail here biida'adoon
vti2
FOLLOW A TRAIL TO A CERTAIN
PLACE: follow s.o.'s trail to a certain place
ina'azh /ina'aN-/ via; follow s.t. as a trail
to a certain place ina'adoon vti2
ICY TRAIL: be icy (as a road or trail)
mikwamiiwadamon
/mikwamiiwadamo-/ vii
IN THE MIDDLE OF THE TRAIL: in the
middle of the road or trail naawikana pc
MAKE A TRAIL: make a road or trail
miikanaake vai
NARROW TRAIL: be narrow (as a road or
trail) agaasademon /agaasademo-/ vii
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE TRAIL: on
the other side of the road or trail
agaamikana pc
ON THIS SIDE OF THE TRAIL:
ondaasikana pc
SLIPPERY TRAIL: be slippery (as a road or
trail) ozhaashadamon /ozhaashadamo-/
vii; zhooshkwadamon
/zhooshkwadamo-/ on; be slippery with
ice (as a road or trail) ozhaashikwadamon
/ozhaashikwadamo-/ vii
TRAIL FORKS: fork (as a road or trail)
niingidawadamon /niingidawadamo-/ vii
TRAIL GOES ACROSS: go across (as a road
or trail) aazhoodamon /aazhoodamo-/ vii
TRAIL GOES OFF TO THE SIDE: go off to
the side (as a road or trail) bakemon
/bakemo-/ vii
TRAIL LEADS ALONG: lead along (as a
road or trail) bimamon /bimamo-/,
bimamoomagad vii
TRAIL LEADS FROM A CERTAIN
PLACE: lead from a certain place (as a
road or trail) ondadamon /ondadamo-/ vii
TRAIL LEADS TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
lead to a certain place (as a road or trail)
inamon /inamo-/ vii
WET TRAIL: be wet (as a road or trail)
nibiiwadamon /nibiiwadamo-/ vii
WIDE TRAIL: be wide (as a road or trail)
mangademon /mangademo-/ vii, also
mangadademon
TRAILER
TRAILER: zagapijigan, -an ni
TRAIN
TRAIN: ishkodewidaabaan, -ag na, also
mashkodewidaabaan*
TRAIN TRACK
TRAIN TRACK: ishkodewidaabaanikana, -n
ni
TRANQUILLY
REMAIN TRANQUILLY IN PLACE:
goshkwaawaadabi vai
TRANSFORM
TRANSFORM: transform oneself in appear-
ance izhinaago'idizo vai; transform s.o.
aanzinaago* vta; transform s.t.
aanzinaagotoon vti2; transform oneself
aanzinaago'idizo vai
TRANSLATE
TRANSLATE: translate s.o. aanikanootaw
vta; translate s.t. aanikanootan vti; trans-
late for people aanikanootaage vai
TRANSLATOR
TRANSLATOR: aanikanootaagewinini,
-wag na
TRANSPARENT
TRANSPARENT: be transparent
zhiibawaaseyaa, zhiibawaaseyaamagad
vii; zhiibawaasezi vai
TRAP
TRAP: dasoonaagan, -an ni; wanii'igan, -an
ni; wanii'ige vai; trap for s.o. wanii'amaw
vta; trap s.o. dasoozh /dasooN-/ vta
CHECK TRAPS: check one's traps
naadasoonaagane vai
GO AFTER TRAPS: naajiwanii'ige vai
GO GET TRAPS: go get one's traps
naadasoonaagane vai
TRAP BEAVER: noodamikwe vai
TRAPPED
TRAPPED: be trapped dasoozo vai

trapper—turn
274
TRAPPER
TRAPPER: wanii'igewinini, -wag na
TRASH
TRASH: ziigwebinigan, -an m
TRAVEL
TRAVEL ABOUT: babaamaadizi vai
TRAVEL ALONG: bimi-ayaa vai; travel
along in a group (as a school of fish)
bimaawadaaso vai
TRAVEL AT NIGHT: niibaashkaa vai
TRAVEL TO A CERTAIN PLACE: they
travel in a group to a certain place
inaawanidiwag/inaawanidi-/ vai
TRAVELLER
TRAVELLER: bebaamaadizid na-pt
TRAVOIS
TRAVOIS: niswaakodaabaan, -an ni
TREASURE
TREASURE: treasure s.o. zaagi' vta; treasure
s.t. zaagitoon vti2
TREASURED
TREASURED: be treasured zaagichigaade,
zaagichigaademagad vii; zaagichigaazo
vai
TREAT
TREAT WELL: treat s.o. well mino-doodaw
vta
TREATY KETTLE
TREATY KETTLE: okaadakik, -oog na
TREE
TREE: mitig, -oog na
BYATREE:jiigaatigpc
MANY TREES: there are many trees
mitigokaa vii
TREETOP
ON THE TREETOP: wanakongpc
TREMBLE
TREMBLE: baapagishkaa vai;
baapagishkaa, baapagishkaamagad vii
TREY
TREY: nisoobii'igan, -ag na
TRICK
PERFORM TRICKS: mamaandaagochige
vai
TRICKSTER
TRICKSTER: name of aadizookaan charac-
ter viewed as culture hero and trickster
Wenabozho na, also Nenabozho*
TRIM
TRIM: agogwaajigan, -an ni
TRIP
TRIP: bizozideshin vai
TROUBLE
CAUSE TROUBLE: cause s.o. trouble
aanimi* vta
TROUBLED
TROUBLED: be troubled in one's mind
mamiidaawendam vai2
TROUGH
TROUGH: atoobaan, -an ni
SUGARING TROUGH: naseyaawangwaan,
-an ni
TRUCK
TRUCK: aawadaasoowidaabaan, -ag na:
ditibidaabaan, -ag na
FIRE TRUCK: aate'ishkodawewidaabaan na
MAIL TRUCK: mazina'iganiiwidaabaan, -ag
na
TRUTH
FIND OUT THE TRUTH: gwayakotam
vai2
TELL THE TRUTH: debwe vai
TRY
TRY: gagwe- pv4; goji- pv4; goji'ewizi vai; try
s.t. gagwejitoon vti2; try things
gagwejichige vai; gojichige vai
TRY ON: try on s.o. (e.g., clothes) gozikaw
vta; try on s.t. (e.g., clothes) gozikan vti
TRY TO DO: try to do s.t. wiikwajitoon vti2
TRY TO GET: try to get s.o. to... gagweji' vta
TRY TO GET FREE: wiikwaji'o vai; try to
get free of s.t. wiikwajitoon vti2
TUB
TUB: makakosag, -oon ni
TUBERCULOSIS
TUBERCULOSIS: ozosodamwaapinewin ni
HAVE TUBERCULOSIS:
ozosodamwaapine vai
TUESDAY
TUESDAY: be Tuesday niizho-giizhigad TO
TULLIBEE
TULLIBEE: odoonibii, -g na, also
odoonibiins, -ag
TURBULENT
TURBULENT WATER: be turbulent water
madaagamin /madaagami-/ vii
TURKEY
TURKEY: mizise, -g na
TURN
HER TURN: her turn third person singular
personal pronoun wiinitam pr
HIS TURN: his turn third person singular
personal pronoun wiinitam pr
MY TURN: my turn first person singular
personal pronoun niinitam pr
OUR TURN: our turn first person exclusive
plural personal pronoun niinitamawind pr;
our turn first person inclusive personal
pronoun giinitamawind pr
THEIR TURN: their turn third person plural
personal pronoun wiinitamawaa pr
YOUR TURN: your turn second person plural
personal pronoun giinitarnawaa^r; your
turn second person singular personal pronoun
giinitam pr
TURN
TURN: turn (one's body) gwekitaa vai; turn
s.o. biimiskon vta; turn s.t. biimiskonan
mi
TURN AND GO BACK: washki-giiwe vai
TURN AND LOOK BACK: aabanaabi vai;
turn and look back at s.o. aabanaabam
vta; turn and look back at s.t.
aabanaabandan vti

275
turn—typewriter
TURN AROUND WHILE SITTING:
gwekabi vai
TURN BY HAND: turn s.o. by hand gwekin
vta; turn s.t. by hand gwekinan vti; turn
things by hand gwekinige vai
TURN DRIVING: gwekibizo vai
TURN FACE DOWN: turn s.o. face down
animikon vta; turn s.t. face down
animikonari vti
TURN FACE UP: aazhigijise vai; aazhigijise,
aazhigijisemagad vii
TURN HEAD AROUND: turn one's head
around gwekikweni vai
TURN IN PLACE: washkibagizo vai
TURN INSIDE OUT: aaboozikaa vai;
aaboozikaa, aaboozikaamagad vii; turn
s.o. inside out aaboodin vta; turn s.t. in-
side out aaboodinan vti
TURN LYING IN PLACE: gwekishin vai;
gwekisin vii
TURN OVER: turn s.o. over (as something
sheet-like) gwekiigin vta; turn s.t. over (as
something sheet-like) gwekiiginan vti
TURN OVER BACKWARDS: aazhigijise
vai; aazhigijise, aazhigijisemagad vii
TURN QUICKLY: turn quickly, right self
gwekibagizo vai
TURN RUNNING: gwekibatoo vai
TURN STANDING: turn while standing
gwekigaabawi vai; washkigaabawi vai
TURN TO FACE BACKWARDS: turn s.o. to
face backwards animikon vta; turn s.t. to
face backwards animikonan vti
TURN WITH HANDS: turn s.o. with hands
gwekibizh /gwekibiN-/ vta; turn s.t. with
hands gwekibidoon vti2
TURN ON
TURN ON A LIGHT: turn s.t. on for a light
waazakonebidoon vti2
TURN OUT
TURN OUT: turn s.t. out (e.g., stove or lamp)
aatebidoon vti2
TURN OUT THAT
TURN OUT THAT: it turns out that
nangwana/)!, also ngwana, ingwana
TURNED
PUT TURNED: put s.o. turned gwekishim
vta; put s.t. turned gwekisidoon vti2
TURNED FACE DOWN: be turned face
down animikonigaade,
animikonigaademagad vii;
animikonigaazo vai
TURNED TO FACE BACKWARDS: be
turned to face backwards animikonigaade,
animikonigaademagad vii;
animikonigaazo vai
TURTLE
PAINTED TURTLE: miskwaadesi, -wag na
SNAPPING TURTLE: mikinaak, -wag na;
mishiikenh, -yag na
TWELVE
TWELVE: ashi-niizh nm; midaaswi ashi-niizh
nm
TWELVE O'CLOCK: be twelve o'clock ashi-
niizho-diba'iganed vii
TWENTY
TWENTY: niishtana nm
TWENTY-TWO
TWENTY-TWO: twenty-two (gun)
niishtana-ashi-niizh ni
TWENTY-TWO BULLET: anwiins, -an ni
TWICE
TWICE: niizhing pc
TWILIGHT
TWILIGHT: be twilight
dibikaabaminaagwad vii
TWIN
TWIN: niizhoodenh, -yag na
TWINE
BALL OF TWINE OR YARN: bikoojaan, -an
ni
TWIST
TWIST: twist s.o. biimiskon vta; twist s.t.
biimiskonan vti
FALL AND TWIST ARM: fall and twist one's
arm biimiskonikeshin vai
TWISTED
TWISTED MOUTH: have a twisted mouth
(as from a stroke) biimidoon vai
TWO
TWO: niizh nm; niizho-pi>4; they are two
niizhinoon /niizhin-/ vii; niizhiwag
/niizhi-/ vai; two (card) niizhoobii'igan,
-ag na
AND TWO: ashi-niizh nm; ashi-niizho-pu4
TWO ACRES: niizho-diba'igaans pc
TWO DAYS: niizho-giizhikpc; niizhogon pc;
be two days niizhogonagad vii
TWO DAYS OLD: be two days old
niizhogonagizi vai
TWO DOLLARS: niizhwaabik pc
TWO EACH: neniizh nm
TWO FEET: niizhozid pc
TWO HOURS: niizho-diba'iganpc
TWO HUNDRED: niizhwaak nm
TWO INCHES: niizhoninjpc
TWO MILES: niizho-diba'igan pc
TWO MINUTES: niizho-diba'igaans pc
TWO MONTHS: niizho-giizispc
TWO NIGHTS: niizho-dibikpc
TWO O'CLOCK: be two o'clock niizho-
diba'iganed vii
TWO PAIRS: niizhwewaan pc
TWO SETS: niizhwewaan pc
TWO THOUSAND: niizhosagoons nm
TWO TIMES: niizhing pc
TWO WEEKS: niizho-anama'e-giizhikpc; be
two weeks niizho-anama'e-giizhigad pc
TWO YEARS: niizho-biboon pc; be two years
niizho-biboonagad vii
TWO YEARS OLD: be two years old niizho-
biboonagizi vai
TYPE
TYPE: mazinaabikiwebinige vai
TYPEWRITER
TYPEWRITER: bakite'ibii'igan, -an ni;
mazinaabikiwebinigan, -an ni

ugly—unlock
276
U
UGLY
UGLY: be ugly maanaadad vii; maanaadizi
vai
UMBILICAL CORD
UMBILICAL CORD: my umbilical cord indis
/-disy-/ nid
UMBRELLA
UMBRELLA: agawaate'on, -an ni
UNABLE
UNABLE TO DO: be unable to do s.t.
bwaanawitoon vti2; be unable to do some-
thing bwaanawi'o vai; be unable to do
something to s.o. bwaanawi' vta; be
unable (to do something) bwaanawichige
vai
UNABLE TO FIND A DRINK: be unable to
find a drink gwiinobii vai
UNABLE TO MANAGE: be unable to
manage s.o. bwaanawi' vta; be unable to
manage s.t. bwaanawitoon vti2
UNCLE
UNCLE: my cross-uncle (mother's brother)
inzhishenh, -yag /-zhisheny-/ nod; my par-
allel uncle (father's brother) nimishoome,
-yag /-mishoomey-/ nad
UNCOMFORTABLY
LIE UNCOMFORTABLY: maazhishin vai
SIT UNCOMFORTABLY: maanabi vai
SLEEP UNCOMFORTABLY:
maazhingwaam vai
UNCONNECTED
COME UNCONNECTED: come unconnect-
ed (as something string-like)
gidiskaabiigishkaa,
gidiskaabiigishkaamagad vii
UNCOVER
UNCOVER: uncover s.o. baakin vta; uncover
s.t. baakinan vti; uncover (s.t.) for s.o.
baakinamaw vta; uncover things
baakinige vai
UNCOVERED
COME UNCOVERED: baakise,
baakisemagad vii
LEAVE UNCOVERED: leave s.o. uncovered
baakoshim vta; leave s.t. uncovered
baakosidoon vti2
LIE UNCOVERED: baakishin vai; baakisin
vii; michishin vai; michisin vii
UNDER
UNDER: anaami- pn; under it anaamayi'ii pc
UNDER A BOAT: anaamoonag pc
UNDER THE FLOOR: anaamisagpc
UNDER THE GROUND: anaamakamig pc
UNDER THE ICE: anaamiskwam pc
UNDER THE SNOW: anaamaagon pc, also
anaamaagonag
UNDER WOOD: under wood (e.g., a tree or
stick) anaamaatig^c
UNDERBRUSH
DENSE UNDERBRUSH: there is dense un-
derbrush zazagaa, zazagaamagad vii
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUND: anaamaki pc
UNDERPANTS
UNDERPANTS: biitoo-giboodiyegwaazon,
-ag na
UNDERSHIRT
UNDERSHIRT: biitoo-babagiwayaan, -an ni
UNDERSTAND
UNDERSTAND: nisidotam vai2; understand
s.o. nisidotaw vta; understand s.t.
nisidotan vti; they understand each other
nisidotaadiwag /nisidotaadi-/ vai
UNDERSTAND A CERTAIN WAY: initam
vai2; understand s.o. a certain way initaw
vta; understand s.t. a certain way initan vti
UNDERSTOOD
UNDERSTOOD: be understood
nisidotaagozi vai; nisidotaagwad vii
UNDERSTOOD A CERTAIN WAY: be un-
derstood a certain way initaagozi vai;
initaagwad vii
UNDERWATER
UNDERWATER: anaamibiigpc
UNDERWATER PANTHER
UNDERWATER PANTHER: mishibizhii, -g
na
UNDERWEAR
UNDERWEAR: men's underwear
biitooshkigan, -an ni
UNDO
UNDO: undo s.o. aaba' /aaba'w-/ ma; undo
s.t. aaba'an vti; undo (s.t.) for s.o.
aaba'amaw vta
UNDO BY HAND: undo s.o. by hand
aabiskon vta; undo s.t. by hand
aabiskonan mi
UNDONE
UNDONE: be undone aaba'igaade,
aaba'igaademagad vii; aaba'igaazo vai
COME UNDONE: aabiskose vai; aabiskose,
aabiskosemagad mi
UNDRESS
UNDRESS: giizikonaye vai; undress s.o.
giizikonaye' vta
UNFOLD
UNFOLD: unfold s.o. (as something sheet-
like) aabiskwegin vta; unfold s.t. (as some-
thing sheet-like) aabiskweginan vti
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES: Gichi-mookomaan-aki
ni
UNIVERSITY
UNIVERSITY: gabe-gikendaasoowigamig,
-oon ni
UNLOAD
UNLOAD A BOAT: agwaanaaso vai
UNLOCK
UNLOCK: unlock s.o. aabaabika'
/aabaabika'w-/ vta; unlock s.t.

277
unlock—used to
aabaabika'an vti; unlock (s.t.) for s.o.
aabaabika'amaw vta
UNLOCKED
UNLOCKED: be unlocked
aabaabika'igaade,
aabaabika'igaademagad vii
UNMARRIED
UNMARRIED MAN: moozhaabe, -g na
UNMARRIED WOMAN: moozhikwe, -g na
UNRAVEL
UNRAVEL: aabiskose vai; aabiskose,
aabiskosemagad vii; unravel s.o. (as
something string-like) aabaabiigin vta; un-
ravel s.t. (as something string-like)
aabaabiiginan vti
UNSATISFACTORY
FIND UNSATISFACTORY: find s.o. unsat-
isfactory aanawenim vta; find s.t. unsatis-
factory aanawendan vti; find things unsat-
isfactory aanawenjige vai
FOUND UNSATISFACTORY: be found
unsatisfactory aanawendaagozi vai;
aanawendaagwad vii
UNSTEADY
FEEL UNSTEADY: giiwashkweyaabandam
vai2
UNTIE
UNTIE: untie s.o. aaba* /aaba'w-/ vta; untie
s.t. aaba'an vti; aaba'oodoon vti2; untie
(s.t.) for s.o. aaba'amaw vta
UNTIE WILD RICE: aaba'oodoo vai
UNTIED
UNTIED: be untied aaba'igaade,
aaba'igaademagad vii; aaba'igaazo vai
UNTIL
UNTIL: biinish pc
UNWIND
UNWIND: unwind s.o. (as something string-
like) aabaabiigin vta; unwind s.t. (as
something string-like) aabaabiiginan vti
UP TO
UP TO: biinish pc
UP TO YOU
IT'S UP TO YOU: booshke^c, also booshke
giniin
UPHILL
GO UPHILL: agidaakiiwe vai
RUN UPHILL: agidaakiiwebatoo vai
UPPER STORY
HAVE AN UPPER STORY:
ishpimisagokaade,
ishpimisagokaademagad vii
UPSET
UPSET BY HAND: upset s.o. by hand gawin
vta; upset s.t. by hand gawinan vti
UPSIDE DOWN
HANG UPSIDE DOWN: ajidagoode,
ajidagoodemagad vii; ajidagoojin vai;
hang s.o. upside down ajidagoozh
/ajidagooN-/ vta; hang s.t. upside down
ajidagoodoon vti2
HOLD UPSIDE DOWN: hold s.o. upside
down ajidin vta; hold s.t. upside down
ajidinan vti
UPSTAIRS
GO UPSTAIRS: akwaandawe vai
UPSTREAM
UPSTREAM: agidaajiwan pc, also
ogidaajiwan*, wagidaajiwan
UPWARDS
BLOWN UPWARDS: be blown upwards
ombaashi vai; ombaasin vii
FLY UPWARDS: ombibide,
ombibidemagad vii; ombibizo vai
GO UPWARDS: ombishkaa vai; ombishkaa,
ombishkaamagad vii
GO UPWARDS AS SMOKE: ombaabate vii
JUMP UPWARDS: ombigwaashkwani vai
SPEED UPWARDS: ombibide,
ombibidemagad vii; ombibizo vai
THROW UPWARDS: throw s.o. upwards
ombiwebin vta; throw s.t. upwards
ombiwebinan vti
URGE
URGE: urge s.o. gagaanzom vta
URGE TO COME: urge s.o. to come
wiizhaam vta
URINATE
URINATE: zhiishiigi vai; urinate on s.o.
zhigizh /zhigiN-/ vta; urinate on s.t.
zhigidan vti; urinate on oneself zhiginidizo
vai
US
US: MS first person exclusive plural pronoun
niinawind pr; us first person inclusive per-
sonal pronoun giinawind pr
USE
USE: use s.o. aabaji' vta; use s.t. aabajitoon
vn2
GET GOOD USE: get good use of s.o.
minwaabaji' vta; get good use of s.t.
minwaabajitoon vti2
OF GOOD USE: be of good use
minwaabadad vii; minwaabadizi vai
USE A CERTAIN WAY: use s.o. a certain
way inaabaji* vta; use s.t. a certain way
inaabajitoon vri2; use things a certain way
inaabajichige vai
USE UP
USE UP: use s.o. up jaagaabaji' vta; use s.t.
up jaagaabajitoon vti2; use things up
jaaginige vai
USE UP AMMUNITION: use up all of the
ammunition jaaga'e vai; jaagizige vai
USE UP MONEY: use up all of the money
jaagizhooniyaaweshin vai
USED
USED: be used aabadad vii; aabadizi vai
USED TO
USED TO: be used to making s.o. nagaji' vta;
be used to making s.t. nagajitoon vti2; be
used to s.o. nagadenim vta; be used to s.t.
nagadendan vti

used to—vulva
278
USED TO
USED TO: iko pc, also ko
USED UP
USED UP: be used up jaaginigaade,
jaaginigaademagad vii
USEFUL
USEFUL: be useful aabadad vii; aabadizi vai;
be very useful minwaabadad vii;
minwaabadizi vai
USEFUL IN A CERTAIN WAY: be useful in
a certain way inaabadad vii; inaabadizi vai
V
VAIN
IN VAIN: aano- pvl
VALLEY
VALLEY: be a valley basadinaa,
basadinaamagad vii
VALUED
VALUED TO A CERTAIN EXTENT: be
valued to a certain extent apiitendaagozi
vai; apiitendaagwad vii
VAMP
MOCCASIN VAMP: moccasin vamp
apiingwe'igan, -an ni
VAN
VAN: aawazhiwewidaabaan, -ag na
VARIEGATED
VARIEGATED: be variegated gidagaa,
gidagaamagad vii; gidagizi vai; be varie-
gated (as something sheet-like) gidagiigad
vii; gidagiigizi vai
VARIETY
VARIETY OF THINGS: a variety of things
anooj gegoo pr, also anooji-gegoo
VARIOUS
VARIOUS :anooj pc
VARIOUS THINGS: anooj gegoo pr, also
anooji-gegoo
VEGETABLE
VEGETABLE: gitigaanens, -an ni
VEIN
VEIN: my vein indiskweyaab, -iin nid
VELVET
VELVET: miishiigin, -oon ni
VERY
VERY: aapiji pc; gichi- pv4, also chi-; enda-
pv4
VESSEL
VESSEL: naabikwaan, -an ni
VEST
VEST: gibide'ebizon, -an ni
VETERAN'S HOME
VETERAN'S HOME:
rhimaaganishiiwigamig, -oon m
VETERAN'S HOSPITAL
VETERAN'S HOSPITAL: zhimaaganishil-
aakoziiwigamig, -oon ni
VIEW
COME INTO VIEW: bi-naagozi vai; bi-
naagwad vii
COME SUDDENLY INTO VIEW: come
suddenly into view as from around a corner
zaagewe vai
DRIVE SUDDENLY INTO VIEW:
zaagewebide, zaagewebidemagad vii;
zaagewebizo vai
PADDLE SUDDENLY INTO VIEW:
zaagewe'o vai; zaagewekwazhiwe vai
RUN SUDDENLY INTO VIEW:
zaagewebatoo vai
SPEED SUDDENLY INTO VIEW:
zaagewebide, zaagewebidemagad vii;
zaagewebizo vai
SWIM SUDDENLY INTO VIEW: swim as a
fish suddenly into view zaagewekwazhiwe
vai
VINE
VINE: biimaakwad, -oon ni
VINEGAR
VINEGAR: zhiiwaaboo ni
VIOLIN
VIOLIN: naazhaabii'igan, -an ni
VISIBLE
VISIBLE: be visible naagozi vai; naagwad vii
BARELY VISIBLE: be barely visible
naawinaagozi vai; naawinaagwad vii
VISIBLE AT A DISTANCE: be visible at a
distance debaabaminaagozi vai;
debaabaminaagwad vii
VISION
VISION: have vision waabi vai
FAST FOR A VISION: gii'igoshimo vai
VISIT
VISIT: visit s.o. mawadish /mawadiS-/ vta;
odish /odiS-/ vta; visit people
mawadishiwe vai; odishiwe vai; they visit
each other mawadisidiwag /mawadisidi-/
vai
VISITOR
VISITOR: biiwide, -g na
VOICE
BAD VOICE: have a bad voice maanowe vai
GOOD VOICE: have a good voice
minogondaagan vai; minowe vai
HAVE A SOFT VOICE: bedowe vai
HAVE DIFFICULTY WITH VOICE: have
difficulty with one's voice
maazhigondaagan vai
VOMIT
VOMIT: zhigagowe vai; keep vomiting
zhishigagowe vai
VOTE
VOTE: biinjwebinige vai; vote for s.o.
biinjwebinigetamaw vta
VULVA
VULVA: my vulva nikidin /-kidin-/ nad

279
wade—warm
w
WADE
RUN ACROSS WADING:
aazhawagaaziibatoo vai
WADE ABOUT: babaamaadagaazii vai
WADE ACROSS: aazhawagaazii vai
WADE ALONG: bimaadagaazii vai
WADE AWAY: animaadagaazii vai
WADE FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
ondaadagaazji vai
WADE HERE: biidaadagaazii vai
WADE TO A CERTAIN PLACE:
inaadagaazii vai
WAG
WAG TAIL: wag one's tail wewebaanoweni
vai
WAGON
WAGON: ditibidaabaan, -ag na; odaabaan,
-ag«a
DRIVE ALONG IN A WAGON OR
SLEIGH: drive along quickly in a wagon
or sleigh bimidaabiiba'igo vai
WAIT
WAIT: bii'o vai; wait for s.o. bii* vla; wait for
s.t. biitoori vti2; wait! bekaa /n
KEEP WAITING: baabii'o vai; keep waiting
for s.o. baabii' vta; keep waiting for s.t.
baabiitoon vti2
TIRED OF WAITING: be tired of waiting
zhigajibii'o vai; be tired of waiting for s.o.
zhigajibii' vta; be tired of waiting for s.t.
zhigajibiitoon vti2
WAIT IN WATCH: akawaabi vai; wait in
watch for s.o. akawaabam vta; wait in
watch for s.t. akawaabandan vti
WAKE
WAKE: wake s.o. amadin vta
WAKE BY VOCAL NOISE: wake s.o. by vo-
cal noise amajim vta
WAKE FROM BEING COLD: amadaji vai
WAKE FROM PAIN: amajine vai
WAKE UP: goshkozi vai
WAKE
SIT UP WITH AT A WAKE: sit up with s.o.
(e.g., the deceased at a wake) abiitaw vta
WALK
ARRIVE WALKING: bagamose vai
HEARD WALKING: be heard walking on the
floor madwesagishin vai
HEARD WALKING ALONG: be heard
walking along bimweweshin vai
HEARD WALKING HERE: be heard walking
here biidweweshin vai
WALK A CERTAIN WAY: inose vai
WALK ABOUT: babaamose vai; babimose
vai
WALK ALONG: bimose vai
WALK ALONG ON THE ICE:
bimaadagaako vai
WALK ALONG SHORE TO A CERTAIN
PLACE: inaazhagaame vai
WALK ALONG THE SHORE:
jiigeweyaazhagaame vai
WALK AROUND: walk around s.o.
giiwitaashkaw vta; walk around s.t.
giiwitaashkan vti; walk around something
giiwitaawose vai, also giiwitaa'ose
WALK AROUND A LAKE:
giiwitaayaazhagaame vai
WALK AROUND THE EDGE:
giiwitaayaazhagaame vai
WALK AWAY: animose vai
WALK AWAY MAKING NOISE:
animwewetoo vai
WALK FROM A CERTAIN PLACE: ondose
vai
WALK HERE: biidaasamose vai
WALK SLOWLY: bedose vai
WALK TO CERTAIN PLACE: walk to a
certain place inose vai
WALK WITH: walk with s.o. wiidosem vta
WALK WITH DISCOMFORT: maanose vai
WALL
WALL: aasamisag, -oon ni
BY A WALL: jiigaatig pc
WALLEYE
WALLEYE: ogaa, -wag na
WANDER
WANDER ABOUT: babaa-ayaa vai
WANT
WANT: misawendam vai2; nandawendam
vai2; want s.o. misawenim vta; want s.o.
(to do...) nandawenim vta; want s.t.
misawendan vti; nandawendan vti; want
things misawenjige vai
WANTTO:wii-p^
WAR
WAR: miigaadiwin, -an ni
GO TO WAR: go to war archaic nandobani
vai
SING WAR SONGS: bwaanzhii-nagamo vai
WAR CLUB
WAR CLUB: bagamaagan, -an ni
WAR DANCE
WAR DANCE: bwaanzhii-niimi'idiwin, -an
ni; dance a war dance bwaanzhii-niimi vai;
they dance a war dance bwaanzhii-
niimi'idiwag /bwaanzhii-niimi'idi-/ vai
WAR WHOOP
GIVE WAR WHOOPS: zaasaakwe vai
WARM
WARM: be warm (as a liquid) abaagamide,
abaagamidemagad vii; warm s.t. (as a
liquid) abaagamizan vti
WARM AT THE FIRE: warm s.o. at the fire
abiz /abizw-/ vta; warm s.t. at the fire
abizan vti; warm (s.t.) for s.o. at the fire
abizamaw vta
WARM BACK: warm one's back
abaawiganezo vai
WARM BY THE FIRE: warm oneself by the
fire awazo vai
WARM FEET: warm one's feet abizidezo vai

warm—water
280
WARM HANDS: warm one's hands
abininjiizo vat
WARM UP: warm up in the sun abaaso vai
WARM WEATHER: be warm weather
aabawaa, aabawaamagad vii
WEATHER WARMS UP: warm up (of the
weather) abaate, abaatemagad vii
WRAPPED UP WARM: be wrapped up warm
giizhoopizo vai
WARMLY
DRESS WARMLY: giizhoo'o vai
WARMTH
LIE IN WARMTH: giizhooshin vai
WARN
WARN: warn s.o. ayaangwaamim vta
WARN AGAINST: warn s.o. against (s.t.)
gina'amaw vta
WARRIOR
WARRIOR: ogichidaa, -g na
WART
WART: jiichiigom, -ag na
WASH
WASH: giziibiigii vai; wash s.o. by hand
giziibiigin vta; wash s.o. using something
giziibiiga' /giziibiiga'w-/ vta; wash s.t. us-
ing something giziibiiga'an mi; wash s.t. by
hand giziibiiginan vu; wash things
giziibiiga'ige vai
WASH CLOTHES: giziibiiga'ige vai
WASH DISHES: giziibiiginaagane vai
WASH FACE: wash one's face giziibiigiingwe
vai
WASH FLOORS: giziibiigisaginige vai
WASH HAIR: wash one's hair giziibiigindibe
vai
WASH HANDS: wash one's hands
giziibiigininjii vai
WASH KETTLE: giziibiiginakokwe vai
WASH PAIL: giziibiiginakokwe vai
WASH BASIN
WASH BASIN: giziibiigiingwewinaagan ni
WASH UP
WASH UP: giziibiigazhe vai
WASHBOARD
WASHBOARD: mimigwaakosijigan, -an ni
WASHED
WASHED: be washed giziibiiginigaade,
giziibiiginigaademagad vii
WASHING MACHINE
WASHING MACHINE: giziibiiga'ige-
makak, -oon ni
WASHINGTON
WASHINGTON: Washington, D.C.
Waashtanong place
WASHTUB
WASHTUB: giziibiiga'ige-makak, -oon ni
WASP
WASP: aamoo, -g na
WASP NEST
WASP NEST: aamoo-wadiswan, -an ni
WASTE
WASTE: waste s.o. nishwanaaji' vta; waste s.t.
nishwanaajitoon vti2; waste things
nishwanaajichige vai
WATCH
WATCH: ganawaabi vai; watch s.o.
ganawaabam vta; watch s.t.
ganawaabandan vti; watch things
ganawaabanjige vai; they watch each
other ganawaabandiwag /ganawaabandi-/
vai
WATCH CAREFULLY: watch s.o. carefully
naanaagadawaabam vta; watch s.t. care-
fully naanaagadawaabandan vti
WATCH OVER: watch over s.o. gizhaazh
/gizhaaN-/ vta; watch over s.t. gizhaadan
vti; watch over things gizhaadige vai
WATCH
WATCH: diba'igiiziswaanens, -ag na
WATCHED
WATCHED: be watched
ganawaabanjigaade,
ganawaabanjigaademagad vii;
ganawaabanjigaazo vai
WATER
WATER: nibi ni; water s.t. ziiga'andan vti
AT THE WATER: agamiingpc
BLOWN INTO THE WATER: be blown into
the water bakobiiyaashi vai;
bakobiiyaasin vii
BY THE WATER: jiigibiigpc
COLD WATER: dakib ni
DRAG INTO THE WATER: drag s.o. into
the water bakobiidaabaazh
/bakobiidaabaaN-/ vta; drag s.t. into the
water bakobiidaabaadan vti
EMERGE FROM THE WATER: mookibii
vai
FALL INTO THE WATER: bakobiise vai;
bakobiise, bakobiisemagad vii
GET WATER: nibinaadi vai; get water for s.o.
gwaaba'amaw vta
GET WATER FROM A CERTAIN PLACE:
onda*ibii vai
GO AWAY FROM THE WATER: gopii vai
GO DOWN INTO THE WATER: bakobii
vai
GO GET WATER: go get water or other
liquid naadoobii vai
IN THE DEPTHS OF A BODY OF
WATER: anaamiindim pc
JUMP INTO THE WATER:
bakobiigwaashkwani vai
MUCH WATER: be much water nibiikaa,
nibiikaamagad vii
ON THIS SIDE OF THE WATER:
ondaasagaam pc
ON TOP OF THE WATER: agidibiig/x, also
ogidibiig*, wagidibiig
OVER ACROSS THE WATER: awasagaam
pc
RUN INTO THE WATER: bakobiibatoo vai
SUSPENDED IN WATER: be suspended in
water agomo vai; agonde vii

281
water—weave
THROW INTO THE WATER: throw s.o.
into the water bakobiiwebin vta; throw s.t.
into the water bakobiiwebinan vti
THROW OUT OF THE WATER: throw s.t.
out of the water agwaawebinan vti; throw
(s.t.) out of the water for s.o.
agwaawebinamaw vta
WATER SOURCE: onda'ibaan, -an ni
WATER PAIL
WATER PAIL: nibiiwakik, -oog na
WATERFALL
WATERFALL.: be a waterfall gakaamikijiwan
vii; gakijiwan vii
WATERMELON
WATERMELON: eshkandaming, -in ni-pt
WATERY
WATERY: be watery nibiiwan vii
WAVE
WAVE: digow, -ag na, also digo
BIG WAVES: be big waves
mamaangaashkaa,
mamaangaashkaamagad vii
WAVES COME IN TO SHORE:
biidaashkaa, biidaashkaamagad vii
WAY
CERTAIN WAY: be a certain way izhi-ayaa
vai
IN A CERTAIN WAY: izhi- pv3
ON THE WAY: ani- pv2, also ni-; bimi- pv2
THIS WAY: bi-pv2
WAY OF LIFE
WAY OF LIFE: inaadiziwin, -an ni
CERTAIN WAY OF LIFE: have a certain way
oflifeinaadizi vai
WE
WE: we first person exclusive plural pronoun
niinawind pr; vie first person inclusive per-
sonal pronoun giinawind pr
WEAK
WEAK: be weak niinamad vii; niinamizi vai;
be weak (as a liquid) zhaagwaagamin
/zhaagwaagami-/ vii; be weak in muscular
strength zhaagwiiwii vai; be weak in power
zhaagwaadad vii; zhaagwaadizi vai
CONSIDER 'WEAK: consider s.o. weak
zhaagwenim vta; consider s.t. weak
zhaagwendan vti
LOOK WEAK: niinaminaagozi vai;
niinaminaagwad vii
WEALTH
WEALTH: daniwin ni
WEAR
WEAR: wear s.o. biizikaw vta; wear s.t.
biizikan vti
WEAR A BRACELET: jiiskinikebizo vai
WEAR A COAT: gigibabiinzikawaagane vai
WEAR A SHIRT: gigibabagiwayaane vai
WEAR ACROSS THE SHOULDER: wear
s.t. across; the shoulder aazhooningwa'an
vti
WEAR ARM GARTERS: jiiskinikebizo vai
WEAR AROUND NECK: wear s.o. around
one's neck naabikaw vta; wear s.t. around
one's neck naabikan vti
WEAR BLACK: makadewi'o vai
WEAR BLUE: ozhaawashko'o vai
WEAR BROWN: ozaawi'o vai
WEAR EARMUFFS: giizhootawage'o vai
WEAR GREEN: ozhaawashko'o vai
WEAR INSIDE OUT: wear s.o. inside out
aaboozikaw vta; wear s.t. inside out
aaboozikan vti
WEAR LAYERS: wear layers (as underwear)
biitookonaye vai
WEAR LEG GARTERS: gashkidaasebizo vai
WEAR MITTENS: gigiminjikaawane vai
WEAR NEW CLOTHES: oshki'o vai
WEAR OVERSHOES: biitookizine vai
WEAR PANTS: gigigiboodiyegwaazone vai
WEAR PATCHES: bagwa'igaazo vai
WEAR RED: misko'o vai
WEAR SOCKS: gigazhigane vai
WEAR THE WRONG WAY: wear s.o. the
wrong way napaazikaw vta; wear s.t. the
wrong way napaazikan vti
WEAR WHITE: waabishki'o vai
WEAR YELLOW: ozaawi'o vai
WEAR OUT
WEAR OUT IN OPERATION: angobide,
angobidemagad vii; angobizo vai
WEAR OUT WITH FOOT OR BODY: wear
s.o. out with foot or body (e.g., pants)
angoshkaw vta; wear s.t. out with foot or
body angoshkan vti
WEASEL
WEASEL: zhingos, -ag na
WEASEL SKIN
WEASEL SKIN: zhingosiwayaan, -ag na
WEATHER
BAD WEATHER: be bad weather niiskaadad
vii
CALM WEATHER: be calm weather
anwaatin vii
CERTAIN WEATHER CONDITION: be a
certain weather condition izhiwebad vii
COLD WEATHER: be cold (weather)
gisinaa, gisinaamagad vii
COOL WEATHER: be cool (weather)
dakaayaa, dakaayaamagad vii, also daki-
ayaa
GOOD WEATHER: be good weather
mizhakwad vii
HAVE GOOD TRAVELLING WEATHER:
mino-giizhiganishi vai
HOT WEATHER: be hot (weather) gizhaate,
gizhaatemagad vii
MILD WEATHER: be mild weather
aabawaa, aabawaamagad vii
WARM WEATHER: be warm weather
aabawaa, aabawaamagad vii
WEATHER WARMS UP: warm up (of the
weather) abaate, abaatemagad vii
WEAVE
WEAVE: weave s.t. niibidoon vti2

wedged—wherever
282
WEDGED
WEDGED IN TIGHTLY: be wedged in
tightly (as something stick- or wood-like)
ziindaakoshin vai; ziindaakosin vii
WEDNESDAY
WEDNESDAY: be Wednesday aabitoose,
aabitoosemagad vii
WEED
WEED: weed s.t. bashkwashkibidoon vti2;
weed things bashkwashkibijige vai
WEEK
CERTAIN DAY OF THE WEEK: be a cer-
tain day of the week izhi-giizhigad vii
CERTAIN NUMBER OF WEEKS: a certain
number of weeks daso-anama'e-giizhik^c;
be a certain number of weeks daso-
anama'e-giizhikwagad vii, also
daswanama'e-giizhikwagad
WEEP
WEEP: mawi vai
WEIGH
WEIGH: weigh s.o. dibaabiishkoozh
/dibaabiishkooN-/ vta; weigh s.t.
dibaabiishkoodoon vti2; weigh things
dibaabiishkoojige vai
WEIGH A CERTAIN AMOUNT:
apiitinigozi vai; apiitinigwad vii
WELFARE OFFICE
WELFARE OFFICE: ashangewigamig, -oon
ni
WELFARE WORKER
WELFARE WORKER: ashangewinini, -wag
na; welfare worker (female)
ashangewikwe, -g na
WELL
WELL: mino- pv4; wawiinge pc; be well
mino-ayaa vai
BEHAVE WELL: mino-izhiwebizi vai
COOK WELL: minozekwe vai; cook s.o. well
minoz /minozw-/ vta; cook s.t. well
minozan vti
DO WELL: do things well minochige vai
DRESS WELL: mino'o vai
EAT WELL: minwanjige vai
FIT WELL: minwashkine vai; minwashkine,
minwashkinemagad vii; fit s.o. well (e.g.,
pants) minokaw vta; fit s.t. well minokan
vti
GET ALONG WELL: minose vai
GO WELL: minose, minosemagad vii; have
things go well for one minose vai
GROW WELL: minogi vai; minogin vii
LIVE WELL: mino-bimaadizi vai
MAKE WELL: make s.o. well onizhishi' vta;
make s.t. well onizhishitoon vti2
RUN WELL: run well (as a machine)
minobide, minobidemagad vii; minobizo
vai
SEE WELL: minwaabi vai
SPEAK WELL: minowe vai
TREAT WELL: treat s.o. well mino-doodaw
vta
WELL COOKED: be well cooked minode,
minodemagad vii; minozo vai
WELL FILLED: be well filled minwashkine
vai; minwashkine, minwashkinemagad
vii
WELL
WELL: aanish pc
WELL HOW: well how? aaniin danaa^c
WELL NOW: aaniishpc; aaniish naa/n
WELL THEN: aanish pc
WELL WHY: well why? aaniin danaapc
WELL
WATER WELL: onda'ibaan, -an ni
WEST
WEST: ningaabii'an ni
IN THE WEST: bangishimog in the west;
conjunct of: bangishimon /bangishimo-/ vii
set as the sun
WET
WET: be wet nibiiwan vii; nibiiwi vai
GET WET: nisaabaawe vai; nisaabaawe,
nisaabaawemagad vii
HEAVY WET SNOW: there is heavy wet
snow falling zhakipon /zhakipo-/ vii
WET GROUND: be wet ground
nibiiwakamigaa, nibiiwakamigaamagad
vii
WET ROAD: be wet (as a road or trail)
nibiiwadamon /nibiiwadamo-/ vii
WET THE BED: zhigingwaam vai
WET TRAIL: be wet (as a road or trail)
nibiiwadamon /nibiiwadamo-/ vii
WHAT
WHAT: what inanimate interrogative wegonen,
-an pr; awegonen, -an pr; wegonesh
I DON'T KNOW WHAT: I don't know what
inanimate dubitative wegodogwen, -an pr
I DON'T REMEMBER WHAT: ayi'ii, -n pr
I WONDER WHAT: I wonder what inanimate
dubitative wegodogwen, -an pr
WHATEVER
WHATEVER: whatever inanimate dubitative
wegodogwen igo pr
WHEEL
WHEEL: detibised na-pt
WHEEZE
WHEEZE: gaaskanaamo vai
WHEN
WHEN: apii pc; when? interrogative aanapii pc,
also aanapiish, aaniin apii, aaniin iw apii
I DON'T KNOW WHEN: dubitative amanj
apii pc
I WONDER WHEN: I wonder when dubitative
amanj apii pc
WHENEVER
WHENEVER: dubitative amanj igo apii pc
WHERE
WHERE: where? interrogative aandi pct also
aandish, aaniindi
I DON'T KNOW WHERE: dubitative dibi pc
I WONDER WHERE: I wonder where
dubitative dibi pc
WHEREVER
WHEREVER: dubitative dibi go pc

283
while—wide
WHILE
WHILE: eshkwaapc; megwaa pc
A LITTLE WHILE: ajina pc
EVERY LITTLE WHILE: wewayiiba pc
WHIP
WHIP: bashanzhe'igan, -an ni;
bashanzhe'ige vai; whip s.o. bashanzhe'
/bashanzhe'w-/ via
WHIRL
WHIRL: gizhibaabide, gizhibaabidemagad
vii; gizhibaabise vai; gizhibaabise,
gizhibaabisemagad vii; gizhibaabizo vai
WHIRLPOOL
WHIRLPOOL: be a whirlpool maajijiwan TO
WHIRLWIND
WHIRLWIND: be a whirlwind
gizhibaayaanimad vii
WHISKERS
WHITE WHISKERS: have white whiskers
waabishkawedoon vai
WHISPER
WHISPER: gaaskanazo vai; whisper to s.o.
gaaskanazootaw vta
WHISTLE
WHISTLE: gwiishkoshi vai;
noondaagochigan, -an ni; whistle to s.o.
gwiishkoshim vta
WHISTLE FROM BOILING:
gwiishkoshwewegamide,
gwiishkoshwewegamidemagad vii;
gwiishkoshwewegamizo vai
WHITE
WHITE: waabishki- pv4; be white
waabishkaa, waabishkaamagad vii;
waabishkizi vai; be white (as something
mineral) waabishkaabikad vii;
waabishkaabikizi vai; be white (as some-
thing sheet-like) waabishkiigad vii;
waabishkilgizi vai; be white (as something
stick- or wood-like) waabishkaakozi vai;
waabishkaakwad vii; be white (as some-
thing string-like) waabishkaabiigad vii;
waabishkaabiigizi vai
COLORED WHITE: be colored white
waabishkaande, waabishkaandemagad
vii; waabishkaanzo vai
WEAR WHITE: waabishki'o vai
WHITE CLOUDS: there are white clouds
waabishkaanakwad vii
WHITE ASH
WHITE ASH: white ash (tree)
baapaagimaak. -wag na
WHITE CEDAR
WHITE CEDAR: giizhik, -ag na
WHITE CLAY
WHITE CLAY: waabaabigan na
WHITE EARTH
WHITE EARTH: White Earth Reservation
Gaa-waabaabiganikaag place
WHITE HAIR
WHITE HAIR: have white hair
waabishkindibe vai
WHITE PERSON
WHITE PERSON: gichi-mookomaan, -ag
na; wayaabishkiiwed na-pt; be a white
person waabishkiiwe vai
WHITE PINE
WHITE PINE: zhingwaak, -wag na
WHITE SPOTS
WHITE SPOTS ON FINGERNAILS: have
white spots on fingernails mindaweganzhii
vai
WHITE SPRUCE
WHITE SPRUCE: gaawaandag, -oog na
WHITE WOMAN
WHITE WOMAN: gkhi-mookomaanikwe,
-%na
WHITEFISH
WHITEFISH: adikameg, -wag na
WHITTLE
WHITTLE: mookodaaso vai
WHO
WHO: who? animate interrogative awenen, -ag
pr; awenesh pr
I DON'T KNOW WHO: I don't know who
animate dubitative awegwen, -ag pr
I DON'T REMEMBER WHO: aya'aa, -gpr
I WONDER WHO: I wonder who animate
dubitative awegwen, -agpr
WHO THEN: who then animate interrogative
awenesh pr
WHOEVER
WHOEVER: whoever animate dubitative
awegwen igo pr
WHOLE
WHOLE: be whole miziweyaa,
miziweyaamagad vii; miziwezi vai
MAKE OF A WHOLE PIECE: make s.o. of a
whole piece miziwe' vta; make s.t. of a
whole piece miziwetoon vti2
WHOLE LOT
A WHOLE LOT: neniibowapc
WHOOP
WHOOP: zaasaakwe vai
WHY
WHY: why? aaniin pc; aaniish pc; aaniin dash
PC
WHY NOT: why not? aaniin danaa />i
WIDE
WIDE: be wide mangadeyaa,
mangadeyaamagad vii; mangadezi vai
MAKE WIDE: make s.o. wide mangade' vta;
make s.t. wide mangadetoon vti2
SO WIDE: be so wide inigokwadeyaa,
inigokwadeyaamagad vii; inigokwadezi
vai; be so wide (as something mineral)
inigokwadeyaabikad vii;
inigokwadeyaabikizi vai; be so wide (as
something sheet-like) inigokwadeyiigad
vii; inigokwadeyiigizi vai; be so wide (as
something stick- or wood-like)
inigokwadeyaakozi vai;
inigokwadeyaakwad vii; be so wide (as
something string-like)

wide—wind
284
inigokwadeyaabiigad vii;
inigokwadeyaabiigizi vai
WIDE BOAT: be wide (as a boat)
mangadeyoonagad vii
WIDE RIVER: be wide (as a river)
mangitigweyaa, mangitigweyaamagad
vii
WIDE ROAD: be wide (as a road or trail)
mangademon /mangademo-/ vii, also
mangadademon
WIDE TRAIL: be wide (as a road or trail)
mangademon /mangademo-/ vii, also
mangadademon
WIDEN
WIDEN: widen s.o. mangade' vta; widen s.t.
mangadetoon vti2
WIDOW
WIDOW: zhiigaa, -g na; be a widow
zhiigaawi vai
WIDOWER
WIDOWER: zhiigaa, -g na; be a widower
zhiigaawi vai
WIDTH
CERTAIN WIDTH: be a certain width
inigokwadeyaa, inigokwadeyaamagad
vii; inigokwadezi vai; be a certain width
(as something mineral)
inigokwadeyaabikad vii;
inigokwadeyaabikizi vai; be a certain
width (as something sheet-like)
inigokwadeyiigad vii; inigokwadeyiigizi
vai; be a certain width (as something stick-
or wood-like) inigokwadeyaakozi vai;
inigokwadeyaakwad vii; be a certain
width (as something string-like)
inigokwadeyaabiigad vii;
inigokwadeyaabiigizi vai
WIFE
WIFE: my wife niwiidigemaagan, -ag
/-wiidigemaagan-/ na; niwiiw, -ag /-wiiw-/
nad
WIGOB
PEEL WIGOB: peel wigob (inner bark of
basswood) bisha'igobii vai
WIGWAM
WIGWAM: waaginogaan, -an ni; wiigiwaam,
-an ni
LIVE IN A WIGWAM: wiigiwaamige vai
MAKE A WIGWAM: wiigiwaamike vai
WIGWAM FRAME
WIGWAM FRAME: wiigiwaamaak, -oon ni
WIGWAM POLE
WIGWAM POLE: wiigiwaamaatig, -oon ni
WILD
WILD: bagwaji- pv4
WILD ANIMAL
WILD ANIMAL: awesiinh, -yag na
WILD POTATO
WILD POTATO: bagwajipin, -iig na, also
bagwaji-opin
WILD RICE
WILD RICE: manoomin ni, also anishinaabe-
manoomin
BARREL OR TUB USED IN THRESHING
WILD RICE: mimigoshkamwaagan, -an
ni
GREEN WILD RICE: ozhaawashko-
manoomin ni
HARVEST WILD RICE: bawa'am vai2;
manoominike vai
HAUL WILD RICE: aawajimine vai
KNOCK WILD RICE: bawa'am vai2
MUCH WILD RICE: there is much wild rice
manoominikaa, manoominikaamagad
vii
POPPED WILD RICE: gaapizigan, -an ni
TAKE WILD RICE INLAND: gopimine vai
THRESH WILD RICE: thresh something
mimigoshkam vai2
TIE WILD RICE: dakobidoo vai
TIED WILD RICE: dakobijigan, -an ni
UNTIE WILD RICE: aaba'oodoo vai
WILD RICE BROTH
WILD RICE BROTH: manoominaaboo ni
WILD RICE STALK
WILD RICE STALK: manoominaganzh, -iin
WILDERNESS
IN THE WILDERNESS: bagwaj pc
WILL
WILL: will future!desiderative verb prefix wii-
pvl
WILLOW
WILLOW: oziisigobimizh, -iig na
WILLOW BASKET
WILLOW BASKET: oziisigobimizhii-makak,
-oon ni
WIN
WIN: gabenaage vai; mizhodam vai2
WIN IN A GAME: win from s.o. in a game
gabenaw vta
WIN OVER: win over s.o. bakinaw vta; win
over people bakinaage vai
WIND
WIND: there is a wind noodin vii
COLD WIND: be a cold wind dakaanimad vii
COME AS WIND FROM A CERTAIN
PLACE: come as wind from a certain
direction ondaanimad vii
COOLED BY THE WIND: be cooled by the
wind dakaashi vai; dakaasin vii
CREAK IN THE WIND: giziibweweyaashi
vai; giziibweweyaasin vii
EAST WIND: waabani-noodin ni
FAVORABLE WIND: there is a favorable
wind minwaanrmad vii
HOT WIND: be a hot wind gizhaanimad vii
NORTH WIND: giiwedin ni
SOUTH WIND: zhaawani-noodin ni
WIND BLOWS FAST: gizhiiyaanimad vii
WIND BLOWS WILDLY: aanimad vii
WIND COMES FROM A CERTAIN
DIRECTION: ondin vii
WIND COMES IN HARD: bagamaanimad
v n
WIND DIES DOWN: boonaanimad vii;
ishkwaayaanimad vii
ni

285
wind—wolf
WIND HAS A CERTAIN SPEED: the wind
has a certain speed apiitaanimad vii
WIND LETS UP: boonaanimad vii
WIND PICKS UP: maadaanimad vii
WIND SHIFTS: gwekaanimad vii
WINDIGO
WINDIGO: be a windigo wiindigoowi vai;
windigo: winter cannibal monster
wiindigoo, -g na
WINDLESS
WINDLESS: be windless awibaa,
awibaamagad vii
WINDOW
WINDOW: waasechigan, -an ni
LOOK THROUGH A WINDOW: dapaabi
vai; look through a window at s.o.
dapaabam vta; look through a window at
s.t. dapaabandan vii
WINDOW GLASS
WINDOW GLASS: waasechiganaabik, -oon
ni
WINDOW PANE
WINDOW PANE: waasechiganaabik, -oon ni
WINDOW SHADE
WINDOW SHADE: gibiiga'iganiigin, -oon ni
WINDY
WINDY: be windy noodin vii
VERY WINDY: be very windy gichi-noodin
vii
WINE
WINE: zhoominaaboo ni, also
zhawiminaaboo
WING
WING: my wing niningwiigan, -an
/-ningwiigan-/ nid
SHAKE WINGS: shake one's wings
bapawaangeni vai
WINK
WINK: jiibiingweni vai; wink at s.o.
jiibiingwetaw vta; jiichiibiingwetaw vta
WINNEBAGO
WINNEBAGO: wiinibiigoo, -g na
WINNOW
WINNOW: winnow s.t. (e.g., wild rice)
nooshkaatoon vti2; winnow things (e.g.,
wild rice) niooshkaachige vai
WINNOWED
WINNOWED: be winnowed
nooshkaachigaade,
nooshkaachigaademagad vii
WINNOWING TRAY
WINNOWING TRAY: nooshkaachinaagan,
-an ni
WINTER
WINTER: be a winter (year) biboonagad vii;
be winter biboon vii
LAST WINTER: biboonong/.c
LATE WINTER: be late winter giiwe-biboon
vii
SPEND THE WINTER: spend the winter
somewhere biboonishi vai
WINTER BEFORE LAST: awas-biboonong
PC
WIPE
WIPE: wipe s.o. by hand giziin vta; wipe s.t.
by hand giziinan vti
WIPE AFTER DEFECATING: wipe oneself
after defecating giziindime'o vai
WIPE DISHES: gaasiinaagane vai
WIPE FACE: wipe one's face with something
giziingwe'o vai
WIPE HANDS: wipe one's hands gaasiininjii
vai
WIPE MOUTH: wipe one's mouth
gaasiidoone'o vai
WIPE USING SOMETHING: wipe s.o. using
something gaasii' /gaasii'w-/ vta; wipe s.t.
using something gaasii*an vti; wipe things
using something gaasii'ige vai
WIRE
WIRE: biiwaabikoons, -an ni
SNARE WIRE: agoodwaaganeyaab, -iin ni;
nagwaaganeyaab, -iin ni
WISE
WISE: be wise nibwaakaa vai
WISH
WISH: bagosendam vai2; wish for s.o.
agaawaazh /agaawaaN-/ vta; wish for s.t.
agaawaadan vti; bagosendan vti; wish of
s.o. bagosenim vta
I WISH THAT: I wish that... apegish pc, also
ambegish*, ambesh*
WITH
WITH: w\\\\- pv4; be with s.o. wiij'ayaaw vta,
also wiiji-ayaaw
DANCE WITH: dance with s.o.
wiijishimotaw vta
EAT WITH: eat with s.o. wiidoopam vta; eat
with people wiidoopange vai
GO WITH: go with s.o. wiijiiw vta; go with
people wiijii'iwe vai; they go with each
other wiijiindiwag /wiijiindi-/ vai
IN A PLACE WITH: dago- pv4
PLAY WITH: play with s.o. wiiji' vta
SHARE COVER WITH: share a cover with
s.o. wiidagwazhem vta
SIT WITH: sit with s.o. wiidabim vta
SLEEP WITH: sleep with s.o. wiipem ma;
sleep with s.t. wiipendan vti; they sleep
with each other wiipendiwag /wiipendi-/
vai
SLEEP WITH CHILDREN PROTECTIVE-
LY: wiipemaawaso vai
STAY WITH: stay with s.o. wiij'ayaaw vta,
also wiiji-ayaaw
WALK WITH: walk with s.o. wiidosem vta
WORK WITH: work with s.o. wiidanokiim
vta; wiij'anokiim vta, also wiiji-anokiim
WITHOUT
WITHOUT A DOUBT: aapidegpc
WITHOUT PURPOSE: anishaapi
WITHOUT RESULT: aano- pvl
WITNESS
WITNESS: be a witness waabange vai
WOLF
WOLF: ma'iingan, -ag na

wolf hide—worthless
286
WOLF HIDE
WOLF HIDE: ma'iinganiwayaan, -ag na
WOLVERINE
WOLVERINE: gwiingwa'aage, -g na
WOMAN
WOMAN: ikwe, -wag na; be a woman ikwewi
vai
DAKOTA WOMAN: bwaanikwe, -g na
DRESSED-UP WOMAN: zazegaa-ikwe,
-wag na
INDIAN WOMAN: anishinaabekwe, -g na;
be an Indian woman anishinaabekwewi
vai
OJIBWE WOMAN: ojibwekwe. -g na
OLD WOMAN: mindimooyenh, -yag na; be
an old woman mindimooyenyiwi vai
UNMARRIED WOMAN: moozhikwe, -g na
YOUNG WOMAN: oshkiniigikwe. -g na; be
a young woman oshkiniigikwewi vai
WOMEN'S DANCE
WOMEN'S DANCE: ikwe-niitni'idiwin, -an
ni
DANCE THE WOMEN'S DANCE: ikwe-
niimi vai; they dance the women's dance
ikwe-niimi'idiwag /ikwe-niimi'idi-/ vai
WONDER
WONDER: wonder at s.o. maamakaadenim
vta; wonder at s.t. maamakaadendan vti
I WONDER HOW: I wonder how dubitative
amanj pc, also amanj iidog, namanj*,
namanj iidog*
I WONDER WHAT: I wonder what inanimate
dubitative wegodogwen, -an pr
I WONDER WHEN: I wonder when dubitative
amanj apii pc
I WONDER WHERE: I wonder where
dubitative dibi pc
I WONDER WHO: I wonder who animate
dubitative awegwen, -agpr
WOOD
DRY WOOD: mishiiwaatig, -oon ni
PIECE OF WOOD: mitig, -oon ni
PUT WOOD ON THE FIRE: bagidinise vai
UNDERWOOD: under wood (e.g., a tree or
stick) anaamaatig pc
WOOD TICK
WOOD TICK: ezigaa, -g na
WOODCHUCK
WOODCHUCK: akakojiish, -ag na
WOODPECKER
WOODPECKER: baapaase, -g na
RED-HEADED WOODPECKER: meme, -g
na
WOODS
BEYOND THE WOODS: awasaakwaapc
COME OUT OF THE WOODS:
bapaakwa'am vai2
DENSE WOODS: be dense woods
zagaakwaa, zagaakwaamagad vii
GO INTO THE WOODS: jekaakwa'am vai2
IN THE WOODS: megwaayaak pc;
noopimingpc
MIDDLE OF THE WOODS: in the middle of
the woods naawaakwaa pc
NEAR WOODS: near the woods jiigaakwaa pc
OVER ACROSS THE WOODS: awasaakwaa
pc
WOODS GO A CERTAIN DISTANCE:
akwaakwaa, akwaakwaamagad vii
WORD
WORD: ikidowin, -an ni
WORK
WORK: anokii vai; anokiiwin, -an ni; work at
s.o. anokaazh /anokaaN-/ vta; work at s.t.
anokaadan vti; work for s.o. anokiitaw
vta; work for oneself anokiitaazo vai; work
for people anokiitaage vai
ABLE TO WORK: be able to work
gashkanokii vai
FINISH WORK: giizhiitaa vai
KEPT BUSY IN WORK: be kept busy in
work ondamanokii vai
LOOK FOR WORK: nanda-anokii vai
MAKE WORK: make s.o. work anokii' vta
PRETEND TO WORK: anokiikaazo vai
START TO WORK: maadanoki vai; start to
work on s.o. maadanokaazh
/maadanokaaN-/ vta; maajiikaw vta; start
to work on s.t. maadanokaadan vti;
maajiikan vti
WORK A CERTAIN WAY: inanokii vai
WORK IN A CERTAIN PLACE: dananokii
vai
WORK ON: work on s.o. dazhiikaw vta; work
on s.t. dazhiikan vti
WORK UNTIL DAWN: waabananokii vai
WORK WITH: work with s.o. wiidanokiim
vta; wiij'anokiim vta, also wiiji-anokiim
WORK WITHOUT STOPPING:
aabidanokii vai
WORKED
SOMETHING WORKED ON: anokaajigan,
-an ni
WORKED ON: be worked on dazhiikigaade,
dazhiikigaademagad vii
WORKER
WORKER: anokiiwinini, -wag na; worker
(female) anokiiwikwe, -g na
GOOD WORKER: be a good worker
gotaamigozi vai
WORKSHOP
WORKSHOP: anokiiwigamig, -oon ni
WORLD
ALL OVER THE WORLD: miziwekamigpc
WORM
WORM: moose, -g na
WORRIED
WORRIED: be worried ondamendam vai2
WORRY
WORRY: babaamendam vai2;
biingeyendam vai2; worry about s.o.
babaamenim vta; ondamenim vta; worry
about s.t. babaamendan vti;
ondamendan vti
WORTHLESS
WORTHLESS: be worthless goopadizi vai

28T
worthless—written
CONSIDER WORTHLESS: consider s.o.
worthless goopadenim vta; consider s.t.
worthless goopadendan vti
WOULD
WOULD: would modal daa- pvl
WOUND
SHOOT AND WOUND: shoot and wound
s.o. maakinaw vta
WRAP
WRAP: wrap s.o. (as or as with something
sheet-like) wiiwegin vta; wrap s.t. (as or as
with something sheet-like) wiiweginan vti
WRAP AND TIE IN A BUNDLE: wrap and
tie s.o. in a bundle gashkibizh
/gashkibiN-/ vta; wrap and tie s.t. in a
bundle gashkibidoon vti2; wrap and tie
things in bundle gashkibijige vai
WRAPPED
WRAPPED AND TIED IN A BUNDLE: be
wrapped and tied in a bundle gashkibide,
gashkibidemagad vii; gashkibijigaade,
gashkibijigaademagad vii;
gashkibijigaazo vai
WRAPPED UP WARM: be wrapped up warm
giizhoopizo vai
WREN
WREN: anaamisagadaweshiinh, -yag na
WRENCH
WRENCH: biimiskwa'igan, -an ni
WRESTLE
WRESTLE: they wrestle each other
gagwejiiwaanidiwag /gagwejiiwaanidi-/
vai; wrestle s.o. gagwejiiwaazh
/gagwejiiwaaN-/ vta
WRESTLER
WRESTLER: gagwejiiwaazoowinini, -wag na
WRING
WRING: wring s.o. ziinibizh /ziinibiN-/ vta;
wring s.t. ziinibidoon vti2
WRING NECK: wring s.o.'s neck
bookogwebizh /bookogwebiN-/ vta
WRINKLE
WRINKLE: wrinkle up oziigishkaa vai;
oziigishkaa, oziigishkaamagad vii
WRINKLED
WRINKLED: be wrinkled oziigaa,
oziigaamagad vii; oziigizi vai
WRINKLED FACE: have a wrinkled face
oziigiingwe vai
WRITE
WRITE: ozhibii'ige vai; write s.t. ozhibii'an
vti; write (s.t.) for s.o. ozhibii'amaw vta
MAKE A MISTAKE WRITING: wanibii'ige
vai; make a mistake writing s.t. wanibii'an
vti
WRITE A CERTAIN WAY: write s.t. a cer-
tain way izhibii'an vti; write things a cer-
tain way izhibii'ige vai
WRITE A LETTER: maajiibii'ige vai; write a
letter to s.o. maajiibii'amaw vta
WRITE ALL OVER: miziwebii'ige vai; write
s.t. all over miziwebii'an vti
WRITE BACK: write (s.t.) back to s.o.
nakwebii'amaw vta; they write back to
each other nakwebii'amaadiwag
/nakwebii'amaadi-/ vai
WRITE CORRECTLY: gwayakobii'ige vai;
write s.t. correctly gwayakobii'an vti
WRITE DOWN: write s.o. down ozhibii'
/ozhibii'w-/ vta; write s.t. down ozhibii'an
vti
WRITE HERE: biijibii'ige vai; write (s.t.) here
to s.o. inverse forms of: biijibii'amaw- vta
WRITE IN ENGLISH:
zhaaganaashiiwibii'ige vai; write in Eng-
lish to s.o. zhaaganaashiiwibii'amaw vta;
write s.t. in English zhaaganaashiiwibii'an
vti
WRITE IN INDIAN: write in Indian (Ojibwe)
anishinaabewibii'ige vai; write s.t. in Indi-
an (Ojibwe) anishinaabewibii'an vti; write
s.t. in Indian (Ojibwe) (e.g., a book)
anishinaabewisidoon vti2; write (s.t.) in
Indian (Ojibwe) to s.o.
anishinaabewibii'amaw vta
WRITE IN OJIBWE: write in Indian (Ojibwe)
anishinaabewibii'ige vai; write s.t. in
Indian (Ojibwe) anishinaabewibii'an vti;
write s.t. in Indian (Ojibwe) (e.g., a book)
anishinaabewisidoon vti2; write s.t. in
Ojibwe ojibwewibii'an vti; write (s.t.) in
Indian (Ojibwe) to s.o.
anishinaabewibii'amaw vta; write things
in Ojibwe ojibwewibii'ige vai
WRITE NUMBERS: asigibii'ige vai
WRITE ON: write on something apibii'ige vai
WRITE OVER: write s.t. over aanjibii'an vti
WRITING
INDIAN WRITING: Indian (Ojibwe) writing
anishinaabewibii'igan, -an ni
OJIBWE WRITING: Indian (Ojibwe) writing
anishinaabewibii'igan, -an ni
WRITING SURFACE: apibii'igan, -an ni
WRITTEN
WRITTEN: be written ozhibii'igaade,
ozhibii'igaademagad vii
SOMETHING WRITTEN: ozhibii'igan, -an
ni
SOMETHING WRITTEN IN INDIAN:
something written in Indian (Ojibwe)
anishinaabewibii'igan, -an ni
WRITTEN A CERTAIN WAY: be written a
certain way izhibii'igaade,
izhibii'igaademagad vii; izhisin vii
WRITTEN IN INDIAN: be written in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewibii'igaade,
anishinaabewibii'igaademagad vii; be
written in Indian (Ojibwe) (e.g., a book or
document) anishinaabewisin vii
WRITTEN IN OJIBWE: be written in Indian
(Ojibwe) anishinaabewibii'igaade,
anishinaabewibii'igaademagad vii; be
written in Indian (Ojibwe) (e.g., a book or
document) anishinaabewisin vii; be
written in Ojibwe ojibwewibii'igaade,
ojibwewibii'igaademagad vii; be written
in Ojibwe (e.g., a book) ojibwewisin vii

written—zip
288
WRITTEN ON ALL OVER: be written on all
over miziwebii'igaade,
miziwebii'igaademagad vii
WRONG
GO WRONG: have things go wrong maazhise
vai
MAKE WRONG: make s.o. wrong maanaaji'
vta; make s.t. wrong maanaajitoon vti2
TAKE WRONG ONE: take s.o. who/that is
the wrong one wanin vta; take s.t. that is
the wrong one waninan vti
TOUCH WRONG ONE: touch s.o. who/that
is the wrong one wanin vta; touch s.t. that
is the wrong one waninan vti
X
X-RAY
GET X-RAY: get an x-ray zhaabwaakizo vai
X-RAY PLATE
X-RAY PLATE: zhaabwaakizigan, -an ni
Y
YARDSTICK
YARDSTICK: diba'aatigwaan, -an ni
YARN
YARN: miskogaadeyaab, -iin ni
BALL OF TWINE OR YARN: bikoojaan, -an
ni
YAWN
YAWN: naanibaayawe vai
YEAR
YEAR: gikinoonowin ni
CERTAIN NUMBER OF YEARS: a certain
number of years daso-biboon pc; daso-
gikinoonowin pc; be a certain number of
years daso-biboonagad vii
CERTAIN NUMBER OF YEARS OLD: be a
certain number of years old daso-
biboonagizi vai
YEAR PASSES: a year passes biboonagad vii;
gikinoonowagad vii
YELLOW
YELLOW: ozaawi- pv4; be yellow ozaawaa,
ozaawaamagad vii; ozaawizi vai; be
yellow (as something mineral)
ozaawaabikad vii; ozaawaabikizi vai; be
yellow (as something sheet-like)
ozaawegad vii; ozaawegizi vai; be yellow
(as something stick- or wood-like)
ozaawaakozi vai; ozaawaakwad vii; be
yellow (as something string-like)
ozaawaabiigad vii; ozaawaabiigizi vai
COLORED YELLOW: be colored yellow
ozaawaande, ozaawaandemagad vii;
ozaawaanzo vai
WEAR YELLOW: ozaawi'o vai
YELLOW BIRCH
YELLOW BIRCH: wiinizik, -oog na
YELLOW-SHAFTED FLICKER
YELLOW-SHAFTED FLICKER:
mooningwane, -g na
YES
YES: en* pc; enyan'pCj also en', eya'; mii
nange pc
YES-NO QUESTION
YES-NO QUESTION: yes-no question word ina
pc, also na
YESTERDAY
YESTERDAY: bijiinaago/n
DAY BEFORE YESTERDAY: awasonaago
pc
YET
YET: geyaabi pc
NOT YET: gaa mashi pc, also gaawiin mashi
YOU
YOU: you second person singular personal pro-
noun giin pr; you second person plural per-
sonalpronoun giinawaapr
YOU BET
YOU BET: sure! you bet! enange pc
YOU SEE
YOU SEE: aaniish naapc
YOUNG
YOUNG: oshki- pv4; be young oshkaya'aawi
vai, also oshki-aya'aawi; oshkayi'iiwan vii;
oshki-bimaadizi vai; oshkiniigi vai
LOOK YOUNG: oshkiinaagozi vai
PROTECT YOUNG: protect one's young
gizhaawaso vai
SOMEONE YOUNG: oshkaya'aa, -g na, also
oshki-aya'aa
SOMETHING YOUNG: oshkayi'ii, -n ni, also
oshki-ayi'ii
YOUNG MAN
YOUNG MAN: oshki-inini, -wag na;
oshkinawe, -g na; be a young man
oshkinawewi vai
YOUNG WOMAN
YOUNG WOMAN: oshkiniigikwe, -g na; be
a young woman oshkiniigikwewi vai
YOUNGEST
YOUNGEST CHILD: ishkwejaagan, -ag na
z
ZIP
ZIP UP: zip oneself up giboobinidizo vai

