NUNC  COCNOSCO  EX  PARTE 


TRENT  UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/natickdictionaryOOOOtrum 


SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION 

BUREAU  OP  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY:  J.  W.  POWELL,  DIRECTOR 

BULLETIN  25 


NATICK  DICTIONARY 

BY 


JAMES  HAMMOND  TRUMBULL 


WASHINGTON 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE 

19  03 


CONTENTS 


Page. 

Announcement .  v 

Introduction,  by  Edward  Everett  Hale .  ix 

Abbreviations . 1 . - . .  iv 

Natick-English  vocabulary .  1 

English-Natick  vocabulary . . . 217 

Additions  and  corrections  .  349 

in 


85149 


ANNOUNCEMENT 


In  1877  the  United  States  Geographical  and  Geological  Survey  of 
the  Rocky  Mountain  Region  (J.  W.  Powell.  Director)  began  the  issue  of 
a  series  of  ethnologic  reports  in  quarto  form  under  the  title  Contri¬ 
butions  to  North  American  Ethnology.  Several  of  the  volumes  were 
printed  under  special  authority  conferred  by  Congressional  resolu¬ 
tions:  and  in  March,  1881,  the  publication  of  volumes  vi,  yii,  vin, 
ix,  and  x  of  the  series  was  authorized  bv  the  Congress  through  a 
concurrent  resolution.  This  authorization  was  superseded  by  the  law 
providing  for  the  public  printing  and  binding  and  the  distribution  of 
public  documents,  approved  January  12,  1895.  Up  to  this  time  there 
had  been  published  eight  volumes  of  Contributions  (including  one 
bound  in  two  parts),  numbered  i-vii  and  ix. 

After  the  United  States  Geographical  and  Geological  Survey  of  the 
Rockv  Mountain  Region  was  merged  in  the  United  States  Geological 
Survey,  the  Congress  made  provision  for  continuing  the  ethnologic 
researches  and  publications;  and  in  conformity  with  this  law  the  Bureau 
of  Ethnology  was  founded.  The  Director  of  the  new  Bureau  (J.  W. 
Powell)  began  the  publication  of  annual  reports  in  royal  octavo  form 
with  that  for  the  fiscal  year  1879-80,  and  at  the  same  time  continued  the 
issue  of  the  Contributions  to  North  American  Ethnology.  Until  1895 
the  annual  reports  were  specially  authorized  by  the  Congress,  usually 
through  concurrent  resolutions;  since  1895  they  have  been  issued  under 
authority  of  the  public  printing  law.  Of  these  reports  nineteen  have 
been  published  and  others  are  in  press;  the  Fourteenth,  Seventeeth, 
Eighteenth,  and  Nineteenth  are  each  in  two  parts  or  volumes. 

In  August,  1886,  the  Director  of  the  Bureau  was  authorized  by  a 
joint  resolution  of  the  Congress  to  begin  the  publication  of  a  series  of 
bulletins,  which  were  issued  in  octavo  form;  and  in  July,  188S,  the 
continuation  of  the  series  was  authorized  by  a  concurrent  resolution. 
When  the  public  printing  law  was  drafted  this  series  was  omitted,  and 
the  issue  terminated  in  1894.  Up  to  this  time  there  had  been  published 
twenty-four  bulletins,  each  under  a  special  title. 


VI 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


In  the  law  making-  appropriation  for  the  ethnologic  work,  approved 
June  4,  1897,  the  title  was  changed  to  ‘’American  Ethnology";  the 
designation  of  the  Bureau  was  modified  conformal >lv,  and  the  Sixteenth 
report  (for  1894-95,  issued  in  1897)  and  those  of  later  date  bear  the 
modified  title.  From  1895  to  1900  but  a  single  series  was  issued  by 
the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  viz,  the  annual  reports. 

In  1900  the  Congress  authorized  the  resumption  of  publication  in 
bulletin  form  by  a  concurrent  resolution,  adopted  by  the  Housh  of 
Representatives  on  April  7  and  by  the  Senate  on  April  27.  This 
resolution  is  as  follows: 

Resolved  by  the  House  of  Representatives  ( the  Senate  concurring),  That  there  be  printed 
at  the  Government  Printing  Office  eight  thousand  copies  of  any  matter  furnished  by 
the  Director  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  relating  to  researches  and  discov¬ 
eries  connected  with  the  study  of  the  American  aborigines,  the  same  to  be  issued  as 
bulletins  uniform  with  the  annual  reports,  one  thousand  five  hundred  of  which  shall 
be  for  the  use  of  the  Senate,  three  thousand  for  the  use  of  the  House  of  Representatives, 
and  three  thousand  five  hundred  for  distribution  by  the  Bureau. 

Pursuant  to  this  authority  the  manuscript  of  the  late  Dr  J.  H. 
Trumbull’s  Natick -English  and  English-Xatick  Dictionary  was  trails- 
mitted  to  the  Public  Printer  on  May  12.  1900,  with  the  request  that 
the  same  be  printed  and  bound  and  issued  as  a  bulletin  uniform  with 
the  annual  reports  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology.  The  com¬ 
position  was  at  once  taken  up;  but  by  reason  of  the  technical  character 
of  the  matter  and  unforeseen  difficulties  in  proof  reading,  the  issue  of 
this  initial  number  of  the  new  series  has  been  unexpectedly  delayed. 

It  is  a  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  courtesy  of  tine  American  Anti¬ 
quarian  Society  and  of  its  president,  Honorable  Stephen  Salisbury, 
in  intrusting  Dr  Trumbull’s  unique  manuscripts  to  this  Bureau;  and 
it  is  especially  gratifying  to  express  appreciation  of  the  scholarly 
interest  and  aid  of  Dr  Edward  Everett  Hale,  who  not  only  effected 
the  arrangement  for  publication  but  contributed  an  introduction 
to  the  work.  While  this  introduction  was  written  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  the  general  literary  student  rather  than  the  specialist  in 
Indian  languages  and  characteristics,  it  pays  a  just  tribute  to  the  mem¬ 
ory  of  the  eminent  philologist  whose  latest,  and  perhaps  greatest, 
work  was  that  of  compiling  and  comparing  the  acompanying  vocabu¬ 
laries  from  the  Eliot  Bible.  James  Hammond  Trumbull  was  born 
in  Stonington,  Connecticut,  December  20,  1821;  he  was  a  student 
at  Yale,  and  held  important  public  offices  in  Hartford  during  the 
period  1S47-1864.  He  was  an  original  member  of  the  American 
Philological  Association  in  1869,  and  its  president  in  1874  and  1S75; 
a  member  of  the  American  Oriental  Society,  of  the  American  Ethno¬ 
logical  Society,  and  of  several  other  learned  societies,  including  the 
National  Academy  of  Sciences.  In  1873  he  was  chosen  lecturer  on 


ANNOUNCEMENT 


VII 


native  languages  of  North  America  at  Yale  University,  though  failure 
of  health  soon  compelled  his  resignation;  and  from  Yale,  Harvard, 
and  Columbia  he  was  the  recipient  of  degrees  in  recognition  of  notable 
researches  and  publications.  In  addition  to  his  linguistic  knowledge 
he  possessed  great  learning  and  skill  as  a  bibliographer.  During  his 
later  years  he  was  a  valued  correspondent  of  the  Bureau,  and  his  wide 
knowledge  of  both  aboriginal  tongues  and  bibliographic  methods, 
freely  conveyed  to  the  officers  of  the  Bureau,  proved  of  great  service. 
He  died  in  Hartford,  Connecticut,  August  5,  1897. 

Dr  Hale  pays  a  merited  tribute  also  to  John  Eliot,  the  pioneer  stu¬ 
dent  of  aboriginal  languages  in  the  New  England  region,  pointing  out 
that  Eliot  was  not  merely  a  translator  of  the  native  tongues  but  an 
original  investigator  of  their  structure.  Naturally  the  opinions  con¬ 
cerning  the  aborigines  and  their  languag'es  based  on  the  limited  knowl- 
edge  of  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  were  much  less  definite 
than  those  resting  on  the  numerous  records  extant  at  the  beginning  of 
the  nineteenth  century;  }ret  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  early  view  of 
Eliot,  voiced  by  Dr  Hale,  as  to  the  widespread  grammatic  corres¬ 
pondences  among  the  native  tongues,  possesses  a  meaning  well  worth 
the  interest  of  the  pioneer  student  and  his  later  interpreters,  Trumbull 
and  Hale.  The  place  and  date  of  John  Eliot’s  birth  are  not  recorded, 
but  he  was  baptized  in  Widford,  Hertfordshire,  England,  August  5, 
1604.  He  matriculated  at  Cambridge  in  1619,  and  took  a  degree  in 
1622;  he  subsequently  took  orders,  and,  accepting  a  call  to  Roxbury, 
Massachusetts,  emigrated  in  1631.  He  remained  at  Roxbury  in  pas¬ 
toral  work  throughout  the  remainder  of  his  life;  he  died  May  21, 
1690.  As  indicated  by  Dr  Hale,  his  enduring  reputation  rests  chiefly 
on  his  records  of  aboriginal  languages;  yet  it  would  seem  that  he  exer¬ 
cised  a  still  more  important  influence  on  his  own  and  later  generations 
through  his  sympathetic  efforts  to  educate  the  tribesmen  of  New  Eng¬ 
land  and  to  raise  them  toward  the  plane  of  self-respecting  citizenship. 
In  this  work,  too,  he  was  a  pioneer;  and  undoubtedly  he  did  much  to 
prepare  the  minds  of  statesmen  and  philanthropists  for  the  humanita¬ 
rian  views  of  primitive  men  which  characterize  modern  policies  toward 
the  Nation’s  wards.  Thus  it  is  particularly  fitting  that  Eliot,  the  pio¬ 
neer  in  sympathetic  and  systematic  study  of  the  aborigines,  no  less 
than  Trumbull,  the  direct  contributor,  should  receive  from  the  Bureau 
of  American  Ethnology  such  honor  as  this  publication  may  confer. 

As  has  been  noted  by  Dr  Hale,  the  Trumbull  manuscript  and  proof 
passed  through  the  hands  of  Dr  Albert  S.  Gatschct  and  received  the 
benefit  of  his  extended  acquaintance  with  the  native  languages  of  the 
Algonquian  stock.  The  manuscript  was  not,  however,  edited  crit¬ 
ically;  it  was,  on  the  other  hand,  aimed  to  print  the  matter  substan¬ 
tially  as  it  left  the  author’s  hands,  with  only  those  minor  changes  in 


VIII 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


punctuation,  alphabetic  arrangement,  cross  references,  etc.,  which  the 
author  would  necessarily  have  made  had  he  lived  to  revise  the  copy; 
and  a  list  of  abbreviations  was  prepared.  Still,  the  task  of  proof 
revision  proved  arduous,  and  much  credit  is  due  Mr  F.  W.  Hodge, 
who  began,  and  Mr  H.  S.  Wood,  who  completed,  this  work.  Grate¬ 
ful  acknowledgment  is  made  to  Mr  Wilberforce  Fames,  of  the  New 
York  Public  Library,  for  aid  in  interpreting  abbreviations. 

July  10,  1902. 


INTRODUCTION 


By  Edward  Everett  Hale 


Dr  Trumbull’s  vocabularies  constitute  the  most  important  contribu¬ 
tion  to  the  scientific  study  of  Eliot’s  Indian  Bible  which  has  been  made 
since  that  wonderful  book  was  published. 

To  the  preparation  of  these  vocabularies  James  Hammond  Trumbull 
gave  most  of  his  time  throughout  the  closing  years  of  his  diligent  and 
valuable  life.  The  work  was  so  nearly  finished  when  he  died  that,  as 
the  reader  will  see,  it  is  clearly  best  to  print  it  as  he  left  it,  and  to  leave 
it  to  the  careful  students  of  the  future  for  completion  by  such  work  as 
he  has  made  comparatively  easy.  By  her  generous  gift  of  the  beau¬ 
tiful  finished  manuscript  to  the  American  Antiquarian  Society,  his 
widow,  Mrs  Sarah  Robinson  Trumbull,  has  made  its  immediate  pub¬ 
lication  possible.  The  officers  of  the  society  at  once  consulted  Major 
Powell,  the  Director  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  as  to  the 
best  plan  for  its  publication.  The  Bureau  placed  the  manuscript  in 
the  hands  of  Dr  Albert  S.  Gatschet,  of  the  ethnologic  staff;  and  the 
book  has  had  the  great  advantage  of  his  extended  acquaintance  with 
Algonquian  languages  as  it  passed  through  the  press. 

It  is  hoped  that  the  book  will  form  the  first  volume  in  a  series  of 
vocabularies  of  the  native  languages.  Such  a  series,  under  such 
supervision  as  the  Bureau  will  give  to  the  selection  and  editing  of  the 
works  contained  in  it,  will  be  of  great  value  to  students  of  language; 
but  it  will  contain  no  book  more  valuable  in  itself  or  more  interesting 
from  its  history  than  Dr  Trumbull’s  Dictionary. 

Even  in  circles  of  people  who  should  be  better  informed,  we  fre¬ 
quently  hear  it  said  that  the  Bible  of  Eliot  is  now  nothing  but  a  liter¬ 
ary  curiosity,  and  hardly  that.  Such  an  expression  is  unjust  to  Eliot’s 
good  sense,  and  it  is  quite  untrue.  Reverend  J.  A.  Gilfiilan,  whose 
work  of  education  among  the  northern  tribes  is  so  remarkable,  found 
that  his  intelligent  Chippewa  companions  were  greatly  interested  in 
the  Bible  of  Eliot,  and  readily  caught  the  analogies  of  the  language 
with  their  own  when  the  system  of  spelling  and  of  vocalization  was 
explained  to  them. 

With  great  good  sense,  Eliot  used  the  English  letters  with  the 
sounds  which  Englishmen  gave  them.  When  the  American  Home 


IX 


X 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bull.  25 


Missionary  Society  first  undertook  its  translations  of  the  Bible,  it 
adopted,  after  some  question,  the  vowel  pronunciation  of  the  Latin 
nations.  The  wadtchu  (mountain)  of  Eliot  becomes  in  Mr.  Sherman 
Hall’s  translation  uijiuii,  the  one  letter  n  being  the  only  letter  which 
is  the  same  in  both  words;  yet  both  mean  to  express  the  same  sound. 
It  seems  now  a  great  pity  that  the  translators  in  our  century  did  not 
use  in  any  way  the  diligent  work  of  Eliot. 

In  the  spring  of  1899  I  placed  before  a  Chippewa  boy  in  the  Hamp¬ 
ton  (Virginia)  school  thirty  words  of  the  Massachusetts  Indian  lan¬ 
guage.  He  recognized  at  once  fifteen  of  them,  giving  to  them  their 
full  meaning;  and  with  a  little  study  he  made  out  almost  all  of  the 
remainder.  In  the  course  of  two  and  a  half  centuries  the  uses  of 
words  differ  as  much  among  Indians  as  among  white  men,  but  it 
would  seem  that  they  do  not  differ  more. 

Such  careful  study  as  Dr  Trumbull  and  Duponeeau  and  Pickering 
and  Heckewelder  have  given  to  the  Algonquian  languages  shows 
beyond  a  doubt  that  John  Eliot  was  one  of  the  great  philologists  of 
the  world.  His  study  of  the  remarkable  grammatic  construction  of  the 
Indian  languages  proves  to  be  scientific  and  correct.  The  linguists 
of  the  continent  of  Europe  took  it  for  granted,  almost,  that  Eliot’s 
statements  regarding  the  grammar  of  the  Indian  tribes  could  not 
be  true.  It  seemed  to  them  impossible  that  languages  so  perfect  in 
their  systems  and  so  carefully  precise  in  their  adaptations  of  those 
systems  could  maintain  their  integrity  among  tribes  of  savages  who 
had  no  system  of  writing.  All  study  of  these  languages,  however, 
through  the  century  which  has  just  passed,  has  proved  that  the  elab¬ 
orate  system  of  grammar  was  correct!}7  described  by  Eliot,  and,  to  the 
surprise  of  Eux-opean  philologists,  that  it  is  fairly  uniform  through 
many  variations  of  dialect  and  vocabulary. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  a  careless  habit  of  thought  takes  it 
for  granted  that  a  good  Indian  word  of  one  locality  is  a  good  Indian 
word  of  another,  and  that  names  may  be  transferred  from  North  to 
South  or  from  South  to  North  at  the  free  will  of  an  innkeeper  or  of  a 
poet.  Such  transfers  of  words,  which  in  the  beginning  amount  almost 
to  falsehood,  cause  more  confusion  and  more  as  time  goes  by. 

Mr  Filling’s  valuable  bibliography  of  the  Algonquian  languages 
shows  us  that  there  are  now  existing  fourteen  complete  copies  of 
Eliot’s  Bible  in  the  first  and  second  editions.  Besides  the  complete 
text  we  have  the  New  Testament  printed  in  a  separate  volume  in  1001, 
and  in  the  Eliot  Primer  or  Catechism,  which  has  been  reprinted  in  the 
present  generation,  we  have  the  Lord’s  Prayer  and  some  texts  from 
the  Bible,  as  well  as  a  translation  of  the  Apostles’  Creed  into  the 
Massachusetts  language.  The  number  of  books  printed  as  part  of  his 
movement  for  the  translation  of  the  Scriptures  and  the  conversion  of 
the  Indians  is  nearly  forty.  For  the  use  of  all  these  books  Dr  Trum- 


hale] 


INTRODUCTION 


XL 


bull’s  dictionary  will  be  of  the  very  first  value.  Is  it  perhaps  just 
possible  that  the  publication  of  this  book  may  awaken  such  attention 
to  the  subject  that  some  of  Eliot's  lost  manuscripts  may  still  be 
discovered  ? 

Of  Eliot’s  place  as  a  scholar  and  an  educator  Dr  DeNormandie, 
who  now  fills  his  pulpit  in  Roxbury,  speaks  in  the  highest  terms.  It 
would  seem  that  we  owe  to  Eliot  the  establishment  of  the  first  proper 
Sunday  school  in  America,  and  perhaps  one  may  sa}r  in  the  English 
realm.  On  October  6,  167-1,  the  record  of  his  church  says: 

This  day  we  restored  our  primitive  practice  for  the  training  of  our  youth.  First 
our  male  youth,  in  fitting  season,  stay  every  Sabbath  after  the  evening  exercise  in 
the  public  meeting  house,  where  the  elders  will  examine  their  remembrance  that  day 
of  any  lit  poynt  of  catechise.  Secondly,  that  our  female  youth  should  meet  in  one 
place  (on  Monday)  where  the  elders  may  examine  them  on  their  remembrance  of 
yesterday  about  catechise  and  what  else  may  be  convenient. 

“The  care  of  the  lambs,”  says  Eliot,  “is  one-third  part  of  the  charge 
over  the  works  of  God.” 

Dr  DeNormandie  ascribes  to  Eliot  the  general  establishment  of 
“grammar  schools”  among  the  institutions  of  Massachusetts.  He 
says:  “One  day  all  the  neighboring  churches  were  gathered  in  Boston 
to  ‘  consider  how  the  miscarriages  which  were  among  us  might  be  pre¬ 
vented,’  Eliot  exclaimed  with  great  fervor,  ‘Lord,  for  our  schools 
everywhere  among  us!  That  our  schools  may  flourish!  That  every 
member  of  this  assembly  may  go  home  and  procure  a  good  school  to  be 
encouraged  in  the  town  where  he  lives!  That  before  we  die  we  may 
be  so  happy  as  to  see  a  good  school  encouraged  in  every  plantation  in 
the  country!”’  By  “plantation”  Eliot  meant  separate  village. 

Cotton  Mather  says:  “God  so  pleased  his  endeavors  that  Roxbury 
could  not  live  quietly  without  a  free  school  in  the  town.”  Roxbury  was 
the  town  of  which  Eliot  was  the  minister.  “And  the  issue  of  it  has  been 
one  thing  which  has  made  me  almost  put  the  title  of  ‘  Schola  Illustris’’ 
upon  that  little  nursery;  that  is,  that  Roxbury  has  afforded  more 
scholars,  first  for  the  college  and  then  for  the  publick,  than  any  town 
of  its  bigness,  or  if  I  mistake  not,  of  twice  its  bigness,  in  all  New- 
England.” 

John  Eliot  was  quite  willing  to  accept  the  responsibilities  of  making 
laws  and  even  a  constitution  for  his  “  praying  Indians.”  As  he  found 
the  Indian  tribes,  government  among  them  seemed  at  best  absolutely 
minimum;  he  was  unable  to  perceive  that  they  had  any  government. 
Eliot  made  for  them  a  working  constitution  for  a  democracy,  on  prin¬ 
ciples  which  are  so  absolutely  democratic  that  they  frightened  even 
the  Puritan  emigrants  around  him,  the  coadjutors  of  Cromwell  and 
Sidney.  Poor  Eliot  was  even  obliged  to  recall  his  words  in  a  public 
recantation.  The  democratic  constitution  which  he  wrote  for  his 
people  is  well  worth  the  study  of  any  faithful  student  of  government 


XII 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULL.  25 


toda}T.  On  much  the  same  plan  were  his  settlements  founded  where 
the  colonies  of  “praying  Indians,”  with  the  government  of  the  people 
by  the  people  and  for  the  people,  and  with  the  oversight  of  a  benevo¬ 
lent  judge  in  Israel,  were  his  coadjutors  and  pupils.  It  is,  alas, 
impossible  to  tell  what  would  have  been  the  outcome  of  this  remark¬ 
able  experiment,  for  the  outbreak  of  King  Philip’s  war  in  the  year 
1675  broke  it  up  before  it  was  fairly  tested. 

Eliot’s  first  religious  service  among  the  Indians  was  on  Octooer  28, 
1646.  When  King  Philip,  in  1675,  united  the  Indian  tribes  of  New 
England  in  almost  simultaneous  attacks  on  the  English  settlements, 
the  excitement  in  the  seaboard  towns  turned  against  Eliot's  “praying 
Indians,”  and  the  people  suspected — as  on  such  an  occasion  seems 
natural — that  these  converts  were  in  league  with  the  enemy.  So 
strong  was  the  popular  feeling  in  Boston  that  Eliot  was  compelled  to 
remove  his  colony  from  Natick  to  Deer  island,  in  Boston  harbor,  and 
there,  as  exiles  from  their  own  land,  they  spent  the  months  before 
King  Philip’s  power  was  broken.  They  then  went  back  to  Natick, 
where  the  people  celebrated,  on  the  4th  of  July  last,  the  two  hundred 
and  fiftieth  anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  that  village.  There 
seems  to  be  no  one  left  in  that  neighborhood  of  the  descendants  of 
this  colony. 

A  late  and  insufficient  authority  says  that  Natick  means  Place  of 
the  Hills.  The  Dictionary  of  Dr  Trumbull  affords  no  support  for 
this  etymology,  and  it  is  probably  mistaken.  Charles  river,  as  a 
small  stream,  passes  through  the  village.  Captain  John  Smith  gave  to 
it  its  name,  which  was  the  name  of  Prince  Charles,  afterward  King 
Charles.  The  Indian  name  of  this  stream  seems  to  have  been  Quino- 
beguin;  this  would  seem  to  mean  Long  river,  from  the  root  quin, 
it  is  long  (compare  Quinnehtukqut,  the  Connecticut);  or,  quite  as 
probably,  it  means  the  river  which  turns  about,  from  quinuppe, 
around  about  or  all  about. 

South  of  the  Natick  Indians  the  Narragansett  tribe  spoke  a  dialect 
not  very  different  from  theirs,  and  west  of  these  the  Mohegan  tribe 
used  another  dialect  of  the  same  language.  There  is  now  no  Narra¬ 
gansett  Indian  who  remembers  any  words  of  the  language  of  his  fore¬ 
fathers;  Mrs  Mitchell,  who  considered  herself  a  descendant  of  King 
Philip  and  who  did  remember  some  of  the  words  of  his  tribe,  died  in  the 
spring  of  1899.  The  Mashpee  Indians  still  exist  as  a  native  community, 
occupying  the  town  of  Mashpee  on  Cape  Cod.  They  have  taken  on 
all  the  habits  of  civilization;  among  others,  they  preserve  their  own 
trout  brooks  for  the  benefit  of  amateur  sportsmen,  and  rent  them  to 
such  sportsmen  for  considerable  revenue.  They  maintain  free  schools 
as  other  towns  of  Massachusetts  do,  but  in  these  schools  no  word  of 
the  language  of  their  race  is  spoken,  nor  do  any  of  the  Mashpee 
Indians  have  further  knowledge  of  it  than  does  any  other  New 


hale]  INTRODUCTION  XIII 

Englander.  The  Gay  Head  Indians,  on  Marthas  Vineyard,  a  brave 
and  spirited  set  of  men,  retained  a  knowledge  of  their  own  language 
later  perhaps  than  did  any  other  of  the  Indians  of  southern  New 
England,  but  it  has  died  out  among  them.  In  the  eastern  part  of 
Maine,  however,  the  Passamaquoddy  and  Micmac  Indians,  whose 
range  extends  into  the  British  provinces,  still  use  their  dialects  of  the 
Algonquian  stock.  Vocabularies  of  the  related  dialect  spoken  by  the 
Abnakis,  prepared  by  the  faithful  Catholic  minister,  Sebastian  Basies, 
still  exist;  of  these  the  most  important  was  printed  by  the  American 
Academv  as  edited  by  the  distinguished  scholar  Mr  John  Pickering. 

Roxbury,  Mass.,  July  19,  1901. 

£.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 


■ii 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Abn.  =Abnaki. 
act.  =  active. 

Adelung=Adelung,  Johann  Christoph  [and  Vater,  J.  S.].  Mithridates  oder  allge- 
meine  sprachenknnde.  4  vols.  Berlin,  1806-17. 
adj.  =  adjective, 
adv.  =adverb. 

Afgh.  =  Afghan, 
agent.  See  n.  agent. 

Alg.  =Algic  (Algonquian;  in  citations  from  McKenney,  Chippewa);  Algonkin  (the 
Algonkin  or  Xippissing  dialect  of  the  Lake  of  the  TwodVlountains,  near  the 
western  end  of  the  island  of  Montreal);  Algonquian. 
an.  =animate;  animate  object. 

Ang. -Sax.  =  Anglo-Saxon. 

Arab.  =  Arabic. 

Arch.  Amer.=Arch£eologia  Americana.  Transactions  and  collections  of  the  Ameri¬ 
can  Antiquarian  Society.  Vols.  i-iv.  Worcester  and  Cambridge,  1820-60. 
Archer= Archer,  Gabriel.  Relation  of  Captain  Gosnold’s  voyage  to  the  north  part 
of  Virginia,  begun  .  .  .  1602,  etc.  In  Purchas,  Samuel,  His  pilgrimes, 
vol.  iv,  London,  1625;  Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  3,  vol.  vm, 
Boston,  1843. 

AS.  =  Anglo-Saxon. 

Assembly  Catechism.  See  Quinney. 
augrn.  =augmentative. 
auxil.  =auxiliary. 

A.  V.  =  Authorized  version. 

Bancroft = Bancroft,  George.  History  of  the  United  States  from  the  discovery  of  the 
American  continent.  10  vols.  Boston,  1834-1874.  Many  other  editions. 
Bar.,  Baraga = Baraga,  Rev.  Frederic. 

Diet,  (or  simply  Bar. )=A  dictionary  of  the  Otchipwe  language,  explained  in 
English.  Cincinnati,  1853;  Montreal,  1878,  1879  (with  grammar),  1880, 
1882  (with  grammar).  References  are  to  the  edition  of  1853. 

Gr.=A  theoretical  and  practical  grammar  of  the  Otchipwe  language.  Detroit, 
1850;  Montreal,  1878,  1879  (with  dictionary),  1882  (with  dictionary) .  Refer¬ 
ences  are  to  the  edition  of  1850. 

Bartlett=Bartlett,  John  Russell.  Dictionary  of  Americanisms.  A  glossary  of  words 
and  phrases  usually  regarded  as  peculiar  to  the  United  States.  New  York, 
1848.  Several  later  editions. 


Note.  It  has  not  been  possible  to  refer  to  the  source  of  all  quotations,  and  hence  a  few  errors  may 
have  crept  into  the  bibliographic  parts  of  this  list.  All  known  editions  of  important  works  have  been 
cited,  note  being  made  of  the  editions  referred  to  in  the  Dictionary  when  these  are  known. 

XV 


x 


XVI 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULL.  25 


Barton,  Barton’s  Compar.  Voc.  =Barton,  Benjamin  Smith.  New  views  of  the  origin 
of  the  tribes  and  nations  of  America.  Philadelphia,  1797,  1798.  Contains 
comparative  vocabulary  of  a  number  of  Indian  languages. 

Beverley = Beverley,  Robert.  The  history  and  present  state  of  Virginia,  in  four 
parts  .  .  .  III.  The  native  Indians,  their  religion,  laws,  and  customs,  in 
war  and  peace.  London,  1705,  1722;  Richmond,  1855.  References  are  to 
the  second  edition. 

Bloch  =  Bloch,  Mark  Elieser.  Several  works  on  ichthyology,  1782-1801. 

Bonap.  =  Bonaparte,  Charles  Lucien  Jules  Laurent.  American  ornithology.  Phila¬ 
delphia,  1825-33. 

Bopp=B°pp,  Franz.  Comparative  Grammar  of  the  Sanscrit,  Zend,  Greek,  Latin, 
Lithuanian,  Gothic,  German,  and  Sclavonic  languages.  Translated  from 
the  German  [Berlin,  1833-52,  1857-61,  1868-71]  by  E.  B.  Eastwick.  3  vols. 
London,  1845-50,  1856. 

Brebeuf=Brebeuf,  Jean  de.  Relation  de  ce  qui  s’est  passe  dans  le  pays  des  Hurons 
en  l’annee  1636,  With  Le  Jeune,  Paul,  Relation  de  ce  qui  s’est  passe  en  la 
No vvelle  France  en  l’anneel636,  Paris,  1637;  in  Relations  des  Jesuites,  vol.  i, 
Quebec,  1858;  The  Jesuit  relations  and  allied  documents  .  .  .  edited  by 
Reuben  Gold  Thwaites,  vol.  x,  Cleveland,  1897.  The  Quebec  edition  was 
the  one  used. 

C.,  Cott.,  Cotton = Cotton,  Josiah.  Vocabulary  of  the  Massachusetts  (or  Natick) 
Indian  language.  In  Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  3,  vol.  n,  Cam¬ 
bridge,  1830  (edited  by  John  Pickering) ;  issued  separately,  Cambridge,  1829. 

Caldw.  =Caldwell,  Robert.  Comparative  grammar  of  the  Dra vidian  or  South  Indian 
family  of  languages.  London,  1856. 

Camp.  =Campanius,  Johan.  Lutheri  catechismus  ofwersatt  pa  American-Virginiske 
spraket  [followed  by]  Vocabularium  Barbaro-Virgineorum.  Stockholm, 
1696.  The  vocabulary  was  reprinted  with  some  additions  in  Campanius 
Holm,  Thomas,  Kort  beskrifning  om  provincien  Nya  Swerige  uti  America, 
Stockholm,  1702.  The  latter  work  was  transtated  as,  A  short  description 
of  the  province  of  New  Sweden  .  .  .  Translated  .  .  .  By  Peter  S.  Du 
Ponceau,  in  Pennsylvania  Historical  Soc.  Mem.,  vol.  in,  pt.  1,  Philadel¬ 
phia,  1834;  issued  separately,  Philadelphia,  1834. 

Cant.  =  Can  tides  (The  song  of  Solomon). 

Cass=Cass,  Lewis.  Remarks  on  the  condition,  character,  and  languages,  of  the 
North  American  Indians.  From  the  North  American  Review,  no.  i.  [vol. 
xxii],  for  January,  1826. 

Catechismo  Algonchino=Catechismo  dei  missionari  cattolici  in  lingua  aigoncliina, 
pubblicato  per  cura  di  E.  Teza.  Pisa,  1872. 

caus.,  causat.  =causative. 

cf.=confer,  compare. 

Chald.  =Chaldaic,  Chaldee. 

Charlevoix  =Charlevoix,  Pierre  Francois  Xavier  de.  Histoire  et  description  generale 
de  la  Nouvelle  France,  avec  le  journal  historique  d’un  voyage  fait  par  ordre 
du  roi  dans  l’Amerique  Septentrionale.  Paris,  1744;  London,  1761,  1763; 
Dublin,  1766.  There  are  other  editions  not  containing  the  linguistic 
material. 

Chey.  =Cheyenne. 

Chip.  =Chippewa. 

Gr.  Trav.=Grand  Traverse  band. 

Mack.  =Mackinaw  band. 

Sag.  =Saginaw  band. 

St  Marys = St  Marys  band. 

1  Chr.=The  first  book  of  the  chronicles. 


TRUMBULL] 


ABBREVIATIONS 


XVII 


2  Chr.  =The  second  book  of  the  chronicles. 

C.  M.,  C.  Math.,  C.  Mather=Mather,  Cotton. 

Family  religion  excited  and  assisted.  Indian  heading:  Teashshinninneongane 
peantamooonk  wogkouunumun  kah  anunumwontamun.  Boston,  1714. 

Notit.  Ind.=Notitia  Indiarum,  in  India  Christiana.  A  discourse,  delivered  unto 
the  Commissioners,  for  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel  among  the  American 
Indians.  Boston,  1721. 

Wussukwhonk  en  Christianeue  asuh  peantamwae  lndianog,  etc.  Second  title: 
An  epistle  to  the  Christian  Indians,  etc.  Boston,  1700,  1706. 

Col.  =The  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Colossians. 

comp.  =compound. 

compar.  = comparative. 

condit.  =  conditional. 

conj.  =conjunction. 

Conn.  Rec.  =Public  records  of  the  colony  of  Connecticut.  Vols.  i-iii,  1636-89, 
edited  by  J.  H.  Trumbull;  vols.  iv-xv,  1689-1776,  edited  by  C.  J.  Hoadly; 
appendix,  1663-1710.  Hartford,  1850-90. 
constr.  =construet  state, 
contract.  =contracted  form. 

1  Cor.  =The  first  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians. 

2  Cor.  =The  second  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians. 

Cott.,  Cotton.  See  C. 

Cotton,  John.  See  Rawson;  El.  (I.  P. ). 

Cuv.  =Cuvier,  Georges  Leopold  Chretien  Frederic  Hagobert,  Baron.  Several  works 
on  zoology. 

Dan.=The  book  of  the  prophet  Daniel;  Danish. 

Danf.  =Danforth,  Samuel. 

Masukkenukeeg  matcheseaenvog  wequetoog  kah  wuttooanatoog  uppeyaonont 
Christoh  kah  ne  yeuyeu  teanuk,  etc.  Translation:  Greatest  sinners  called  and 
encouraged  to  come  to  Christ,  and  that  now,  quickly,  etc.  Boston,  1698. 

Oggus.  Kutt.  =The  woful  effects  of  drunkenness,  etc.  Address  in  Indian  begins 
on  page  43  with  the  words  “Oggussunash  kuttooonkash.”  Boston,  1710. 

Also  a  manuscript  vocabulary  of  the  Massachusetts  language,  in  the  library  of 
the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  Boston. 

Dawson  =Dawson,  Sir  John  William.  Acadian  geology.  Edinburgh,  1855;  Mon¬ 
treal,  1860;  London,  18C8. 

Del.  =Delaware. 
derog.  =  derogatory. 

Descr.  N.  Netherland,  1671.  See  Montanus. 

Deut.  =Deuteronomy. 

De  Vries= Vries,  David  Pietersz.  de.  Voyages  from  Holland  to  America,  A.  S.  1632 
to  1644.  .  .  Translated  from  the  Dutch  [Hoorn,  1655]  .  .  .  by  Henry  C. 
Murphy.  New  York,  1853;  in  New  York  Historical  Sou.  Coll.,  ser.  2,  vol. 
iii,  pt.  1,  New  York,  1857. 
dict.=dictionary.  See  Bar. ;  Grav. ;  Rasies, 
dimin.  =diminutive. 

Duponceau=Duponceau,  Peter  Stephen. 

Corresp.  See  Hkw. 

Notes  on  El.  Gr.  See  El. 
east.=eastern. 

Eccl.,  Eccles.  =Ecclestiastes. 

Edw.=Edwards,  Jonathan.  Observations  on  the  language  of  the  Muhhekaneew 
[Mohegan]  Indians  .  .  .  Communicated  to  the  Connecticut  Society  of  Arts 
and  Sciences,  and  published  at  the  request  of  the  society.  New  Haven, 


XVIII 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULL.  25 


Edw.  =  Edwards,  Jonathan — continued. 

1788;  London,  1788,  1789;  New  York,  1801;  in  Massachusetts  Historical  Soc. 
Coll.,  ser.  2,  vol.  x,  Boston,  1823  (with  notes  by  Pickering);  in  Works  of 
Jonathan  Edwards,  with  a  memoir  of  his  life  and  character,  by  Edward 
Tryon  (2  vols. ),  Hartford,  1842.  References  are  to  the  edition  of  New 
Haven,  1788,  and  that  in  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections. 

Egyp.  =  Egyptian. 

El.,  Eliot=Eliot,  John. 

Bihle=The  holy  Bible:  containing  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New.  Translated 
into  the  Indian  language,  and  ordered  to  be  printed  by  the  Commissioners 
of  the  United  Colonies  in  New-England,  at  the  charge  and  with  the  consent 
of  the  Corporation  in  England.  Second  title:  Mamusse  wunneetupanatamwe 
up-biblum  God  naneeswe  nukkone  testament  kah  wonk  wusku  testament, 
etc.  Cambridge,  1663  (also  with  Indian  title  only),  1685,  (with  Indian  title 
only).  References  are  to  the  1685  edition. 

Gr.,  Guam.  =The  Indian  grammar  begun :  or,  An  essay  to  bring  the  Indian  lan¬ 
guage  into  rules,  for  the  help  of  such  as  desire  to  learn  the  same,  etc.  Cam¬ 
bridge,  1666;  in  Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  2,  vol.  ix,  Boston, 
1822  (with  notes  by  P.  S.  Duponceau  and  an  introduction  and  supple¬ 
mentary  observations  by  John  Pickering);  issued  separately,  Boston,  1822. 

I.  P.,  Ind.  Prim.  =Indiane  primer  asuh  negonneyeuuk.  Ne  nashpe  mukkiesog 
woh  tauog  wunnamuhkuttee  ogketamunnate  Indiane  unnontoowaonk.  Kah 
Meninnunk  wutch  mukkiesog.  Second  title:  The  Indian  primer;  or  The  first 
book.  By  which  children  may  know  truely  to  read  the  Indian  language. 
And  Milk  for  babes.  Boston,  1720, 1747.  This  is  a  revised  edition,  prob¬ 
ably  by  Experience  Mayhew,  of  Eliot’s  Primer  of  1654  (?),  1662, 1669, 1687(?), 
printed  with  Rawson’s  translation  of  John  Cotton’s  Spiritual  milk  for  babes 
(also  somewhat  revised).  Parts  of  the  edition  of  1720  -were  reprinted  in 
Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  2,  vol.  ii,  Cambridge,  1830. 

Man.  Pom.,  Manit.  Pom.  =Manitowompae  pomantamoonk:  sampwshanau 
Christianoh  uttok  woh  an  pomantog  wussikkitteahonat  God.  Translation: 
Godly  living:  directs  a  Christian  how  he  may  live  to  please  God.  Cam¬ 
bridge,  1665,  1685. 

N.  T.  =The  New  Testament  of  our  lord  and  saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Translated 
into  the  Indian  language,  and  ordered  to  be  printed,  etc.  Second  title:  W usku 
-  wuttestamentum  nul-lordumun  Jesus  Christ  nuppoquoliwussuaeneumun. 
Cambridge,  1661  (also  with  Indian  title  only),  1680  (with  Indian  title  only). 
References  are  to  the  1680  edition. 

S.  Q.,  Samp.  Quin.,  Samp.  Quinnup.  =Sampwutteahae  quinnuppekoinpauaenin 
.  .  .  mache  wussukhumun  ut  English-mane  unnontoowaonk  nashpe  .  ,  . 
Thomas  Shephard,  quinnuppenumun  en  Indiane  unnontoowaonganit  nashpe 
.  .  .  John  Eliot.  Kah  nawhutche  ut  aiyeuongash  oggussemese  ontcheteauun 
nashpe  Grindal  Rawson.  Translation:  The  sincere  convert  .  .  .  written  in 
English  by  .  .  .  Thomas  Shepard,  translated  into  Indian  by  .  .  .  John 
Eliot.  And  in  some  places  a  little  amended  by  Grindal  Rawson.  Cam¬ 
bridge,  1689. 

Also  several  other  translations. 

E.  M.,  Exp.  Mayhew=Mayhew,  Experience. 

Mass.  Ps.  =Massachusee  psalter:  asuh,  Ukkuttoohomaongash  David  weche 
wunnaunchemookaonk  ne  ansukhogup  John,  ut  Indiane  kah  Englishe 
nepatuhquonkash,  etc.  Second  title:  The  Massachuset  psalter:  or,  Psalms  of 
David  with  the  Gospel  according  to  John,  in  columns  of  Indian  and  English, 
etc.  Boston,  1709. 


TRUMBULL] 


ABBREVIATIONS 


XIX 


E.  M.,  Exp.  Mayhew=Mayhew,  Experience — continued. 

Ne  kesukod  Jehovah  kessehtunkup.  Kekuttoohkaonk  papaume  kuhquttum- 
mooonk  kali  nanawehtoonk  ukkesukoduni  Lord,  etc.  Second  title:  The  day 
which  the  Lord  hath  made.  A  discourse  concerning  the  institution  and 
observation  of  the  Lords-day-,  etc.  Boston,  1707. 

A  manuscript  letter  to  Honorable  Paul  Dudley  on  the  Indian  language  of  Con¬ 
necticut  colony,  1722.  Contains  a  translation  of  the  Lord’s  prayer.  When 
E.  M.  alone  is  used  this  letter  is  referred  to.  It  was  printed  in  the  New 
England  Historical  and  Genealogical  Register,  vol.  xxxix,  Boston,  1885 
(communicated  by  John  S.  H.  Fogg,  M.  D.).  Reprinted  as  follows: 

Observations  on  the  Indian  language  .  .  .  Now  published  from  the  original 
ms.  by  John  S.  H.  Fogg,  etc.  Boston,  1884. 

It  is  probable  that  the  Indiane  primer  of  1720  and  1747  (see  EL,  I.  P. )  was 
revised  by  Mayhew. 

Engl. = English. 

Eph.=The  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Ephesians. 

Esth.=The  book  of  Esther. 

Etch.  =Etchemin. 

Eth.,  Ethiop.  =  Ethiopian. 

Ex.  =Exodus. 

Ezek.  =The  l>ook  of  the  prophet  Ezekiel. 

fem.  =  feminine. 

Forbes’  Dahomey = Forbes,  F.  E.  Dahomey  and  the  Dahomans;  two  missions  to 
king  of  Dahomey  in  1848-1850.  2  vols.  London,  1851. 

Force  Tracts=Tracts  and  other  papers  relating  principally  to  the  origin,  settlement, 
and  progress  of  the  colonies  in  North  America,  from  the  discovery  to  the 
year  1776.  Collected  by  Peter  Force.  4  vols.  Washington,  1836—46. 

Fr.  =  French. 

freq.  =frequentative. 

Gal.  =The  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Galatians. 

Gallatin=Gallatin,  Albert. 

A  synopsis  of  the  Indian  tribes  within  the  United  States  east  of  the  Rocky 
mountains,  etc.  In  American  Antiquarian  Soc.  Trans.  (ArcLuelogia  Ameri¬ 
cana),  vol.  n,  Cambridge,  1836. 

Hale’s  Indians  of  north-west  America,  and  vocabularies  of  North  America;  with 
an  introduction.  In  American  Ethnological  Soc.  Trans.,  vol.  n,  New  York, 
1848. 

Gen.  =Genesis. 

gen.  =genitive. 

Gen.  Reg.  =New  England  historical  and  genealogical  register.  Published  under 
the  direction  of  the  New  England  Historic  Genealogical  Society.  Vols. 
i-lvi,  Boston  and  Albany,  1847-1902. 

Gerard’s  Herbal=Gerard,  John.  The  herball,  or  Generali  histone  of  plantes. 
London.  1597,  1633,  1636. 

Germ.  =German. 

Gookin=Gookin,  Daniel. 

Historical  account  of  the  doings  and  sufferings  of  the  Christian  Indians  of  New 
England.  In  American  Antiquarian  Soc.  Trans.  (Archseologia  Americana), 
vol.  ii,  Cambridge,  1836. 

Historical  collections  of  the  Indians  in  New  England.  In  Massachusetts  His¬ 
torical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  1,  voj.  i,  Boston,  1792,  1806. 

Goth.  =Gothic. 

Gr.  =Greek. 

gr.,  gram.  =grammar.  See  Bar.,  El.,  Howse,  MaHl.,  Zeisb.,  and  others. 


XX 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULL.  25 


Grav.,  Gravier=Gravier,  James.  A  manuscript  dictionary  of  the  Illinois  language, 
belonging  to  Dr  Trumbull. 

Hab.  =Habakkuk. 

Hag.=Haggai. 

Harmon= Harmon,  Daniel  Williams.  A  journal  of  voyages  and  travels  in  the  inter- 
iour  of  North  America,  between  the  47th  and  58th  degrees  of  north  latitude, 
extending  from  Montreal  nearly  to  the  Pacific  ocean,  etc.  Andover,  1820. 
Contains  Cree  linguistic  material. 

Hayden  =  Havden,  Francis  Vandever.  Contributions  to  the  ethnography  and  phil¬ 
ology  of  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  Missouri  valley.  In  American  Philosoph¬ 
ical  Soc.  Trans.,  n..  s.,  vol.  xii,  Philadelphia,  1863;  printed  separately,  Phila¬ 
delphia,  1862. 

Heb.  =Hebrew;  The  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Hebrews. 

Hib.  =Hiberno-Celtic. 

Higginson  =  Higginson  (or  Higgeson),  Francis.  New  Englands  plantation;  or,  A 
short  and  true  description  of  the  commodities  and  discommodities  of  that 
country.  London,  1630;  in  Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  1,  vol. 
i,  Boston,  1792,  1806;  Force  Tracts,  vol.  i,  Washington,  1836;  Young,  Alex¬ 
ander,  Chronicles  of  the  first  planters  of  the  colony  of  Massachusetts  bay, 
Boston,  1846. 

Hkw.  =  Heckewelder,  John  Gottlieb  Ernestus. 

Comp.  Voc.=Comparative  vocabulary  of  Algonquin  dialects.  From  Hecke- 
welder’s  manuscripts  in  the  collections  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society, 
Philadelphia.  Printed  for  the  “Alcove  of  American  Native  Languages”  in 
Wellesley  College  library,  by  E.  N.  Horsford.  Cambridge,  1887. 

Corresp.=A  correspondence  between  the  Rev.  John  Heckewelder,  of  Bethle¬ 
hem,  and  Peter  S.  Duponceau,  esq.,  etc.  In  American  Philosophical  Soc., 
Trans,  of  the  Historical  and  Literary  Committee,  vol.  i,  Philadelphia,  1819; 
Pennsylvania  Historical  Soc.  Mem.,  vol.  xii,  Philadelphia,  1876. 

Hist.  Acc.=An  account  of  the  history,  manners,  and  customs  of  the  Indian 
nations,  who  once  inhabited  Pennsylvania  and  the  neighbouring  states.  In 
American  Philosophical  Soc.,  Trans,  of  the  Historical  and  Literary  Com¬ 
mittee,  vol.  i,  Philadelphia,  1819;  printed  separately  Philadelphia,  1818; 
also  in  Pennsylvania  Historical  Soc.  Mem.,  vol.  xii,  Philadelphia,  1876. 

Also  manuscript  vocabularies  of  Chippewa,  Delaware,  Mahicanni,  Nanticoke,  and 
Shawanese  languages,  in  the  library  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society, 
Philadelphia,  and  several  other  works  containing  Delaware  linguistic 
material. 

Hos.  =Hosea. 

PIowse=Howse,  Joseph.  A  grammar  of  the  Cree  language,  with  which  is  combined 
an  analysis  of  the  Chippeway  dialect.  London,  1844,  1865. 

1.,  intr.,  intrans.  =intransitive. 

i.  e.=id  est,  that  is. 

111.,  Illin.  =Illinois. 

MS  Diet.  See  Grav. 

imp.=impersonal. 

imper.,  imperat.  =  imperative. 

inan.=inanimate,  inanimate  object. 

indef.  =indefinite. 

Ind.  Laws,  Indian  Laws=The  hatchets,  to  hew  down  the  tree  of  sin,  which  bears  the 
fruit  of  death.  Or,  The  laws,  by  which  the  magistrates  are  to  punish  offenses, 
among  the  Indians,  as  well  as  among  the  English.  Boston,  1705. 


TR'.’MBULL] 


ABBREVIATIONS 


XXI 


Ind.  Prim.  See  El. 

iafin.  =infinitive. 

in  tens.  =  intensive. 

interj.  =  interjection. 

interrog.  =interrogatfve. 

intr.,  intrans.  See  i. 

introd.  introduction. 

I.  P.  See  El. 

Is.  =The  book  of  the  prophet  Isaiah. 

J. =Jones,  John,  and  Jones,  Peter. 

.Tohn=The  Gospel  according  to  St.  John.  Translated  into  the  Chippeway 
tongue  by  John  Jones,  and  revised  and  corrected  by  Peter  Jones,  Indian 
teachers.  London,  1831;  Boston,  1838  (with  Indian  and  English  title). 

Also  several  other  translations  into  Chippewa  by  both  authors. 

Jeff.  =  Jefferson,  Thomas. 

A  vocabulary  of  the  language  of  the  Unquachog  Indians,  who  constitute  the 
Pusspatoek  settlement  in  the  town  of  Brookhaven,  south  side  of  Long  island. 
Manuscript  in  the  library  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,  Phila¬ 
delphia.  Copy  in  the  library  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology. 

[Vocabulary  of  the  Mohican,  Long  Island,  and  Shawnoe  languages.  ]  In  Gallatin, 
A.,  Synopsis  of  Indian  tribes,  American  Antiquarian  Soc.  Trans.  (Arctneo- 
logia  Americana),  vol.  n,  Cambridge,  1836. 

Several  other  manuscripts  in  the  library  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society. 

Jer.  =The  book  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah. 

John=The  Gospel  according  to  St  John.  For  Chippewa  Bible  quotations  see  J. 

Josh.=The  book  of  Joshua. 

Josselyn=Josselyn,  John. 

Rar.,  N.  E.  Rar.  =New  England’s  rarities  discovered;  in  birds,  beasts,  fishes, 
serpents,  and  plants  of  that  country.  London,  1672;  Boston,  1865;  in 
American  Antiquarian  Soc.  Trans.  ( Archaeologia  Americana),  vol.  iv, 
Boston,  1860. 

Voy.  =  Account  of  two  voyages  to  New  England  [1638,  1663].  London,  1674, 
1675;  Boston,  1865;  in  Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  3,  vol.  m, 
Cambridge,  1833. 

Judd  =  Judd,  Sylvester. 

Gen.  Reg.  =  Article  on  the  fur  trade  on  Connecticut  river,  in  New  England  His¬ 
torical  and  Genealogical  Register,  vol.  xi,  Boston,  1857. 

Hadley,  Hist,  of  Hadley=History  of  Hadley.  Northampton,  1863. 

Judg.  =The  book  of  judges. 

1  K.=The  first  book  of  the  kings. 

2  K.=The  second  book  of  the  kings. 

K.  A.  See  Osunk. 

Keat.,  Keating=  Keating,  William  Hvpolitus.  Narrative  of  an  expedition  to  the 
source  of  St.  Peter’s  river,  etc.  2  vols.  Philadelphia,  1824;  London,  1825. 
Contains  vocabularies  of  Sauk  and  Chippewa  languages. 

L.  =Linne  (or  Linnaeus),  Karl  von.  Several  works  on  botany. 

Lah.,  Lahontan=Lahontan,  Armand  Louis  de  Delondaree,  Baron  de.  New  voyages 
to  North  America,  containing  an  account  of  the  several  nations  of  that  vast 
continent  ...  To  which  is  added,  a  dictionary  of  the  Algonkine  language, 
which  is  generally  spoke  in  North  America.  2  vols.  London,  1703,  1735. 
Various  editions  in  French,  Dutch,  and  German. 

Lam.=The  lamentations  of  Jeremiah. 

Lat.  =  Latin. 


XXII 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULL.  25 


1.  c.,  loc.  cit.  =loco  citato,  in  the  place  cited. 

Lechford  =  Leehford,  Thomas.  Plain  dealing;  or,  News  from  New  England.  London, 
1642;  Boston,  1867  (with  introduction  and  notes  by  J.  H.  Trumbull);  in 
Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  3,  vol.  in,  Cambridge,  1833. 

Le  Jeune=Le  Jeune,  Pb-e  Paul. 

Relation  de  ce  qui  s’est  passe  en  la  Novvelle  France  en  l’annee  1634,  etc.  Paris, 
1635;  in  Relations  de  Jesuites,  vol.  i,  Quebec,  1858;  The  Jesuit  relations  and 
allied  documents  .  .  .  edited  by  Reuben  Gold  Thwaites,  vols.  vii-vm, 
Cleveland,  1897.  Quoted  in  Gallatin,  A.,  Synopsis  of  tribes,  American 
Antiquarian  Soc.  Trans.  ( Archaeologia  Americana),  vol.  n,  Cambridge,  1836. 

Lescarbot=Lescarbot,  Marc.  Histoire  de  la  Nouvelle  France,  etc.  Paris,  1609,  1611, 
1612,  1618,  1866;  London  ( translated  by  P.  E[rondelle] ),  1609,  [1612?]. 

LeSueur=LeSueur,  Charles  Alexander.  Several  works  on  zoology. 

Lev.  = Leviticus. 

Lit.,  Litu.  =Lituanian,  Lithuanian. 

loc.  cit.  See  1.  c. 

Long=Long,  John.  Voyages  and  travels  of  an  Indian  interpreter  and  trader  .  .  . 

To  which  is  added  a  vocabulary  of  the  Chippeway  language  .  .  A  list  of 
words  in  the  Iroquois,  Mohegan,  Shawanee,  and  Esquimeaux  tongues,  and  a 
table,  shewing  the  analogy  between  the  Algonkin  and  Chippeway  languages. 
London,  1791. 

McK.,  McKenney=McKenney,  Thomas  Lorraine.  Sketches  of  a  tour  to  the  lakes  .  .  . 
Also,  a  vocabulary  of  the  Algic,  or  Chippeway  language,  formed  in  part,  and 
as  far  as  it  goes,  upon  the  basis  of  one  furnished  by  the  Hon.  Albert  Gallat  'n. 
Baltimore,  1827. 

Mah.  =Mahicanni,  Mohegan. 

Maill.,  Maillard=Maillard,  Anthony  S. 

Grammar  of  the  Mikmaque  language  of  Nova  Scotia,  edited  from  the  manuscripts 
of  the  Abbe  Maillard  by  the  Rev.  Joseph  M.  Bellenger.  New  York,  1864. 

Also  a  number  of  manuscripts,  preserved  chiefly  in  the  library  of  the  Arch¬ 
bishopric  of  Quebec,  and  several  published  letters  containing  Micmac  words. 

Mal.=Malachi. 

Man.  Pom.,  Manit.  Pom.  See  El. 

Mar.  Vin.  Rec.  =  Manuscript  deeds,  etc.,  in  the  Indian  language  of  Massachusetts, 
formerly  in  possession  of  Reverend  D.  W.  Stevens,  Vineyard  Haven,  Mar¬ 
thas  Vineyard  (?).  Or,  possibly,  manuscript  records  of  Marthas  Vineyard 
in  the  custody  of  the  town  clerk  at  Edgartown,  Massachusetts. 

Martius=Martius,  Karl  Friedrich  Philipp  von.  Beitriige  zur  ethnographie  und 
sprachenkunde  Brasiliens.  Wortersammlung  brasilienischer  sprachen. 
Erlangen,  1863;  Leipzig,  1867. 

Mason=Mason,  Maj.  John.  Brief  history  of  the  Pequot  war.  Boston,  1736;  in 
Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  2,  vol.  vm,  Boston,  1819  (with  an 
introduction  by  Thomas  Prince). 

Mass.  =  Massachusetts. 

Mass.  Hist.  Coll.  See  M.  H.  C. 

Mass.  Ps.,  Mass.  Psalter.  See  E.  M. 

Mather.  See  C.  M. 

Matt.  =The  Gospel  according  to  St  Matthew. 

Mayhew.  See  E.  M. 

Megapolensis=Megapolensis,  Johannes.  A  short  sketch  of  the  Mohawk  Indians  in 
New  Netherland  .  .  .  Revised  from  the  translation  [from  the  Dutch,  Alk- 
maer  [1644?],  and  Amsterdam,  1651  (in  Hartgers,  J.,  Besclirijvinghe  van 
Virginia,  Nieuw  Nederlandt,  Nieuw  Engelandt,  etc.)]  in  [Ebenezer]  Haz- 


TRUMBULL] 


ABBREVIATIONS 


XXIII 


Megapolensis=Megapolensis,  Johannes — continued. 

ard’s  Historical  collections  [Philadelphia,  1792],  with  an  introduction  and 
notes,  by  John  Romeyn  Brodhead.  In  New  York  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser. 
2,  vol.  in,  part  1,  New  York,  1857. 

Menom.  =Menomini. 

Mex.  =  Mexican. 

M.  H.  C.,  Mass.  Hist.  Coll.  ^Collections  of  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society.  Ser. 
1  (1  M.  H.  C. ),  10  vols.,  Boston,  1792-1809.  Ser.  2  (2  M.  H.  C. ),  10  vols., 
Boston,  1814-1823.  Ser.  3  (3  M.  H.  C.),  10  vols.,  Boston  and  Cambridge, 
1825-1849.  Ser.  4  (4  M.  H.  C.),  10  vols.,  Boston,  1852-1871.  Ser.  5,  10 
vols.,  Boston,  1871-1888.  Ser.  6,  10  vols.,  Boston,  1886-1899.  Ser.  7,  vols. 
i— hi,  Boston,  1900-1902. 

Mic.=Micah. 

Micm.  =Micmac. 

Mitch.  =Mitchell,  Samuel  Latham.  Several  works  on  the  fishes  of  New  York. 

mod.  =modern. 

Moh.  =Mohegan. 

Montagn.  =Montagnais. 

Montanus=Montanus  (van  Bergen  or  van  den  Berg),  Arnoldus.  Description  of 
New  Netherland.  1671.  In  Documentary  history  of  the  state  of  New  York, 
arranged  .  .  .  by  E.  B.  O’Callaghan,  vol.  iv,  Albany,  1851  (translated  from 
De  nieuwe  en  onbekende  weereld;  of,  Beschryving  van  America  en’t  Zuid- 
land,  Amsterdam,  1671). 

Morton,  N.  E.  Canaan=Morton,  Thomas.  New  English  Canaan;  or  New  Canaan,  con¬ 
taining  an  abstract  of  New  England.  Composed  in  three  bookes.  Amster¬ 
dam,  1637;  Boston,  1883  (Publications  of  Prince  Society);  in  Force  Tracts, 
vol.  ii,  Washington,  1838. 

MS=manuscript. 

Muh.  =Muhhekaneew,  Mohegan. 

mut.=mutual. 

M.  Y.  Rec.  See  Mar.  Yin.  Rec. 

n=noun. 

n.  agent.,  n.  agentis=nomen  agentis,  noun  (or  name)  of  the  agent. 

Nah.  =Nahum. 

N.  A.  Review=North  American  review.  Vols.  i-clxxv.  Boston  and  New  York, 

1815-1902. 

Narr.  =Narragansett,  or,  in  citations  from  Roger  Williams,  more  properly  Cowweseuck 
or  Cowesit. 

Nash.  Men.  See  Rawson. 

Nav.  Col.  =Navarrete,  Martin  Fernandez  de.  Coleccion  de  los  viages  y  descubri- 
mientos,  que  liicieron  por  mar  los  Espaholes  desde  fines  del  siglo  xv,  etc. 
5  vols.  Madrid,  1825-37. 

neg.,  negat.  =negative. 

Neh.=The  book  of  Nehemiah. 

N.  E.  Plantation.  See  Higginson. 

Nipm.  =Nipmuc. 

Norwood=Norwood,  Col.  Richard.  Voyage  to  Virginia,  1649.  In  Churchill,  Awn- 
sham  and  John,  Collection  of  voyages  and  travels,  London,  1732,  1744,  1746; 
Force  Tracts,  vol.  in,  Washington,  1844;  The  Virginia  Historical  Register, 
vol.  ii,  Richmond,  1849  (abridged). 

Notit  Ind.  See  C.  M. 

N.  T.  =New  Testament.  See  El. 

Num.  =Numbers. 

Nuttall=Nuttall,  Thomas.  The  North  American  sylva.  3  vols.  Philadelphia, 
1842-19. 


XXIV 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


BULL.  25 


N.  Y.  H.  S.  Coll.  =Collections  of  the  New  York  Historical  Society.  Ser.  1,  5  vols., 
New  York,  1811-30.  Ser.  2,  4  vols.,  New  York,  1841-59.  Publication  fund 
ser.,  27  vols.,  New  York,  1868-94. 

Obad.  =Obadiah. 
obj.=object,  objective. 

Oggus.  Kutt.  See  Danf. 

Ojib.  =Ojibwa,  Chippewa. 

Onond.  =Onondaga. 

Osunk.  =Osunkhirhine  (or  Wzokhilain),  Peter  Paul. 

K.  A.  =Wobanaki  kimzowi  awighigan,  P.  P.  Wzokilhain,  kizitokw  [Spelling 
and  reading  book  in  the  Penobscot  dialect  of  the  Abnaki  language,  includ¬ 
ing  a  number  of  vocabularies,  Indian  and  English].  Boston,  1830. 

Also  several  translations  into  Abnaki. 

Palfrey=Palfrey,  John  Gorham.  History  of  New  England  during  the  Stuart 
dynasty.  5  vols.  Boston  and  London,  1859-90. 
part.,  particip. ^participle, 
pass.  =  passive. 

Peq.  =Pequot. 
pers.  =person. 

1  Pet.  =The  first  general  epistle  of  Peter. 

2  Pet.  =  The  second  general  epistle  of  Peter. 

Phil.  =The  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Philippians. 

Philem.=The  epistle  of  Paul  to  Philemon. 

Phil.  Trans.  See  Winth. 

Pickering=Pickering,  John. 

Introd.  to  El.  Gr.  See  El. 

Pier.,  Pierson=Pierson,  Abraham.  Some  helps  for  the  Indians,  shewing  them  how 
to  improve  their  natural  reason,  to  know  the  true  God,  and  the  true  Christian 
religion,  etc.  [Catechism  in  Quiripi],  Cambridge,  1658;  Hartford,  1873 
(from  Connecticut  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  vol.  in;  with  an  introduction  by 
James  Hammond  Trumbull);  in  Connecticut  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  vol.  in, 
Hartford,  1895. 
pi.  =plural. 
poss.  =  possessive. 

Powh.— Powhatan. 

Prayers=  [Sergeant,  Rev.  John.]  A  morning  prayer  [and  a  number  of  other  prayers, 
translated  into  Mohegan],  [Boston?  174-?] 

pres.  =present. 

pret.  =  preterit. 

prog.  =progressive. 

proh.  ,  prohib.  =prohibitory. 

Prov.  =  Proverbs. 

Ps.=The  book  of  psalms. 

Quinney=[Quinney,  John.]  The  Assembly’s  catechism  [in  Mohegan].  Stock- 
bridge,  1795.  Contains  also  a  translation  of  Dr  Watts’  Shorter  catechism  for 
children. 

Quinnip.  =Quinnipiac  (Quiripi). 

Quir.  =  Quiripi. 

q.  v.  =quod  vide,  which  see. 

rad.  =radical,  root. 

Rand  =  Rand,  Silas  Tertius. 

[Vocabulary  of  the  Micmac  language.]  In  Schoolcraft,  Indian  tribes,  vol  v, 
Philadelphia,  1855. 

A  first  reading  book  in  the  Micmac  language,  etc.  Halifax,  1875. 


TRUMBULL] 


ABBREVIATIONS 


XXV 


Iiand=Rand,  Silas  Tertius — continued. 

Also  many  translations  into  Micmac,  and  other  works  containing  Micmac  lin¬ 
guistic  material. 

Rasies  =  Rasies,  Sebastien.  A  dictionary  of  the  Abnaki  language,  in  North  America. 

With  an  introductory  memoir  and  notes  by  John  Pickering.  In  American 
Acad,  of  Sciences  and  Arts,  Memoirs,  new  ser.,  vol.  i,  Cambridge,  1833; 
issued  separately,  Cambridge,  1833. 

Rawson = Rawson,  Grindal. 

Nash.  Men.  =Nashauanittue  maninnunk  wutch  mukkiesog,  wussestimumun 
wutch  sogkodtunganash  naneeswe  testamentsash  .  .  .  Negonae  wussukhu- 
mun  ut  Englishmiinne  unnontoowaonganit  nashpe  .  .  .  John  Cotton.  Kah 
yeuyeu  qushkinnumun  en  Indiane  unnontoowaonganit  .  .  .  nashpe  Grindal 
Rawson.  Translation:  Spiritual  milk  for  babes,  drawn  from  the  breasts  of 
both  Testaments  .  .  .  Formerly  written  in  English,  by  .  .  .  John  Cotton. 
And  now  translated  into  Indian  .  .  .  by  Grindal  Rawson.  Cambridge, 
1691.  Reprinted  in  somewhat  altered  form  in  the  Indiane  primer  of  1720, 
1747  (see  EL,  I.  P.). 

Wun.  Samp.  =  A  confession  of  faith  owned  and  consented  unto  by  the  elders 
and  messengers  of  the  churches  assembled  at  Boston  in  New  England,  May 
12,  1680.  Second  title:  Wunnamptamoe  sampooaonk  wussampoowontamun 
nashpe  moeuwehkomunganash  ut  New-England,  etc.  Boston,  1699. 

See  also  El.,  Samp.  Quin. 

recipr.  =reciprocal. 

redupl.  = reduplicate. 

rel.  = relative. 

Rev.  =The  revelation  ofJSt  John. 

Rev.  Ver.  =Revised  version. 

Rom.=The  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Romans. 

Russ.  =Russian. 

R.  W.,  R.  Williams= Williams,  Roger.  A  key  into  the  language  of  America;  or, 

An  help  to  the  language  of  the  natives  in  that  part  of  America,  called  New- 
England.  London,  1643;  in  Rhode  Island  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  vol.  i,  Provi¬ 
dence,  1827;  issued  separately,  Providence,  1827;  in  Massachusetts  Histor¬ 
ical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  1,  vol.  in,  Boston,  1794,  1810;  and  in  Narragansett  Club 
Publications,  ser.  1,  vol.  i,  Providence,  1866  (edited  by  James  Hammond 
Trumbull).  The  page  references  herein  are  to  the  Rhode  Island  Historical 
Society  edition  (1827). 

1  Sam.  =The  first  book  of  Samuel. 

2  Sam.  =The  second  book  of  Samuel. 

Samp.  Quin.,  Samp.  Quinn  up.  See  El. 

Sansk.  =Sanskrit. 

Sax.  =Saxon. 

Say=Say,  Thomas.  Several  works  on  American  zoology. 

S.  B.  (Chip.  )=  James,  Edwin.  Ojibue  spelling  book.  2  parts.  Boston,  1846.  Ear¬ 

lier  editions  (in  one  volume),  Utica,  1833;  Boston,  1835. 

S.  B.  (Del.).  See  Zeisb. 

sc.  =scilicet,  namely,  to  wit. 

Sch.,  Schoolcraft = Schoolcraft,  Henry  Rowe. 

Ind.  Tribes=Historical  and  statistical  information,  respecting  the  history,  con¬ 
dition,  and  prospects  of  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  United  States,  etc.  6  parts. 
Philadelphia,  1851-1857;  1860;  1884  (partial  reprint;  2  vols. ). 

Also  several  other  works  containing  Indian  (chiefly  Algonquian)  linguistic 
material. 


XXVI 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULL.  25 


Shawn.  =  Shawnee, 
sing.  =singular. 

Smith,  Capt.  J.=Smith,  Captain  John. 

Descr.  N.  England,  1616=A  description  of  New  England;  or,  The  observations 
and  discoveries  of  Captain  John  Smith,  etc.  London,  1616;  Boston,  1865; 
Birmingham,  1884  (in  The  English  scholars  library.  Capt.  John  Smith  .  .  . 
Works.  1608-1631  .  .  .  Edited  by  Edward  Arber);  in  Massachusetts  His¬ 
torical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  3,  vol.  vi,  Boston,  1837;  Force  Tracts,  vol.  n,  Wash¬ 
ington,  1838. 

Virginia,  Hist,  of  Va.  =The  generall  historie  of  Virginia,  New-England,  and  the 
Summer  isles,  etc.  London,  1624,  1626,  1627, 1631,  1632,  1705  (in  Harris,  J., 
Collection  of  voyages,  vol.  i),  1812  (in  Pinkerton,  John,  A  general  collection 
of  voyages  and  travels,  vol.  xiii ) ;  Richmond,  1819  (The  trve  travels  .  .  . 

of  Captaine  John  Smith,  etc.,  vol.  ii)  ;  Birmingham,  1884  (Arber  edition; 
see  above). 

1631=Advertisements  for  the  unexperienced  planters  of  New  England,  etc. 
London,  1631;  Boston,  1865;  Birmingham,  1884  (Arber  edition;  see  above); 
in  Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  3,  vol.  hi,  Boston,  1833. 

Smith,  Fishes  of  Mass.  =Smith,  Jerome  Van  Crowninshield.  Natural  history  of  the 
fishes  of  Massachusetts.  Boston,  1833. 

S.  Q.  See  M. 

St.,  Stiles = Stiles,  Ezra. 

Peq.  =A  vocabulary  of  the  Pequot,  obtained  by  President  Stiles  in  1762  ...  at 
Groton,  Conn.  Manuscript  in  the  library  of  Y ale  University.  Copy  in  the 
library  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology. 

Narr.  =A  manuscript  vocabulary  obtained  from  a  Narragansett  Indian,  Septem¬ 
ber  6,  1769.  In  the  library  of  Yale  University. 

Storer,  Rept.  on  Fishes  of  Mass.  =Storer,  David  Humphreys,  and  Peabody,  William 
Bourne  Oliver.  Report  on  the  fishes,  reptiles,  and  birds  of  Massachusetts. 
Boston,  1839  (Report  of  Commissioners  on  the  Zoological  and  Botanical  Sur¬ 
vey  of  the  State). 

Stour.  Misprint.  See  Storer. 

Strachey=Strachey,  William.  The  historie  of  travaile  into  Virginia  Britannia,  etc. 

London,  printed  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  1849. 
subj.=subject. 
suff.  =suffix,  suffix  form. 

Sum.  =Summerfield,  John.  Sketch  of  grammar  of  the  Chippeway  language,  to 
which  is  added  a  vocabulary  of  some  of  the  most  common  words.  By  John 
Summerfield,  alias  Sahgahjewagahbahweh.  Cazenovia,  1834. 
suppos.  =snppositive. 

Sw.=Swedish. 

s.  v.=sub  voce,  under  the  entry;  also  same  verse. 

Syr.  =Syriac. 

t. ,  trans.  =transitive. 

1  Thess.  =The  first  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians. 

2  Thess.  =The  second  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians. 

1  Tim.=The  first  epistle  of  Paul  to  Timothy. 

2  Tim.=The  second  epistle  of  Paul  to  Timothy. 

Tit.  =The  epistle  of  Paul  to  Titus. 

Tocqueville=Tocqueville,  Alexis  Charles  Henri  Clerel  de.  De  la  democratic  en 
Amerique.  2  v.  Bruxelles,  1835.  Several  other  editions, 
trans.  See  t. 
v.  =verse.  See  also  s.  v. 
v.,  vb.=verb. 


TRUMBULL] 


ABBREVIATIONS 


XXVII 


vbl.=  verbal,  verbal  noun. 

Yespucius= Vespucci,  Amerigo  (Lat.  Vespucius,  Americus). 

Nav.  Col.  =Navarrete,  Martin  Fernandez  de,  Coleecion  de  los  viages  y  descubri- 
mientos,  que  hicieron  por  mar  los  Espanoles  desde  fines  del  siglo  xv.  5 
vols.  Madrid,  1825-37. 

Vineyard  Rec.  See  Mar.  Yin.  Rec. 

Virg.  =  Virginian. 

voc.  =  vocabulary. 

Von  Martius.  See  Martins. 

Watts’  Cat.  See  Quinney. 

Weber=Weber,  Albrecht  Friedrich.  Several  works  on  East  Indian  language  and 
literature. 

Webst.,  Webster = Webster,  Noah.  Dictionary  of  the  English  language.  Many  edi¬ 
tions  and  revisions. 

White= White,  Andrew.  A  relation  of  the  colony  of  the  lord  baron  of  Baltimore,  in 
Maryland,  near  Virginia;  a  narrative  of  the  voyage  to  Maryland,  by  Father 
Andrew  White,  etc.  In  Force  Tracts,  vol.  iv,  Washington,  1846. 

Williams.  See  R.  W. 

Wils.  =  Wilson,  Alexander.  Several  works  on  American  ornithology. 

Winslow,  Relation=W[inslow],  E[dward],  Good  nevves  from  New-England;  or  A 
true  relation  of  things  very  remarkable  at  the  plantation  of  Plimoth,  etc. 
London,  1624;  partly  reprinted  in  Purchas,  Samuel,  His  pilgrimes,  vol.  iv, 
London,  1625;  also  in  Massachusetts  Historical  Soc.  Coll.,  ser.  1,  vol.  vm, 
Boston,  1802,  and  ser.  2,  vol.  ix,  Boston,  1822,  1832,  and  in  Young,  A., 
Chronicles  of  the  Pilgrim  fathers,  Boston,  1841,  1844. 

Winth  =  Winthorp  (=Winthrop)  [Adam?].  The  description,  culture,  and  use  of 
maiz.  In  Philosophical  Transactions,  no.  142,  for  December,  January,  and 
February,  1678  [-79].  London,  1679. 

Wood  (N.  E.  )=Wood,  William.  New  Englands  prospect.  A  true,  lively,  and 
experimentall  description  of  that  part  of  America,  commonly  called  New 
England,  etc.  London,  1634;  1635;  1639;  1764;  Boston,  1865  (in  Publica¬ 
tions  of  Prince  Society). 

Wood  (L.  I.),  S.  Wood=Wood,  Silas.  A  sketch  of  the  first  settlement  of  the  several 
towns  on  Long  island,  with  their  political  condition,  to  the  end  of  the  Amer¬ 
ican  revolution.  Brooklyn,  1824;  1826;  1828;  1865. 

Wun.  Samp.  See  Rawson. 

Zech.  =Zechariah. 

Zeisb.  =Zeisberger,  David. 

Gr.,  Gram.=A  grammar  of  the  language  of  the  Lenni  Lenape  or  Delaware 
Indians.  Translated  from  the  German  manuscript  of  the  author  by  Peter 
Stephen  Du  Ponceau.  With  a  preface  and  notes  by  the  translator.  Pub¬ 
lished  by  order  of  the  American  Philosopnical  Society  in  the  third  volume 
of  the  new  series  of  their  Transactions.  Philadelphia,  1827;  in  American 
Philosophical  Soc.  Trans.,  new  ser.,  vol.  in,  Philadelphia,  1830. 

S.  B.,  Spelling  Book=Essay  of  a  Delaware-Indian  and  English  spelling-book, 
for  the  use  of  the  schools  of  Christian  Indians  on  Muskingum  river.  Phila¬ 
delphia,  1776;  reprinted  with  additions  and  omissions,  Philadelphia,  1806. 

Voc.  =  Vocabularies  by  Zeisberger.  From  the  collection  of  manuscripts  presented 
by  Judge  Lane  to  Harvard  University.  Nos.  1  and  2.  Printed  for  the 
“Alcove  of  American  Native  Languages”  in  Wellesley  College  library,  by 
E.  N.  Horsford.  Cambridge,  1887- 

Also  several  translations  into  Delaware,  and  other  works  containing  Delaware 
linguistic  material. 


N  * 


XXVIII 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[  BULL.  25 


Zeph.  =Zephaniah. 
ig.  =  (Gerin. )  Zigeuner,  Gypsy. 

In  the  Natick-English  part  this  sign  indicates  that  the  words  it  precedes  do  not 
belong  tothe  Natick  dialect  proper.  In  the  English-Natick part  it  apparently 
indicates  that  the  words  it  precedes  represent  ideas  foreign  tothe  aboriginal 
thought.  Its  use  seems  to  have  been  discontinued  soon  after  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  this  part  of  the  dictionary. 


NATICK— EN  GLISH 


/ 


1 


*Abbamocho.  See  *chepy;  *Hobbamoco. 
*abockqu6sin-ash  (Narr. ),  n.  pi.  ‘the 
mats  of  the  house’  (with  which  the 
wigwam  was  covered),  R.  W.  See 
appuhqudm ;  uppohquos. 
abohquas,  n.  a  mouse.  See  mishaboh- 
quas. 

abohquos,  n.  a  covert;  - sokanon,  a 

covert  from  rain,  Is.  4,  6.  See  appuh- 
qudsu;  uppohquos. 

*acawmen  (Narr.),  on  the  other  side  of, 
beyond.  See  ongkome. 

*aehm<Dwonk,  vbl.  n.  news,  C.  See 

aunchemcokau. 

adchaii,  v.  i.  he  hunts,  is  hunting.  Vbl.  n. 
adchdonk,  audchdonk,  hunting,  what  is 
taken  by  hunting,  Prov.  12,  27.  N. 
agent,  adchaen,  a  hunter,  Gen.  10,  9 
( adchden-in ,  a  fowler,  C.).  With  an. 
obj.  adchanau,  he  hunts  (him,  live 
game);  pi.  -andog,  Mic.  7,  2;  suppos. 
achanont,  when  he  hunts,  when  hunt¬ 
ing,  Lev.  17, 13;  inlin.  achanat,  to  hunt, 
C.  From  ahchu,  he  strives  after,  is  dili¬ 
gent  or  active  to  secure. 

[Narr.  auchaui,  he  is  gone  to  hunt 
or  fowl;  n’ tauchdumen,  I  go  a  fowling 
or  hunting.  Cree  ach,  he  is  active, 
diligent.] 

-adchaubuk,  in  comp,  words,  root,  or 
roots.  See  wadchaubuk. 
adchuwompag,  ‘in  the  morning  watch’, 
just  before  light,  Ex.  14,  24;  Judg.  16,  2. 
Suppos.  of  utchuwompan  (it  dawns, 
light  comes),  q.  v. ;  no  pajeh  utchuwom- 
panit,  ‘until  the  day  dawn’,  2  Pet.  1, 19. 
adt,  at,  prep,  in,  at,  to,  El.  Gr.  22 
(sometimes  written  ahhut):  adt  yadt 
naiyag,  upon  the  four  corners,  Ex.  38,  2; 
[ayeuonk]  adt  sepaginit  hashab,  [a  place] 
for  spreading  nets  upon,  Ezek.  26,  14 
(ahhut  sepagenit,  ibid.  47,  10). 

As  a  prefix,  adt  (sometimes  at,  ut,  or 


adt,  at — continued. 

’ t )  is  apparently  related  to  ohtail,  he  has; 
ohteau  (se  habet),  it  is;  ohtAe,  belonging 
to,  or  possessing  (a  quality,  attribute, 
etc.).  So,  in  the  Cree,  according  to 
Howse  (Gr.  21),  oo  prefixed,  or,  before 
a  vowel,  oof,  “shows  that  the  subject 
possesses  the  noun — he  has,  i.  e.,  owns, 
or  possesses  (it),”  as  “assdm,  a  snow- 
shoe;  oot-assdm-u ,  he  has  snowshoes.” 

[Vineyard  Rec.  ta,  tab.'] 
adtahshe  [adt-tahshe],  adv.  as  often  as, 
as  many  as,  Rev.  3,  19;  attmche,  Rev. 
11,  6;  ahhut  tahshe,  2  K.  4,  8;  uttmche, 
1  Cor.  11,  25,  26.  See  tohsu;  uttwche. 

[Narr.  aydtche,  as  often  as.  Cree 
it-tdssu-uk,  they  are  so  many;  he  it-tdse- 
chick,  as  many  as  they  are.  Del.  endchi, 
so  much  as,  as  many;  endchen,  so  often 
as,  Zeisb.] 

adtahtou,  v.  t.  he  hides  (it),  Matt.  25, 18; 
nul-adtahtau-un,  I  hide  it,  Ps.  119,  11; 
Jer.  13,  5;  imper.  2d  pers.  adtalitaush, 
hide  it,  Jer.  13,  4.  This  is  a  caus.  inan. 
form,  from  a  primary  not  found  in 
Eliot.  See*aidah  (Narr. ),  an  apron, = 
adtau,  he  hides.  See  also  adtashau. 

adtannegen,  -nekin,  v.  t.  (inan.  subj.) 
it  brings  forth,  bears,  produces  (as  the 
earth  when  cultivated,  plants,  a  culti¬ 
vated  tree,  fruit,  etc.).  See  tannegen. 
The  prefix  adt  marks  appropriation,  a 
growing,  or  bringing  forth,  to  or  for  an 
owner. 

adtannekitteau,  v.  i.  he  plants  (lays  the 
foundation  of)  his  house;  suppos.  adtan- 
nekitteadt  qussukquanit,  when  he  built 
(founded)  his  house  on  a  rock,  Matt. 

7,  24;  - naguntu, - -  in  the  sand, 

v.  26.  With  inan.  subj.,  adtanehteau, 
uttan-,  the  house  is  planted,  or  founded, 
v.  25.  See  wekitteau. 


3 


4 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin'  25 


adtashaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  hides  (himself,  or 
another),  Jer.  23,  24;  Luke  1,  24;  wut- 
tdttasli-uh,  she  hid  them,  Josh.  2,  4.  See 
adtahtou. 

[Cree  kaht-ow,  he  hides  it;  kdht-tayoo, 
he  hides  him.  Abn.  ne-kandaSan,  ne- 
kan-StaSan,  je  le  lui  cache;  ne-kandSn, 
je  cache  cela.] 

adtoaii,  adtauaii,  attoaii,  v.  t.  he  ac-  : 
quires  possession  of,  makes  his  own;  ' 
(used  by  Eliot  for)  he  buys;  imperat. 
adtdash,  buy  thou  (it),  Jer.  32,  7,  8; 
adtdagk,  buy  ye,  Is.  55,  1;  suppos.  noh 
adtdadt,  .  .  .  noh  maguk,  he  who  buys, 
...  he  who  sells,  Is.  24,  2;  adt  mish- 
dadtik,  ‘of  great  price’,  1  Pet.  3,  4; 
anoadtu  rubisash,  she  is  of  price  above 
[is  worth  more  than]  rubies,  Prov.  31, 
10;  vbl.  n.  adtoaonk,  purchasing,  acquir¬ 
ing,  Jer.  32,  8;  adj.  and  adv.  adtdde,  of 
or  relating  to  purchase,  Jer.  32,  11,  12, 
16.  Cf.  oadtuhkau,  he  pays  (him). 

[Narr.  kut-tattauam-ish  afike,  I  will 
buy  land  of  you.  Abn.  net-atahSd, 
j’aeliete,  jetraite;  net-atahman,  j’achete 
de  lui;  aiaSeSangan,  achat,  traitement. 
Cree  at-dwdyoo  \_ahd-ahwd,  Chip.],  he 
exchanges,  barters,  Howse.  Chip,  ata- 
wenan,  he  sells  (him),  Bar.] 
adtoekit,  suppos.  of  hohtdekin  (?),  she  is 
next  in  growth  (?) ;  noh  adtdekit,  she  who 
comes  next,  a  ‘second  daughter’,  Job 
42,  14.  Cf.  hohtdeu. 

[Abn.  Sdd'kanar,  son  frere  cadet.] 
adtonkqs,  as  n.  a  kinsman,  or  kinswo-  i 
man;  pi.  -sog;  kadtonkqs,  ‘thy  cousin’,  I 
Luke  1,  36;  nu  tonkqs,  ‘my  kinswoman’, 
Prov.  7,4;  ivadtunkqus-oh,  ‘her  cousins’, 
Luke  1,  58;  wadtonkqsin,  a  cousin,  C. 
One  who  is  akin  to  or  in  some  sense 
belongs  to  another.  Cf.  adtdau;  oh- 
tunk;  togquos  (a  twin). 

[Narr.  natoneks,  my  cousin;  ivatoncks, 
a  (his)  cousin;  wat-tonksittuock  (v.  mut. ) 
they  are  cousins.  Abn.  nnadahgSs,  pi. 
-8ssak,  mon  cousin,  seu  le  fils  des  pa¬ 
rents  de  ma  m£re  (dicit  vir  vel  mulier) ; 
nnada hg8seses k8c  [n’ dahgcoses  (dimin.) 
and  squa  (fem.)],  ma  cousine,  la  fille 
du  parent  de  ma  mere  (dicit  vir) ; 
nadahgS,  dit-on  a  la  femme  de  son  frere, 
dit  le  pc  re  au  mari  de  sa  fille,  etc.  Cree 
tdhkoo-mayoo,  he  is  related  to  him. 
Chip,  nindangoshe,  my  mother’s  broth- 


adtonkqs — continued. 

er’s  daughter,  or  my  father’s  sister’s 
daughter  (dicit  mulier).] 
adtuhtag,  suppos.  when  (it  was)  in  order, 

or  seasonable  (?); - wenominneash,  at 

‘the  time  of  grapes’,  Num.  13,  20. 
aetai,  aeetaue,  aeetawe,  ehtai,  adv.  at 
both  sides,  Ezek.  47,  7,  12;  Ex.  25,  19: 

- seep,  on  both  sides  of  the  river, 

Rev.  22,  2;  ehtdi-kenag,  sharp  on  both 
sides,  ‘two-edged’,  Prov.  5,  4. 

[Abn.  eidaSiSi,  ou  dpemaiSi,  au  bout, 
aux  deux  bouts  de  quelque  chose.] 
agkemut,  suppos.  of  ogkemau,  v.  t.  an.  he 
counts.  See  ogkemonat. 
agqueneunkquok,  suppos.  as  n.,  like¬ 
ness,  resemblance,  Deut.  4,  16,  17,  18. 
See  ogquk;  ogqueneunk. 
agquit,  aqut,  suppos.  of  hogkco,  he  is 
covered  or  clothed  with,  he  wears  (as 
clothing) ;  ne  agquit,  ne  dqut,  that  which 
he  wears,  Gen.  37,  23;  1  K.  11,  30. 
Adv.  agwee,  for  wear;  ‘to  put  on’,  Gen. 
28,  20.  See  hogkco. 

agush.au,  v.  t.  he  goes  under  (it) — for 
shelter  or  concealment  is  implied — 
2  Sam.  18,  9;  pi.  agqshaog,  Job  24,  8. 
Cf.  ogkoochin. 
agwe.  See  agwu. 

agwonk,  under  a  tree,  1  Sam.  31,  13. 
From  agwu  and  -unk,  formative.  See 
mehtug. 

agwu,  agwe,  ogwu,  (it  is)  underneath, 
below,  Deut.  33,  27;  Josh.  15,  19;  Ex. 
20,  4.  The  contracted  form  of  ohkeiyeu, 
earthward  (El.  Gr.  21);  ohkeieu,  C. 

[Del.  equiwi,  Zeisb.} 

ahamaquesuuk  (?),  ahamogq  (suppos. 
as  n.),  a  needle,  Mark  10,  25;  Luke  18  - 
25;  ohhomaquesuuk,  C.  Adj.  and  adv. 
-ogquesue,  made  by  the  needle,  of 
needlework,  Judg.  15, 10.  Cf.  aohkeomco. 

[Abn.  tsamakS,  aiguille  pour  faire  des 
nattes  ou  des  raquettes;  tsahkkandi, 
aiguille  f  rangoise.  ] 

ahanehtam,  v.  t.  he  laughs  at  (it).  See 
hahanehtam. 

ahanu,  v.  i.  he  laughs.  See  hahdnu. 
ahaosukqueu.  See  hdsekdeu. 
*a’hawgwut  (Peq.),  a  bear,  Stiles, 
ahcheu.  See  ahchu. 
ahchewontam,  v.  t.  he  is  very  desirous 
of  (it),  covets  (it) ;  ahcheu-antam,  he  is 
earnest-minded;  imper.  2d  pi.  ahche- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


5 


ahchewontam — continued. 
wontamcok,  covet  ye  (the  best  gifts), 
1  Cor.  12,  31;  imperat.  of  prohibition, 
ahchevvntukon,  thou  shalt  not  covet,  or 
‘desire’  it,  Deut.  5,  21;  suppos.  ahche- 
wontog,  he  who  is  covetous;  pi.  -gig,  the 

covetous,  Luke  16,  4.  Ybl.  n. - tam- 

bonk,  coveting,  covetousness,  Hab.  2,  9 
( ahhahchuivonk ,  Man.  Pom.  86).  Cot¬ 
ton  has  nut-ahchuueekteom  (?) ,  I  pro¬ 
cure;  nuttahchuehteo,  I  get  (?) . 
ahchu,  ahcheu,  v.  i.  he  is  diligent, 
makes  effort,  exerts  himself  (cf.  acl- 
chai'i,  he  hunts).  Used  by  Eliot  only 
as  an  adverb,  in  the  sense  of  diligently, 
earnestly,  exceedingly,  very  much,  etc. : 
ahchu  anakamuog,  they  ‘  had  a  mind  to 
work’  (worked  ‘witha  will’) , Neh. 4,  6; 
ahchue  taphekon  (prohib. ),  ‘labor  not  to 
comfort  me’,  Is.  22,  4;  ahche  mishe  kut- 
onkquatunk,  ‘thv  exceeding  great  re¬ 
ward’,  Gen.  15,  1;.  ahchue  pannup- 
umshau  & — ,  ‘  he  must  needs  go  through 
S — ’,  Mass.  Ps.  This  verb  may  be 
regarded  as,  in  some  sort,  an  intensive 
of  ussu,  usseu,  which  expresses  animate 
action,  he  moves,  he  does  (Lat.  agit), 
while  adchau  denotes  action  for  a  pur¬ 
pose  or  directed  toward  an  end. 

[Cree  “ache-oo  ( cli=tch )  or  age-oo 
{g  =  dg),  he  moves  (quasi,  Lat.  age- 
re)”,  Howse,  156.  Chip,  aunj-eh.  Abn. 

ahantsi,  de  plus  en  plus;  - negah- 

mih8si ,  surpasse-toi  de  plus  en  plus. 
Del.  ahchwe  (when  prefixed),  very, 
Hkw. ;  achowat,  hard,  painful,  Zeisb.] 
ah.ch.unk  (?),  n.  a  corpse,  the  dead  body 
of  a  man,  Num.  19,  11,  16. 
*ahchusittam,  (Mass.  Ps.)  he  ‘inclines 
his  ear’  to  (it) ;  he  gives  attention;  nut- 
tahchusittam,  I  incline  my  ear  to  it,  Ps. 
49,  4  [=  nuk-kodnaotam,  El.  ] ;  imperat. 
2d  sing,  ahchusutash,  Ps.  45,  10  [ =kuk - 
keitash,  EL;  see  kukkehtau]. 
ahenit,  suppos.  of  henna.il,  q.  v. 
ahhaohomcoonk.  See  auwohhomcoonk. 
ahhut.  See  adt. 

ahkehteaunat.  See  ohkehteaundt. 
*ahketeamuk,  an  herb,  C.  (that  which  is 
planted).  See  ohkeliteaun&t. 

-ahkon,  -uhkon,  -ogkon,  the  character¬ 
istic  (suffix)  of  the  imperative  of  pro¬ 
hibition,  2d  sing.  Its  force  is  equiva¬ 
lent  to  that  of  ahque  prefixed:  ontah- 


-ahkon,  -uhkon,  ogkon — continued, 
ahkon,  do  not  remove  it,  Prov.  23,  10; 
himmoot-uhkon,  do  not  steal,  steal  not, 
Ex.  20,  15. 

ahkuhk.  See  ohkuk,  an  (earthen)  pot. 
ahpappin.  See  appappin. 
ahpeh.  See  appih,  a  trap, 
ahpcoteau,  uppcoteau,  v.  i.  it  withers, 
Ps.  90,  6;  Is.  40,  7,  8;  i.  e.  becomes 
dry,  dries  up:  mussoopohteau  ( wunnin - 
abpehtau-un,  he  maketh  (it)  dry,  Hag. 
1,  4.  From  appwau,  ohteau,  it  is  dried 
by  heat,  parched.  Cf.  nundpi;  nunas- 
sendt;  nunnobohteateou.  See  apwou. 
[ahquantam,]  ahquoantam,  ahquon- 
tam,  v.  t.  he  forgives  (it),  pardons 
[ ahque-antam ,  refrains  from  thinking 
of],  2  Chr.  7,  14;  imperat.  2d  sing,  ah- 
quoantash,  forgive  thou  (it),  1  Sam.  25, 

28;  - -  tamdiinnean,  forgive  thou  to 

us  (our  sins),  Matt.  6,  12.  With  an. 

2d  obj., - tamauau,  he  forgives  (it) 

to  (him);  act.  intrans.  ahquoantaum, 
he  exercises  forgiveness,  pardons,  for¬ 
gives.  Ybl.  n.  -  aumonk,  the  ex¬ 
ercise  of  forgiveness,  Ps.  130,  4;  - 

tamoonk,  a  forgiving,  forgiveness  (e.  g. 
of  sins,  Col.  1,  14).  Cf.  mehquantam. 
ahquanumau,  ohquan-,  v.  t.  an.  he 
forsakes,  abandons  (keeps  away  from, 
ahque )  him;  pi.  -indog,  they  forsake 
(him),  Judg.  2,  13;  suppos.  -mog,  if 
ye  forsake,  Josh.  24,  20.  Cf.  uhquan- 
umau  (intens. ),  he  abhors,  forsakes  or 
abandons  with  abhorrence, 
ahque,  v.  i.  he  leaves  off,  desists,  re¬ 
frains:  -  keketmhkauont,  he  left  off 

(when)  talking  with  him,  Gen.  17,  22; 
matta  ahque  womonunk,  he  leaves  not  off 
his  kindness,  Ruth  2,  20.  More  com¬ 
monly  used  as  a  negative-imperative 
or  prohibitive  particle — answering  to 
Greek  pry,  Fr.  ne  pas:  ahque  xvabesish, 

‘fear  not’,  do  not  fear,  Gen.  15, 1;  - 

nalwontamaok,  take  ye  not  thought,  leave 

off  thinking,  Matt.  10,  19;  - hettash, 

do  not  call  (it),  Acts  10,  15;  - tape- 

nuk,  ‘when  she  could  not  longer’,  etc. 
(when  she  left  off  being  able),  Ex.  2,  3. 
Sometimes  it  receives  the  regular  verbal 
inflections:  ahqueh,  have  thou  patience 
with  me,  refrain  thou  to  me,  Matt.  18, 
26  [=ahkumeh,  v.  29,  a  more  question- 


6 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


ahque — continued. 

able  form];  ahqhuk  [ahque-cok],  refrain 
ye,  Prow  17,  14.  Cf.  uhquae;  ultque. 

[Narr.  aquie,  leave  off,  do  not;  aquie  j 
assokisli,  be  not  foolish,  R.  W.  39,  41. 
Quir.  matta  eakquino,  it  ceaseth  not, 
Pier.  15,40.  Cree  “ea'ci  [=  ithka],  sub- 
ordin.  neg.  not;  used  with  sub],  and 
imperative”;  “dk-, or  awk'-, and  dkoo-, 
privative  and  intensive”  prefixes.  Abn. 
ckSi,  cessationem  significat;  ned-tkSip- 
pi,  je  cesse  de  manger;  ekSihaia,  de-  | 
meure  en  repos  (dit-on  a  celui  qui  se 
fache,  badine,  etc.).] 

aliquedne,  as  n.  an  island;  kishke  cih- 
quedn-et,  near  an  island,  Acts  27, 16;  pi. 
-nosh  ( ogquidnaeh ,  Is.  40,  15) . 

[Howse  (Cree  Gr.  152)  gives  a  ‘‘verb 
expressive  of  a  state  of  rest” :  “ a'koo-su , 
he  sits  (a  bird,  in  a  tree) ;  a'koo-moo,  he 
suspends,  sits  (e.  g.,  a  duck  in  the  j 
water) ;  a'koo-tin,  inan.  subj.  itsuspends, 
is  situate,  e.  g.,  an  island  in  the  water.” 
Micm.  agvfltk,  it  is  in  the  water;  Ep- 
agwlt,  it  lies  in  the  water  (name  of 
Prince  Edward  island),  Daw'son’s  Aca¬ 
dian  Geology,  app.,  p.  673.] 
ahquehteau,  quehteau,  v.  t.  (caus. )  he 
refrains  from  (it),  leaves  it  off;  imper. 
2d.  pi.  ahquetedcok  ussenat,  refrain  from 
doing,  ‘take  heed  that  ye  do  not’, 
Matt.  6,  1.  With  the  characteristic  of 
forcible  or  disastrous  action,  ahqshau, 
he  is  compelled  to  refrain,  unwillingly 
refrains,  or  the  like,  Is.  33,  8. 

[Narr.  aquituck,  ‘let  us  cease’  (fight¬ 
ing);  but  the  verb  is  imperat.  2d  pi.] 
ahquekin,  v.  i.  inan.  subj.,  it  ceases  to 
bear,  or  produce,  becomes  barren,  Ps. 
107,  34.  From  alique,  with  the  forma¬ 
tive  of  verbs  of  inan.  growth,  -ekin. 
[ahquene.]  See  *aquene,  peace;  a  truce. 
ah.quiyeuh.tea.ii,  v.  i.  he  refrains  from 
fighting,  Jer.  51,  30.  From  ahqxie  and 
ayeuhteau. 

ahqunon,  v.  imp.  it  ceases  to  rain,  holds 
up,  Cant.  2,  11.  From  ahque,  privative, 
wdth  -  non,  the  formative  of  verbs  of 
raining  (falling  water).  See  sokanon. 

[Abn.  i‘k8ranii,  (la  pluie)  cesse.] 
ahquoantam.  See  ahquantam. 
ahquompi,  v.  imp. ;  as  n.  a  time,  a  season ; 
Ezek.  16,  8;  Pan.  7,  12;  8,  17;  suppos. 
and  indef.  ahquompak,  when  it  is  the 


ahquompi — continued, 
time,  at  the  time  when;  ne  aquompak, 
at  that  time,  Josh.  11,  10.  In  his  Gram¬ 
mar  (p.  21),  Eliot  classes  “ ahqitompak, 
when”,  with ‘‘adverbs  of  time”.  With 
verb  subst.  ahquompiymco,  time  is, 
there  is  a  time,  Eecles.  3,  2,  et  seq. 
( oggosohquompi ,  a  little  time;  kesuk- 
kdttae  ahquompi,  daytime,  C. ) 
ahquontam.  See  ahquantam. 
ahtauunat.  See  ohtauundt. 

*ahteah  ( Peq. ) ,  a  dog,  Stiles.  See  anum. 
ahteiik.  See  ohteak,  a  (cultivated)  field, 
ahtinosuk,  when  she  ‘fluttereth  over’ 
(her  young),  Deut.  32,  11. 
ahtomp.  See  ohtornp,  a  bow. 
ahtoonk.  See  ohteoonk,  a  possession, 
ahtotapagodtut,  ‘beside  the  still  wa¬ 
ters’,  Ps.  23,2. 

ahtou,  ahtoou.  See  ohtauundt. 
ahtuk,  n.  a  deer;  pi.  ahtuhquog,  El.  Gr.  9; 
adtunkquog,  1  K.  4,  23  ( attuk ,  C. ;  oltucke, 
Wood).  This  name  is  used  by  Eliot 
for  ‘roe’,  ‘roe-buck’,  and  in  one  place 
for  ‘hart’,  as  vrell  as  for  ‘deer’,  generic. 
Elsewhere  he  has  nukkonahtuk  (old 
deer)  for  ‘hart’  (Deut.  12,  15);  and 
more  often,  aiyomp  or  eiyomp  (Ps.  42, 1; 
Cant.  2, 17),  also  transl.  ‘roe’  (Prow  5, 
19;  6,  5;  Cant.  8,  14).  Of  the  several 
names  applied  by  Eliot  to  deer-kind : 

ahtuk,  in  Nevr  England,  appears  to 
have  been  the  common  name  of  the 
fallow^  deer,  Cervus  virginianus.  Narr. 
attuck  and  noonatch.  Peq.  nought tch, 
nogh-ieh,  deer;  waughtuggac.hy,  ‘deer, 
i.  e.,  wet-nose’;  cunggachie  maukyase, 
a  great  deer  (Abn.  manrSs,  ‘cerf’; 
‘maurouse’  of  Josselyn);  mausshakeet 
inaukkyhazse  ‘the  biggest  deer’  ( moose? ) , 
Stiles  MS.  Etch,  adook.  Del.  achtuch. 
Abn.  ncorke,  chevreuil.  Old  Alg.  aivas- 
kesh,  Lah.  Chip,  wawdshkeshi,  wavnvaw- 
shesh,  red  deer;  atik,  reindeer,  Cervus 
sylvestris.  [See  what  Schoolcraft  (Ind. 
Tribes,  in,  520)  says  of  the  tradition 
that  at  the  first  deers  were  the  hunters 
of  men,  and  his  statement  that  the 
mythic  “ Adik  was  a  famous  hunter  of 
the  North”,  etc.  Look  for  the  possible 
relation  of  Mass,  adchaii,  ‘he  hunts’, 
ahchu,  ‘he  strives  after’,  etc.,  and  ahtuk 
(attuck),  ‘deer’.] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


7 


ahtuk — continued. 

aiyomp,  ayimp,  eiyomp,  ‘hart’,  ‘roe’, 
is  Abn.  dianbe,  the  male  of  deer  or 
deerkind,  a  buck.  Karr,  kultiomp  [ keht - 
eiyomp'],  ‘a  great  buck’;  and  so,  pau- 
cottduivaw,  -tauivat,  a  buck.  Del.  ayapeit, 
Zeisb.  East.  Chip,  ayarbey  awaskesh, 
male  deer,  Long. 

eiyomp&emese,  pi.  -soy,  ‘young  hart’, 
Cant.  8,  14;  ‘young  roes’,  Cant.  4,  5; 
dimin.  of  eiyomp. 

qunnegk,  pi.  -gqudog,  -qudog,  ‘hind’, 
Gen.  49,  21 ;  Cant.  2,  7;  a  doe,  the  female 
deer.  Narr.  aiin&n,  qunneke  (the  former 
term  corresponding  to  Abn.  herar,  fe¬ 
male  of  deer-kind);  qunnequawese,  a 
young  doe. 

mcosoog,  ‘fallow  deer’.  See  moos. 
alitushkouwaii,  pi.  -waog,  ‘nobles’, 
principal  men,  Num.  21,  18. 

[Narr.  atauskaiv&uog,  -kowaug,  rulers, 
lords,  R.  IV.  120,  133.] 
ahunou.  See  hennau. 

*aiannau,  v.  t.  an.  he  imitates  (him); 
nuttianndu,  I  imitate,  C.  See  oontoh- 
konauonat;  unneu. 

*aianne,  C.  See  eiydne. 

*alontogkomp,  n.  a  knave,  C. 
aippanehteau,  v.  caus.  he  maketh 
calm  ( mishittashineuh ,  the  storm),  Ps. 
107,  29.  See  auwepin. 
ait,  suppos.  of  ayeu,  q.  v. 
aiubkontowaonk.  See  auwakontowdonk. 
aiuskoiantam,  v.  i.  he  repents,  is  sorry; 
nut-aiuskoiantam,  I  repent,  Jer.  18,  10; 
imperat.  2d  sing,  aiuskoiantamash,  re¬ 
pent  thou,  be  sorry  for,  Acts  8,  22. 
aiyomp,  a  buck.  See  ahtuk. 

*akesu-og  (Narr.),  they  are  counting. 
See  ogketamundt. 

akodchu,  v.  i.  he  is  ashamed;  nut-akodj 
( nut-dgkodch ,  C.),  I  am  ashamed,  Luke 
16,  3;  matta  cikodchuog,  they  were  not 
ashamed,  Gen.  2,  25  ( nut-dgkodchehik - 
qun,  it  ashameth  me,  C.).  Ybl.  n. 
-chuonk,  shame,  Prov.  18,  13  ( ogkodchu - 
onk,  C. ).  Caus.  an.  akodchehheau,  he 
shames  (him),  makes  him  ashamed; 
kut-a-kodchehheoog,  thou  puttest  them  to 
shame,  Ps.  44,  7.  Imperat.  2d  +  3d 
pers.  ahque  akodjheh,  put  me  not  to 
shame,  Ps.  119,  31- 


amaeii,  amaei,  v.  i.  he  departs,  goes 
away,  withdraws  himself,  Job  27,  21; 
Gal.  2,  12  (without  reference  to  the 
mode  or  to  the  act  of  going,  but  simply 
to  the  separation  or  removal  of  one  per¬ 
son  or  thing  from  another) ;  imperat. 
2d  pers.  sing,  amaish,  depart,  go  away; 
suppos.  amdit,  amdiit,  when  he  went 
away;  with  an.  obj.  amaeuau,  he  goes 
away  from  him;  amaeuoh,  amayeoh, 
he  went  away  from  him,  Judg.  6,  21  (?), 
more  commonly,  amaehtauau,  he  de¬ 
parts  or  goes  away  from  (him),  1  Sam. 

16,  14;  imperat.  2d -(-1st  sing,  amaeih- 
tah,  depart  thou  from  me,  Luke  5,  8; 
suppos.  part,  amehtauont,  when  he  de¬ 
parts,  when  departing,  from  (him),  Jer. 

17,  5. 

-amag,  -amaug,  pi.  dmagquog,  n.  gen. 
for  ‘fish  taken  by  the  hook.’  See 
*aumaid. 

[amakompau,  v.  i.  he  stands  away;] 
imperat.  -pauish,  stand  thou  away,  C. 
amarohkauau,  v.  t.  an.  he  drives  (him) 
away;  pi.  -kauaog,  they  drive  away, 
Job  24,  3. 

-amaug.  See  -dimag. 
amaunum,  v.  t.  he  takes  (it)  away,  Job 
20,  19;  Judg.  8,  21;  imperat.  amaunsh, 
take  thou  (it)  away,  Prov.  25,  4.  From 
am&eu,  with  characteristic  (-num)  of 
action  by  the  hand.  Cf.  *aumadi. 

[Narr.  amaunsh,  take  it  away.] 
amaush.au,  v.  i.  he  departs  secretly  or 
with  evil  purpose,  or  the  like;  he  ‘slips 
away’,  1  Sam.  19,  10.  From  am&eu, 
with  sh  of  derogation, 
amayeuonk  [==amaeiionk\,  vbl.  n.  de¬ 
parture,  going  away,  2  Tim.  4,  6. 
*amisque  [=amisq],  Muh.  a  beaver, 
Edw.  Cf.  tummunk,  a  name  which  was 
applied  properly  only  to  the  living 
adult  animal.  (Abn.  ie:mdk8e,  castor 
vivant.)  Amisk,  a  generic  name  for 
beaver-kind,  has  been  retained  in  the 
principal  Algonquian  dialects:  Abn. 
j>ep8n-emesk8,  nipen-emesk8,  winter 
beaver,  summer  beaver;  kemeskS,  great 
beaver,  or  beaver  skin;  atsimeskS  (or 
naiib-hneskS) ,  male,  n8semesk8  (or  sk- 
tmeskS) ,  female  beaver.  Cree  umisk. 
Chip.  amik.  Shawn,  am&vhwah.  Miami 
mahkwaw.  Del.  (Minsi)  amochk,  Zeisb. 


8 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


*ammiat,  perhaps,  it  may  be,  C. 
amomau,  v.  t.  an.  he  warns  (him);  gives 
(him)  warning;  pi.  -dog,  Ps.  19,  11; 
kut-ammdmoh,  thou  warnest  him,  Ezek. 
5,  18;  wut-amomuh,  he  warned  him, 
Acts  10,  22;  suppos.  amdmont,  if  he 
warn,  Ezek.  33, 3.  Ybl.  n.  (pass. )  amdn- 
tuorik,  warning,  Ezek.  33,  45. 
*a’mucksh  (Peq.),  n.  a  weasel,  Stiles. 
See  *musquash. 

anakausu,  v.  i.  he  works,  he  labors, 
Prov.  31, 13;  nut-anakous,  I  labor,  John 
5,  17;  suppos.  noh  anakausit,  he  who 
works,  Eccl.  3,  9.  N.  agent,  -men,  a 
worker,  Is.  40,  19;  pi.  -enuog,  Is.  44, 11. 
Ybl.  n.  -monk,  laboring;  work,  labor, 
Eccl.  3,  10,  11. 

[Narr.  anakdusu,  ‘a  laborer’,  pi. 
(suppos.)  -sichik.  Abn.  ned-arokke,  je 
travaille;  ned-arokkeh^si,  je  travaille 
pour  moi.  Chip,  anoki,  Bar, ;  annokee, 
Sch.] 

*anamakeesuck  (Narr.),  this  day,  to¬ 
day  \_=yeu  kesukod,  El.];  anamandu- 
kock,  tonight,  R.  W. 

[Abn.  irme-kizegak,  pendant  le  jour; 
( anremi ,  sign,  la  continuation  d’une 
action;  eremi,  qui  va  laissant,  coulant). 
Del.  eligischquik,  today;  elemi-siquonk, 
this  spring;  elemi-nipunk,  this  summer, 
Zeisb.] 

anantam,  unantam,  v.  i.  he  thinks, 
purposes,  wills;  is  mind-ed,  Luke  12, 
17;  Acts  19,  21;  ne  anantamup  (pret.), 
that  which  I  thought,  Is.  14,  24;  sup¬ 
pos.  ne  anontog,  what  he  may  think,  or 
will;  ‘according  to  his  will’,  Dan.  4,  35 
(unantog,  ‘if  he  permit’,  Heb.  6,  3). 
With  an.  obj.  ananumau,  he  wills  to 
(him),  he  permits  (him);  suppos.  un- 
nanumit,  if  he  permit  (me),  1  Cor.  16,  7. 
Vbl.  n.  anantamcoonk,  thought,  pur¬ 
pose,  opinion,  will;  ananumaonk,  per¬ 
mission,  will  or  thought  (in  relation 
to  an  an.  obj.),  Job  12,  5.  Adj.  and 
adv.  anantamwe,  anantamcoe,  willing-lv, 
Judg.  5,  2. 

This  is  the  intens.  or  augment,  form 
of  the  primary  verb  antam,  he  is 
mind-ed,  has  in  mind  (with  an  an. 
obj.  anumau),  which  is  not,  perhaps, 
found  separately  in  Eliot,  but  is  the 
base  of  all  verbs  of  mental  action  and 
of  emotion.  Maillard  (Micmac  Gr.  91) 


anantam,  unantam — continued, 
distinguishes  this  class  of  verbs  as 
“personnels  mentaux:  ces  verbes  de- 
signent  les  diffe  rentes  modifications  de 
1’ esprit,  de  la  pensee,  ou  de  l’ime.” 

[Narr.  nt-ednlam  or  nt-unndntarn ,  I 
think;  nt-eaidm-mowonek,  my  thought 
or  opinion.  Abn.  ned-ererdarn,  je  pense. 
Chip,  inendam,  he  thinks;  kashk-endam, 
he  is  sad,  etc.,  Bar.;  nind-endindum,  I 
think,  J.  Cree  ilethelum,  he  thinks  (it) ; 
itethe-mayoo,  he  so  thinks  (him);  metho- 
ethetum,  he  well  thinks,  approves,  etc. 
Del.  elendam,  ‘  indicates  a  disposition  of 
the  mind’;  nhv-elendam,  I  am  sad, 
Zeisb.  ] 

anaquabit,  as  a  prep.,  before,  in  the 
presence  of  (him),  Ex.  8,  20;  9,  13; 
Luke  21,  36.  This  is  a  verb  in  the  sup- 
positive  (its  regular  indicat.  pres,  would 
be  anaquappu),  and  varies  in  number 
and  person  with  its  subject,  which  is 
the  object  of  the  preposition  by  which 
we  must  translate  the  verb: 

nun-neepoh  anaquab-ean  (2d  sing.),  I 

stand  before  thee,  Ex.  17,  6;  - ana- 

quab-it  (3d  sing.), - before  him;  — 

anaquab-edg  (2d  pi.), - before  you; 

- anaquab-hettit  (3d  pi.), - before 

them,  Deut.  9,  2;  neepau  anaquabeh 
(1st  sing.),  he  stands  before  me,  Ps. 
139,  5. 

In  some  dialects  this  prepositive  verb 
is  further  varied  with  the  position  or 
attitude  of  its  subject — before  him  when 
sitting,  when  standing,  when  lying 
down,  etc.  (see  Baraga,  Otchipwe  Gr., 
469);  but  if  such  distinction  was  made 
in  the  Massachusetts  language  it  es¬ 
caped  Eliot’s  observation. 

anaquappu  is  formed  of  appu  (he 
remains,  he  is)  and  onkoue  (beyond,  in 
advance  of)  or  some  nearly  related 
word. 

With  inan.  subj.  anaquohtag  (sup¬ 
pos.  of  anaquohteau) ,  before  it,  Ex. 
19,  2;  Judg.  20,  28;  anaquoMag  wek,  be¬ 
fore  his  house,  C.  Cf.  Quir.  arquubi, 
Pier. 

anaquesuonk,  onoq-,  vbl.  n.  a  joining, 
a  joint,  Eph.  4, 16;  pi.  -ongash,  Cant.  7, 1. 
anaqushaii,  v.  i.  he  trades,  traffics; 
imperat.  anaqushunk,  trade  ye,  Gen. 
34,  10;  3d  pi.  ana-qmJidhettich,  let  them 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


y 


anaqushaii — continued. 

trade,  v.  21  ( unkesheto ,  will  you  truck? 
Wood).  N.  agentis  anaqushaen ;  pi. 
-enuog,  traders,  1  K.  10,  14. 

[Narr.  anaqusliauog  (they  trade), 
‘traders’;  mouanaqushauog  or  mounu- 
qushdnchick,  ‘chapmen  ’ ;  anaqushento, 
let  us  trade,  R.  W.] 

anaskham,  v.  i.  he  digs,  hoes,  breaks 
the  earth,  Luke  16,  3  (- hamun ,  as  infin¬ 
itive). 

[Narr.  anaskhommin,  to  hoe,  or  break 
up;  pi.  anashk-homwog,  they  hoe.  Abn. 
Sdererkehemen,  il  le  bec-he.] 

*anaskig  (Narr.),  n.  (a  digging  instru¬ 
ment,  )  a  hoe,  pi.  -ganasli,  R.  W. 

[Abn.  arakehigan.~\ 

*anauchemineash  (Narr. ),  n.  pi.  acorns, 
E.  W. ;  annachim,  nut,  pi.  -minash,  C. 

[Del.  wunachquim,  Hkw.  Abn.  anes- 
kemen,  pi.  -nar,  glands;  anaskamesi, 
ch£ne  qui  porte  des  glands.  ] 

-ane,  of  the  kind  of,  etc.  See  unne. 
anea,  adv.  further,  Luke  24,  28  [=ong- 
koue  (?)].  Cf.  dime,  more  than. 

[Narr.  enkick,  further;  n’ neickomdsu, 
a  little  further.] 

*an6qus  (Narr.  ),n.  the  ground  or  striped 
squirrel,  or  chipmunk  (Tamias  lysteri). 
Cf.  annuneks  (ant). 

[Abn.  anikoosess.  Gi.  Abn.  nannan- 
kesesoa,  il  est  leger.] 

aneiiham,  v.  i.  he  has  advantage,  gains 
[goes  beyond,  aneu-oorn].  With  inan. 
obj. - hamauau,  he  profits  or  is  prof¬ 

ited  by  (it);  toh  unne  cmeuhamau-un 
wosketomp,  what  is  a  man  profited,  etc. , 
Matt.  16,  26;  suppos.  (t.  inan.)  aneu- 
harnauadt,  if  he  gain  (it),  ibid.;  suppos. 
pass,  or  inan.  subj.  aneu-hamuk,  what 
is  gained;  pi.  yeuus  aneuhamug-ish, 
these  things  are  gained,  Phil.  3,  7;  nut- 
taniiwun,  I  overcome  or  conquer,  C. 
YTbl.  n.  aneu-maudonk,  gain,  advantage, 
profit;  and  pass,  aneu-moadtuonk,  1 
Tim.  6,  6. 

aneupae.  See  dnupde. 
anin,  anun,  v.  i.  (1)  it  exceeds,  goes  be¬ 
yond,  is  more  than.  (2)  it  rots,  corrupts. 
From  dnue,  more,  beyond,  with  the 
formative  of  verbs  of  growth :  it  goes  be¬ 
yond,  exceeds  (the  good  or  normal); 
with  an.  subj.  aninnu,  anunnco,  he  rots 
(‘stinketlx’,  John  11,  39),  pi.  aninwog, 


anin,  anun — continued. 

‘they  are  corrupt’,  Ps.  14,  1;  Is.  50, 
2;  ivuskannem  anit  ut  agwe  puhquohkit, 

‘  the  seed  is  rotten  under  the  clods  ’ ,  J oel 
1,  17;  suppos.  'nan.  ne  aneuk,  ‘a  cor¬ 
rupt  thing’,  Mai.  1,  14;  ‘rottenness’, 
Prov.  12,  4;  suppos.  an.  noli  anit ,  he 
who  is  rotten  or  is  corrupt;  corrupted 
or  putrefied  flesh  or  an.  being  (some¬ 
times  used  by  Eliot  for  aneuk,  after  an 
inan.  substantive,  as  Prov.  10,  7) .  Vbl. 
n.  annaoonk,  decay,  rottenness,  Prov.  14, 
30;  annunmonk,  rottenness  (of  flesh, 
or  an.  obj.),  putrefaction,  Lev.  22,  25; 
Job  17,  14;  suppos.  pass.  (inan.  subj.) 
anunnamuk,  when  it  is  rotted,  rotten¬ 
ness,  Hos.  5,  12. 

The  primary  signification,  it  will  be 
observed,  is  to  exceed,  to  pass  beyond; 
hence  noh  anit,  he  who  exceeds  or  goes 
beyond  (the  natural,  the  common,  or 
the  normal)  designates  any  an.  being 
of  supernatural,  uncommon,  or  abnor¬ 
mal  qualities  or  powers;  and  with  the 
indef.  prefix  instead  of  the  demonstra¬ 
tive,  m’anit  (somebody  or  something 
that  exceeds),  became  the  name  of 
supernatural  being  or  agency,  which  is 
usually  translated  ‘God’. 

[Del.  alett,  rotten,  Zeisb.] 

[Note  —It  was  the  intention  of  the  com¬ 
piler  to  rewrite  the  foregoing  definition.] 

aninnuhkco,  it  is  a  help  or  support 
(- uhk  marking  continuance  or  perma¬ 
nence);  as  n.  a  support,  ‘a  stay’,  1  K. 
10,  19. 

aninnum,  v.  t.  he  gives  (with  the  hand), 
he  hands  (it),  presents  (it).  From 
annumau  (q.  v. ),  with  the  characteristic 
(rmm)  of  action  of  the  hand.  Imperat. 
2d  pi.  aninnumcok  metsuonk,  give  ye 
(them)  food,  Matt.  14,  16.  With  an. 
2d  obj.  aninnumau,  he  gives  (it)  to 
(him);  imperat.  2d -(-1st  sing,  anin- 
numeh,  give  thou  (it)  to  me,  Matt.  14,  8 
( aninnumeh ,  help  thou  me,  Ps.  22,  19; 
38, 22;  ken  unundmah,  give  thou  me,  C. ) ; 
aninnumau,  he  gives  (him)  assistance, 
helps  (him);  -mauaii  mittamwossissoh, 
he  helped  the  woman,  Rev.  12,  16; 
kut-aninurn-oush,  I  help  thee,  Is.  41,  10. 
See  annumau. 

[Narr.  kut-dnnum-mi,  will  you  help 
me?;  andnema,  help  me.] 


10 


BUKEAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


*anishamog,  n.  codfish,  ('.  See* pauga- 
naiit. 

anisheau.  See  dmissehheau. 

-anit,  in  compos,  for  manit,  maniito ,  q.  v. 
anitchewan,  anutchuan  [ anue-utchu - 
a»],v.  i.  it  overflows,  flows  abundantly, 
Ps.  78, 16,  20.  S eednupde;  dnuwulchu- 
wan. 

anittue,  adj.  corrupted;  pi.  -lush,  Ps. 

38,  5;  Prov.  25,  26.  See  anin. 

*anna,  n.  a  shell,  C. ;  shell-fish.  See  hogki. 

[Xarr.  (pi.)  andwsuck,  shells.  Abn. 
es,  pi.  essak,  coquilles;  ne-manese,  j’a- 
masse  coquillage  pour  manger.] 
*annachim,  n.  a  nut,  C. ;  an  acorn.  See 
*and uchemineash;  m  in . 
anneganuhtuk,  n.  a  fish  spear,  Job  41,  7. 
annimmungquot,  n.  a  stench,  Is.  3,  24; 
bad  smell  (smell  of  corruption  or 
putridity,  anni  —  mungquot,  the  fonna- 
tive  of  verbals  of  smelling,  or  emitting 
odor). 

annin.  See  anmin. 

anninncoonk,  annun-,  vbl.  n.  corrup¬ 
tion,  Job  17,  14;  Lev.  22,  25. 
annoke.  See  anohke. 
annoi5su,  anncoosu,  v.  i.  he  hopes, 
trusts,  is  hopeful,  1  Cor.  13,  7  ( noh 
annodsu,  C.);  nut-anndus,  I  hope,  2  Cor. 
1,  13;  suppos.  annoo  sit,  when,  or  if,  he 
hopes.  Vbl.  n.  annddsuonk  ( annoaus 
anndous-,  etc.),  hoping;  hope,  expecta¬ 
tion  of  good,  Rom.  8,  24;  Ps.  62,  5. 
anncD,  unnaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  says  to,  tells 
(him).  See  unnaii  and  cf.  noodnat. 
Pret.  ancoop,  anoowop,  he  said  to  him, 
he  told  him;  ne  dnun,  what  is  com¬ 
manded  (said),  Ex.  34,  11;  suppos.  noh 
anont,  he  who  tells  or  says  to,  ‘com¬ 
mands’,  or  directs;  loh  anont,  what  he 
commands  (may  command),  ‘his  com¬ 
mandment’,  Prov.  8,  29.  With  inan. 
obj.  annumau  (q.  v.),  he  gives  (com-  1 
mand)  to,  commands  (it)  to  (him). 

1  n  the  verse  last  cited  three  forms  of 
the  primary  verb  occur  in  the  suppos¬ 
itive:  anummaoni,  when  he  gave  (his 
decree)  to;  toh  anont,  ‘liis  command¬ 
ment’,  i.  e.  his  commanding,  word¬ 
giving;  dnanvodt,  ‘when  he  appoints’, 
commands  (it). 

Eliot’s  use  of  the  several  forms  and 
derivatives  of  this  verb  does  not  enable 
us  to  distinguish  tliem  accurately.  The 


annoo,  unnaii — continued, 
primary  signification  of  the  root  is,  per¬ 
haps,  to  send  (cf.  anncotam,  annaonaii); 
to  commission,  to  direct,  to  tell. 

[Cf.  Abn.  ned-a’ran,  j'ai  coutume  de 
lui  dire;  arSs,  fleche  [i.  e.  a  missile]. 
Del.  allumsi,  go  along;  alluns,  arrow, 
bullet;  allummahen,  to  throw;  ptuk- 
aluns  [round  missile],  bullet,  Zeisb.] 
annconaii,  v.  t.  an.  (1)  he  commands, 
directs  (him);  nut-annam,  I  command 
or  tell  (them),  1  K.  17,  4;  suppos.  nean- 
noonog,  that  which  I  command  you, 
Deut.  4, 2.  (2)  he  hires,  employs  (him) ; 
nut-annmn-uk,  he  hires  me,  Judg.  18,  4; 
suppos.  noh  annamont,  he  who  hires, 
Matt.  20, 1;  suppos.  pass,  annoonit,  when 
he  is  hired,  Neh.  6,  13.  (3)  he  sends 

(him),  Ex.  24,  5;  nut-annam,  I  send, 
Matt.  11,  10;  imperat.  2d  -(-  1st  pers. 
send  thou  to  me.  Is.  6,  8.  N.  agent. 
annooden,  one  who  serves  for  hire,  Ex. 
12, 45;  one  sent,  a  messenger,  Prov.  17, 
11;  anamnuwaen,  a  commander,  Is.  55, 4. 

[Narr.  andce  ( =annd>s ),  hire  him; 
kut-anncomh,  I  hire  you.] 
anncoosu.  See  annoosu. 
annootag  (?),  suppos.  inan.  (that  which) 
is  ripe,  or  seasonable,  Hos.  9,  10;  Jer. 
24,  2.  Cf.  adtuhtag;  kesanohteau. 
anncotam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  sends  (it),  Lam. 
1,  13;  imper.  2d  pi.  -tamcok,  -teamaik, 
send  you,  2  Sam.  17, 16.  Vbl.  n.  -team- 
ooonk,  a  sending,  a  command,  2  John  4. 
annumau,  v.  t.  an.  (1)  he  gives  word  to, 
commands  ( him ) :  anakaumonk  ne  anu- 
rnauont,  the  task  which  he  (suppos.) 
giveth  (to  them)  to  do,  Eccles.  3,  10; 
anumaont,  when  he  gives  (to  the  sea) 
his  decree,  Prov.  8,  29.  See  annoo.  Cf. 
aninnurn.  (2)  he  helps,  assists  (him): 
wut-annuma-oh,  he  helped  them,  Acts 
18,  27;  kut-annum-unkqun,  he  helps  us, 
1  Sam.  7,  12. 

annun,  annin,  v.  t.  he  lays  hold  of, 
puts  hands  on,  seizes;  with  an.  obj. 
annu  (?).  In  either  form  the  verb  sig¬ 
nifies  to  take  hold  of  an  an.  object;  in 
the  inan.  form,  to  seize  (him)  by  a  part, 
a  limb,  the  dress,  etc.  (inan.  obj.):  uu- 
tannuh  wun-nutchegan-it,  he  took  her  by 
the  hand,  Mark  1,  31;  kut-anneh,  thou 
boldest  me  up,  Ps.  73,  23;  wut-annun 
vusseet-ut,  she  caught  him  by  the  feet, 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


11 


annum,  annin — continued. 

2K.4,  27;  imperat.  anin  vmssukqun-at, 
take  (him)  by  the  tail,  Ex.  4,  4;  suppos. 
noh  anum-iooh  anunont  wehtauog-ut,  he 
who  a  dog  takes  by  his  ears,  Prov.  26, 17. 
anmuneks,  n.  an  ant,  pi.  -sog,  Prov.  6,  7; 
30,  25.  Cf.  *anequs  (Abn.  anikcosess), 
chipmunk. 

[Del.  «  li  cus,  pismire,  ant,  Zeisb. 
Mod.  Abn.  al-ikws,  pismire.] 
annunnooonk.  See  anninncoonk. 
*arnuonk,  vbl.  n.  sneezing,  C.  Cf.* 
nanagkmonk,  ‘snorting’,  C. 
anogku,  v.  i.  'he  paints  (beautifies?)  him¬ 
self,  2 K.  9, 30 ;kut-anogkem,  thoupaintest 
thyself,  Ezek.  23,  40  (nut-annogfnnum,  I 
paint,  C).  (Vb.  adj.  an.  anogkesu,  anog- 
quesu,  he  is  painted,  appears  fine. ) 

[Narr.  (v.  adj.  an.)  aunaMsu,  he  is 
painted;  pi.  aunakesuck,  they  are 
painted.  Abn.  eraghinahsS,  il  le  faut 
matacher,  peinturer,  etc. ;  ned-eraghi,  je 
me  matache;  eragS,  il  se  matache.] 
anogqs,  n.  an.  a  star;  pi.  anogqsog,  El. 
Gr.  9;  1  Cor.  15,  41;  Job  22,  12;  mis- 
hdnogkus  [ mishe  anogqs,  great  star],  the 
morning  or  day  star,  2  Pet.  1,  19.  For 
andgqussu,  he  appears,  shows  himself. 
In  distinction  from  the  sun,  which  rises 
or  comes  forth  ( paspishau )  and  sets 
(goes  away,  wayau),  the  stars  appear 
in  their  places  when  the  absence  of  the 
sun  and  moon  makes  them  visible. 

[Narr.  anockqus,  pi.  anocksuck;  mis- 
hdnnock,  morning  star.  Chip,  anang, 
Bar.;  (St Mary’s)  an-6ong.  Del.  aranck 
(Camp. ) ;  cdank  (Zeisb. ).  Modern  Abn. 
al-akws,  K.  A.] 

anohke,  annoke,  n.  ordure,  dung,  Job 
20,  7;  Zeph.  1,  17  ( annohke ,  C.) 

[Abn.  arikkah,  d’une  odeur  forte, 
comme  de  pourri.] 

anome,  (it  is)  within,  it  is  inside  of,  Neh. 
6,  10;  Ps.  122,  2:  en  andme,  in  the  in¬ 
nermost  parts  of,  Prov.  26,  22,  =en 
anoomut,  Prov.  18,  8;  suppos.  (or 
locat.?)  anomut,  when  it  is  within  or 
inside;  ‘adv.  of  place ’,  within,  El.  Gr. 
21  (unnommtyeu,  adj.  (?)  within,  C. ); 
u~utt  innom  hog,  the  inwards,  entrails 
(within  his  body) ,  Lev.  1,  9.  In  other 
dialects  the  primary  meaning  of  anome 
is  ‘below’,  ‘under’. 

[Abn.  aranmek,  dessous;  arahmak8e- 


anome — continued. 
rnek,  sous  l’arbre.  Chip,  anamaii  or 
anam’,  under,  underneath,  below,  Bar. 
460  (pindjaii,  pindj’ ,  in,  within,  inside 
of).  Del.  allami,  -iyey,  therein,  in  there, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  175.] 

anaohom,  v.  t.  he  sings  (a  song) ;  imperat. 
i  2d  pi.  ancohomcbk  .  .  .  anmhomdonk, 
sing  ye  a  song,  Ps.  149,  1.  With  an. 
2d  obj.  -hom.au,  he  sings  to  (him);  sup¬ 
pos.  -homont,  when  he  sings,  he  singing, 
Prov.  25,  20.  Cf.  ketcohomom.  From 
anm  [anna)),  he  tells,  and  mm,  he  goes  on 
telling,  he  narrates. 

ancohque,  a  defective  or  unipersonal 
verb  used  as  an  adverb  or  auxiliary, 
does  not  admit  of  exact  translation.  It 
signifies,  primarily,  to  correspond  with, 
to  be  like  in  form,  degree,  extent,  dura¬ 
tion,  etc.  (cf.  ne-ane,  to  be  like  in  kind, 
of  the  same  kind.)  As  an  adv.  it  is 
variously  translated  ‘as  much  as’,  ‘as 
far  as’,  ‘as  large  as’,  ‘in  like  manner’, 
etc. :  ne  anoohque  .  .  .  ne  noohque,  as 
much  as,  .  .  .  so  much,  Rev.  18,  7; 
noh  ne  anoohque  ussit,  he  who  so  does 
(‘hath  so  done  this  deed’,  1  Cor.  5,  3); 
nesahteagk  ne  anoohque  kishkag,  the 
length  of  it  corresponds  with  the 
breadth,  2  Chr.  3,  8;  suppos.  inan.  ne 
anukkenuk,  pasuk  ne  anukkenuk,  ‘  of  one 
size’,  one  in  extent,  1  K.  6,  25.  See 
nogque. 

[Narr.  tou  anuckquaque,  how  big?;  yd 
anuckquaque,  so  far;  dim.  yd  anuckqua- 
qrnse,  so  little  way  (hence) ;  tounuckqua- 
que,  how  far?  Abn.  ena8i8i,  ‘avecres- 
semblance  d’une  chose  a  une  autre’.] 
ancotaii  (?),  v.  i.  he  revengeth  himself, 
takes  revenge,  Nah.  1,  2;  with  an. 
obj.  -tauau,  he  takes  revenge  on  (him), 
ibid.  Ybl.  n.  ancotaonk,  revenge,  2  Cor. 
7,  11. 

ancDtawwanshteunk,  suppos.  of  -shuh- 
teau,  when  he  takes  revenge  (by  blood) ; 
an  avenger  of  blood,  Num.  35, 19,  21, 24. 
ancotauwanshuhteaen-in,  n.  agent,  an 
avenger,  he  who  revenges  (by  blood) ; 
anmtodn-,  Rom.  13,  4. 

-antam,  the  characteristic  and  forma¬ 
tive  of  verbs  expressing  mental  states 
and  activities.  See  andntam.  [In  the 
Delaware,  -elendam,  in  verbs  which 
“express  a  disposition,  situation,  or 
operation  of  the  mind”,  Zeisb.  Gr.  89.] 


12 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  '25 


anto3sh.au,  v.  i.  he  falls  backward,  vio¬ 
lently  or  by  mischance;  pi.  -<iog,  Is.  2*. 
13.  See  oniamu. 

amichuwan.  See  anitchewan,  it  over¬ 
flows. 

anue,  it  exceeds,  surpasses  as  adv. 
‘more,  rather’,  El.  Gr.  21;  the  sign  of 
the  comparative  degree:  anue  wunnegen, 
it  is  better,  Matt.  18, 8, 9;  anue  onk  net i 
object. ),  more  than  me,  Matt.  10, 37. 
[Quir.  arice,  arche,  artelie,  Pier.; 
arche  mesi,  the  greatest,  p.  40;  arche, 
‘chiefly’,  p.  40;  in  compos,  arice,  arwe- 
nuguot,  more  noble;  arwenungesee,  more 
excellent,  p.  10;  ance-kittamanchdsko, 
most  merciful,  p.41.  Del.  aUoiciwi,  Zeisb. 
and  for  the  superl.  degree  eluwi,  most.] 
anuhkau,  v.  t.  he  is  superior  to,  better 

than,  surpasses,  Nah.  3,  8;  sun  kut - , 

art  thou  better  than?,  Nah.  3,  6. 

[Quir.  arrookawah  and  drrmkawdu, 
Pier.  10.] 

aniim,  n.  a  dog;  pi.  anumwog,  Matt.  7,  6 
(Narr.  agim;  Nipm.  alum;  Quinnip. 
arum,  El.  Gr.  2;  R.  W.  107).  From 
annumaii,  he  holds  with  his  mouth 
{annu-n,  with  -man  the  characteristic  of 
action  performed  by  the  mouth ) .  [The 
Peq.  ahteah  (Abn.  atie),  is  related  to 
adchu,  he  hunts.  Cf.  Engl,  hound 
(Gothic,  hunda)  and  hunt.] 

[Abn.  atie,  pi.  at  ink;  aremSs,  -Sssak. 
Peq.  n’ ahteah,  (my)  dog,  Stiles.  Etch. 
allomoos.  Del.  attum.  Chip.  (St  Mary’s) 
an'emoosh;  (Sag.)  aw  nee  r/wuch,  dog 
(Sch. );  anirn,  ‘mean dog’.  Bar.  Miami 
lam  wah.  Menom.  ah  nai/n.] 
anumwussukup .  -sikkup.  -kuppe,  n. 
a  willow  tree,  Ezek.  17,  5;  Is.  44,  4; 
Job  40.  22  (-eukuppe,  Mass.  Ps. ). 
anun.  See  anin. 

anupae,  aneu-,  as  adj.  and  adv.  over¬ 
flowing,  Is.  28,  18;  with  sokanon,  an 
‘overflowing  shower’,  Ezek.  13, 13;  noh 
pah  anupadto,  ‘he  [it]  shall  overflow’, 
Is.  8,  8.  See  anitchewan. 
anussehheau,  anisheau,  v.  caus.  an. 
he  corrupts,  makes  corrupt.  From 
anue,  or  anin  (q.  v. ),  it  rots,  becomes 
corrupt,  with  -sh  of  derogation:  Anush - 
eaog  wuhhogkauh,  they  corrupt  them¬ 
selves,  Ex.  32,  7;  suppos.  2d  pi.  dnis- 
hedg,  when  you  are  corrupted,  corrupt 
yourselves,  Deut.  4,  24.  With  inan. 


anussehheau,  anisheau — continued, 
subj.  anisteau,  (it)  corrupts  (it),  1  Cor. 
15,  33. 

anutchuan.  See  anitchewan. 
anuwodt,  as  adv.  too  much,  more  than 
enough,  Ex.  36,  7,  =dnue  woh  adt,  Ex. 
36,  5. 

anuwutchuwan  [ =anuchuwan ],  it  over¬ 
flows,  Ps.  78,  20.  See  anitcheican. 
anwohhou,  n.  a  staff,  1  Sam.  17,  40;  Is. 
10,  15;  pi.  -hcounash,  1  Sam.  17,43. 

[Narr.  wuttdnho,  (his)  staff.  Abn. 
aiibadehSn,  baton  ( ned’ ahbadihSi ,  je 
m’appuie  sur  (quelque  chose)  en  mar- 
chant).] 

anwohsin.  v.  i.  he  rests  himself,  takes 
rest,  Ex.  20,  11;  31,  17  [nutt' annuwos- 
sumweh  nuhhog,  I  rest  myself,  C.  (bad)] ; 
imperat.  2d  pi.  -sincok,  rest  ye,  Mark  6, 
41;  uttoh  adt  anwosik  (suppos. ),  whereon 
he  resteth,  J ob  24, 23.  Ybl.  n.  -sindbnk, 
resting,  rest,  a  resting  place,  Num.  10, 
33. 

[Abn.  areStssin,  il  se  repose,  aiant 
travaille.] 

aohkeomcD[s],  n.  a  hornet,  Josh.  24, 12; 
aohkeaumcous,  bee,  Ps.  118,  12  (but 
‘hornet’  is  transferred,  Deut.  7,  20,  and 
‘bees-og’,  Judg.  14,  8,  etc.);  ohkeom- 
mcos-og,  bees,  C. ;  aohkeomuas,  Mass.  Ps. 
Cf.  aha maquesu ilk  (ohhomaquesuuk,  C. ), 
a  needle  or  pin. 

[Del.  amoe,  a  bee,  wasp,  Zeisb.] 
a6hsuh.queaii.  See  hdsekoeu. 
aongkoue.  See  ongkoue. 
acoque,  acohque  (?),,v-  i-  he  is  against,  or 
opposed;  he  is  an  adversary;  howan 
acoque,  who  is  my  adversary?  Is.  50,  8; 
suppos.  noh  ayeuqueuk,  he  who  is  ad¬ 
verse,  an  adversary;  pi.  -queagig,  Neh. 
4,  11.  See  ayeuhteau;  ayeuuhkonau. 
apehtunk.  See  appohteau,  it  remains  or 
rests  in. 

*apome  (Narr.),  n.  the  thigh;  pi.  -mash. 
See  meliquau;  mohpee. 

[Chip.  (St  Mary’s)  bwaum;  (Mack.) 
bawm,  Sch.  ii,  458.  Del.  la  uch  poa  me, 
the  middle  of  the  thigh,  Zeisb.] 
appahquosu.  See  appuhqudsu. 
appappin,  ahp-,  v.  i.  he  sits  upon  (it); 
wutahpappin,  she  sits  on  it,  Lev.  15, 20; 
suppos.  ne  appapit,  that  whereon  he 
sits,  Lev.  15, 22, 23, 26.  Augm.  of  appin. 

[Chip,  ahpahbewin,  a  saddle,  Sum.] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


10 
O 


appeh,  ahpeh  (-han  ),n.  a  trap,  a  snare; 
Is.  8,14;  24,  17;  Job  18,  10;  pi.  -hanog, 
-heonog,  2  Sam.  22,  6;  Job  22,  10. 
From  pahheau,  it  waits  for  (?)  ( n’uppaih , 
I  wait  for  him,  Ps.  130,  5).  Cf.  ohppeh. 

[Xarr.  ape;  pi.  apihana ,  traps;  wusk- 
apelmna ,  new  traps.  Cf.  Cree  appit, 
‘ tobacco  bag ’ .  ] 

appesettukqussin  (?),  he  kneels;  caus.m 
heuh,  he  made  them  kneel,  Gen.  24,  11; 
(v.  i. )  rest  on  their  knees;  to  kneel  on 
his  knees,  1  K.  8,  54;  2  Chr.  6, 13,  etc. 
appesetukqussin,  (-un),  v.  act.  intr.  he 
kneels,  bows  the  knee;  imperat.  2d  pi. 
appesetukqussunook,  bow  the  knee,  Gen. 
41,  43. 

appin,  n.  a  bed  (a  place  to  sit  or  rest  on), 
Lev.  15,  26;  Is.  28,  20;  wut-appin,  his 
bed,  Cant.  3,  7  (as  a  verb,  na  wut-appin, 
he  sits  down  there,  Ruth  4,  1).  See 
appappin,  dppu. 

[Abn.  tessdk8ab8n,  lit,  eleve  de  terre; 
ap8n,  lit  qui  ne  l’est  pas.  Chip.:  “To 
each  person  who  is  a  member  of  the 
lodge-family  is  assigned  a  fixed  seat,  or 
habitual  abiding  place,  which  is  called 
abbinos.” — Sch.  ii,  63.  Del.  achpiney, 
a  place  to  sleep  on,  Zeisb.] 
appohteau,  it  remains  or  rests  in. 

[Note. — It  was  the  intention  of  the  com¬ 
piler.  judging  from  his  reference  under  apeh- 
tunk,  to  complete  the  definition  of  the  term 
appohteau,  but  aside  from  a  marginal  note  in 
pencil  no  reference  to  it  is  made  in  the  manu¬ 
script.] 

appcosu,  apwosu,  op-,  v.  i.  he  roasts, 
bakes;  pass,  it  (an.  subj.)  is  roasted, 
Prov.  12,  27;  Is.  44,  16;  1  K.  19,  6 
( apuvsu ,  roasted;  appmsish  weyatus, 
roast  the  meat,  C.).  See  apwou. 

[Del.  achpussi,  Zeisb.] 
appu,  v.  i.  (1)  he  sits;  nut-ap,  I  sit,  Ezek. 
28,  2;  pi.  appuog,  they  sit,  Ps.  119,  3; 
suppos.  ken  apean,  thou  that  sittest,  Jer. 
22,  2.  (2)  he  rests,  remains,  abides 

( pevsi ),  Ps.  10,  8;  1  John  3,  14;  im¬ 
perat.  apsh,  pi.  apek,  apegk,  Gen.  22,  5; 
1  Sam.  19,  2;  Matt.  10,  11;  suppos.  noh 
apit,  he  that  abideth,  who  remains 
(6  pevoov),  2  John  9  ( matta  apex,  ‘he 
is  not  at  home,’  Prov.  7,  19).  (3)  he 

is,  he  continues  to  be,  lives,  in  a  state 
where  rest  or  inactivity  is  implied:  toh 
kutapin,  where  art  thou?  Gen.  3,  9:  na 
kutappin,  thou  art  there,  Ps.  139,  8;  im- 


appu — continued. 

perat.  na  apsh,  ‘be  there’  (remain 
there),  Ex.  24, 12;  cf.  1  Sam.  19,  3;  sup¬ 
pos.  ne  apit,  where  he  was,  Ex.  20,  21; 
pi.  part,  neg  apitcheg,  they  who  are,  were, 
Ex.  7,  18,  21;  Luke5,  7;  matta  pish  nut- 
appu,  I  shall  not  lie,  Job  7,  21.  With 
dppu  (he  is  at  rest,  or  inactive)  cf.  ayeu 
(he  is  in  place,  posited),  ahteau  (he  has 
himself,  or  is  in  possession;  habet,  se 
habet;  see  ohtauunat),  ussu  (he  acts,  is 
doing,  agit),  and  unnrin,  vmt-unniin  (he. 
is  such  as,  or  of  the  sort  of) :  the  verbs 
by  which  Eliot  translates,  with  sufficient 
accuracy,  the  substantive  verb  of  exist¬ 
ence. 

[Narr.  yo  appitch  ewd,  let  him  sit  here; 
mat-apeu,  he  is  not  at  home.  Abn.  ned’- 
dpi,  je  suis  assis;  3d  sing.  ap8.  Cree, 
dppu,  (1)  he  sits;  (2)  he  remains.  Del. 
vfdappin,  achpin,  he  is  there  in  a  par¬ 
ticular  place;  suppos.  epit,  Zeisb.;  achpo, 
he  is  at  home,  Zeisb.] 
appuhquassumro  (?),  n.  a  pillow;  pi. 
-mcounash,  Ezek.  13,  18;  upjmhquassu- 
mooun-it,  on  a  pillow,  Mark  4,  38.  See 
*abockquosin. 

[Abn.  p8*k8esim8n,  coussin  de  tete; 
p8rk8esin  i8,  ai  cela  pour  coussin.] 
appuh.qu.au,  v.  t.  he  puts  over  (it)  as  a 
covering  (e.  g.  of  a  floor,  side,  or  roof); 
he  ceils  (it)  with:  appuhquau  anomuk- 
koxnuk  mehtugquash,  ‘he  covered  the 
walls  on  the  inside  with  Avood’,  1  K. 
6,  15. 

appuhquosu,  appah-,  v.  i.  he  covers, 

puts  on  that  which  covers; - naslxpe 

cedar,  he  covers  [the  house]  with  cedar, 
and,  pass.,  it  is  covered,  etc.,  1  K.  7,3; 
suppos.  inan.  ne  dbuhquosik,  its  cover¬ 
ing,  Cant.  3,  10.  Hence  uppohquos, 
obbohquos,  abohquos,  n.  a  tent,  the  cov¬ 
ering  of  a  tent,  a  covert,  Ex.  40, 19;  Is. 
4,  6. 

[Narr.  abockqudsinash  (inan.  pi.),  the 
mats  with  which  the  wigwam  was  cov¬ 
ered.  Chip,  ah-puk-we,  covering  for  a 
lodge.] 

appuminneonash,  n.  pi.  parched  corn, 
1  Sam.  17,  17;  (up-)  2  Sam.  17,  28. 
From  apwou,  he  bakes  or  roasts,  and 
tnin-neash,  kernels  or  fruit. 

[Narr.  aupummineanash,  parched 
corn;  aupuminea-7iaw-saitmp,  parched 


14 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


'BULLETIN  25 


appuminneonash — continued, 
meal  boiled  with  water.  Abn.  abimin- 
aiinar,  ble  groule;  ned’abimine,  ned' - 
abimisi,  je  fais  griller  du  ble  d’Inde;  j’en 
groule.] 

appunnonneonash,  n.  pi.  ‘parched 
pulse’,  2  Sam.  17,  28. 

appuonk,  vbl.  n.  sitting,  a  seat,  Rev.  4, 
41  ( appuonk ,  a  chair,  C. ). 

apsin.  v.  t.  he  lies  upon  (it);  suppos.  ne 
apsuk,  that  whereon  he  lies,  Lev.  15, 20. 

*apwonnah.  an  oyster,  C.  See  *oppone- 
nauhock. 

apwosu,  it  is  baked,  roasted.  See  ap- 

pCDSU. 

apwou,  -wati,  v.  t.  an.  he  roasts  or 
cooks  (meat):  apwonal  weyaus,  to  roast 
flesh,  1  Sam.  2,  15;  also,  as  used  by 
Eliot,  v.  t.  inan.  he  bakes  or  cooks 
(bread  or  other  inan.  obj.):  apwdog 
petukqununk,  they  bake  bread  (in  an 
oven),  Lev.  26,  26;  apn/:au  petukqunneg, 
he  baketh  (a  cake  of)  bread,  Is.  44,  15; 
2  Sam.  13,  8;  pish  kut-appdn,  thou  shalt 
bake  it,  Lev.  24,  5.  See  appajsn. 

[Rasies  gives  for  the  Abnaki  several 
verbs  expressing  the  mode  of  preparing 
animal  and  vegetal  food,  all  of  which, 
doubtless,  had  correspondences  in  the 
Massachusetts  dialect,  though  these  are 
not  to  lie  found  in  Eliot:  e.  g.  ned’ 
abipesi  [  =  net’  apepesin?] ,  je  fais  cuire 
dans  la  cendre;  ne-bagas'tSn,  je  fais 
cuire  (v.  g.  de  la  viande);  ne-bagasse- 
mahk  penak,  je  fais  cuire  des  poires  de 
terre;  neiF  afxiTneg8e,  je  fais  cuire  sur 

les  charbons;  ne-pesa k-Salxi meg8e, - k 

la  broche;  ne-pesd  kg8abahn,  je  grille 
( v.  g.  un  anguille,  viande) ;  ned-abe8ahn, 
je  grille  de  la  viande,  sans  broche; 
ri8e8ebap&  k8e,  je  rotis,  me  servant 
d’une  corde;  ne<Tap8sin,  ne-pessag8a- 
bahn,  etc.,  je  rotis  avec  une  broche,  etc. ; 
ned'aijahn ,  je  rotis  (v.  g.  un  lievre);  je 
le  fais  rotir,  etc.  [C’f.  Del.  acbpoan, 
bread,  Zeisb.] 

*aquaunduut  (Peq. ),  n.  the  ‘blue  fish’ 
[Teinnodon  saltator,  Cuv.],  Stiles.  Cf. 
*osacdntuck. 

*aquene  (Narr.),  n.  ‘peace’,  R.  IV.;  a 
truce,  cessation  of  hostilities.  From 
ahque  (aquie,  R.  W. ),  he  desists,  leaves 
off,  refrains. 

aquidnet,  at  the  island.  See  ahrpiedne. 


&q\it  =  agqnit,  ( when  he  is  clothed.  See 
hogkao. 
as.  See  ash. 

asampamukquodt.  See  assompamuk 
quodt. 

*asauanash  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  ‘a  kind  of 
dice  which  are  plumb  stones  painted, 
which  they  cast  in  a  tray’,  R.  AY.  145, 
146. 

[Abn.  esse8an-ar,  les  grains  du  jeu 
du  plat.] 

ase-,  in  comp,  words.  See  hose-. 
asekesukokish,  day  by  day.  See  hose; 
hdsekdeu. 

asemuk,  suppos.  pass.  part,  of  usseii:  ne 
asemuk,  that  which  is  done,  Eccl.  8, 
17;  pi.  -kish,  v.  16. 

ase'quam,  v.  t.  he  sews  (it); - <o  v-usli- 

konagk,  he  sews  new  cloth,  Mark  2,  21; 
kut-ushquam,  thou  sewest  up,  Job  14, 
17  ( ushquamunai  monag,  to  sew  one’s 
clothes,  C.). 

[Abn.  i~ied' dsk8a8au,  jecouds  chemise; 
sk8a8ah,  il  lafautcoudre;  ned' ask8amen, 
je  le  couds  (v.  g.  canot,  item  vestem, 
etc.).] 

ash,  as,  adv.  ‘of  continuance’,  ‘still’, 
El.  Gr.  21;  while,  Mark  5,  35;  Luke 
22,  47  (ash  pamooadt,  ‘while  he  yet 
spake’):  ash  pamaidam  [on],  while  I 
live,  Ps.  63,  4  (as  pamoniam,  Ps.  146,  2  i ; 
as  yen  apeh,  v‘ while  I  have  any  being’, 
while  I  remain  here,  Ps.  146,  2.  Cf. 
asq. 

[Narr.  as  pummewi ,  ‘he  is  not  gone 
by’,  i.  e.,  he  is  yet  going.  Micm.  echk, 
lorsque,  pendant  que.  Chip,  ka  rnashi , 
mashi  ndnge,  not  yet;  baa  mashi,  before. 
Del.  es,  yet,  Zeisb.] 
ashabp,  ashap.  See  hashdbp,  a  net. 
*ashaunt  (Narr.),  a  lobster,  pi.  -teaiig, 
R.  AY.;  au  so  hau  nauc  hoc,  lobster, 
AA'ood.  Peq.  muschundaug,  Stiles, 
ashim  ( ?),  n.  a  fountain,  Cant.  4, 12  (but 
elsewhere  tohkekom).  The  nearest  cor¬ 
respondence  with  this  word  found  in 
any  dialect  of  the  Algonquian  is  Abn. 
asiem  nebi,  ‘il  puise  de l’eau’;  dsihi nebi, 
‘vas  querir,  puise,  de  l’eau,  soit  du 
ruisseau,  soit  a  la  eabane’;  ned-a' sihibe, 
‘je  puise  de  l’eau,  fonti  vel  fluvio.’ 
Perhaps  related  to  assam-au,  he  gives 
nourishment  to,  he  provides  (?) . 
ashkon.  See  askdn. 


Trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


1  5 


ashkoshqui,  -ki;  oshkoski,  (v.  i.  it  is) 
green;  as  adj.  green,  Ps.  37,  2;  Jer.  17,  8 
( askosqae ,  C. ):  ashkoshquhkonlu,  in 
green  places,  ‘  in  green  pastures  ’ ,  Mass. 
Ps.,  Ps.  23,  2;  ‘on  the  green  grass,’ 
Mark  6,  39;  suppos.  oskoskqut,  when  it 
is  green,  Ps.  37,  2  (‘the  green  herb’); 
inan.  pi.  ashkoski-yeuash,  Esth.  1,  6. 
Augm.  of  aske,  q.  v. 

[Narr.  askdski.  Del.  asgask,  Zeisb.  ] 
ashkuh.qu.ame,  (it  is)  green,  i.  e.  grow¬ 
ing  (of  a  tree,  or  of  wood),  Gen.  30,  37: 
onat-uh  askuhquam-ut,  ‘like  the  green 
tree’,  Ps.  37,  35;  ut  askunkquam-ut, 
under  a  green  tree,  Deut.  12,  2;  1  K. 
14,  23.  See  askunkq. 

[Abn.  aresksakS,  arbre  vert,  qui  ne 
peut  bruler;  skakSr,  bois  que  n’est 
pas  sec;  (modern  Abn.  ska-kicam ,  green 
stick,  K.  A. ).] 

*ashonaquo  (Narr.),  a  cap  or  hat.  See 
hashoonukao;  *onkqueekhao. 
ashpohtag,  oh.sh.poh.tag,  suppos.  of 
ushpohteau,  (when  it  is)  higher  (when 
it)  reaches  up  to;  in  height,  from  bottom 
to  top,  Ex.  37,  25;  38,  1:  ne  dshqiohtcig, 
the  height  of  it.  , 

ashpukquodt,  spukquodt,  it  has  the 

taste  of,  tastes  of;  suppos.  ne  dshpuk- 
quok,  ne  spukquok,  the  taste  of  it,  its 
taste.  See  spukquodt. 
ashpummeu,  adv.  as  yet.  See  ash; 
pummeu. 

ashpunadt,  suppos.  when  it  happens  to, 
or  befalls  (him).  See  ushpinail. 
ashpunuk,  suppos..  of  ushpunnum,  when 
lie  lifts  or  hoists  (it)  up. 
ashq.  See  asq. 

ashqshont,  suppos.  part,  he  who  re¬ 
mains;  pi.  -oncheg,  Ezek.  36,  3,  4. 
ashqshunk,  n.  coll,  the  remainder,  what 
is  left.  See  islikont;  sequnaii. 
ashqueteamuk,  suppos.  pass.  inan.  that 
which  is  left.  See  sequtteaumuk. 
ashqunut,  suppos.  of  sequnaii;  noh  ash- 
qunut,  he  who  is  left,  who  remains;  pi. 
-utcheg,  Neh.  1,  3. 
ashquosh,  pi.  of  ashq.  See  asq. 
asinnekoiis,  assunekoaz,  has-,  n.  a 
thorn,  thorn  bush,  Is.  34,  13;  Ex.  3,  2; 
Prov.  26,  9;  Ezek.  28,  24;  pi.  -kosog, 
thorns,  Gen.  3, 18.  From  hassunne  and 
kails,  stony  (i.  e.  very  hard)  briar. 


aske,  (it  is)  raw,  not  cooked  or  prepared 
for  food  ( askin ,  C. ):  askeyails  [cwd-g- 
weyaus],  raw  flesh,  1  Sam.  2,  15.  The 
primary  signification  is,  not  yet  (see 
asq);  not  yet  mature,  green  (whence 
moskeht,  grass,  etc.);  not  yet  fitted  to 
lie  eaten,  raw. 

[Narr.  askun,  it  is  raw.  Abn.  skie, 
crud;  ski8i,  cruement,  on  le  mange  cru; 
skihan  (an.),  cru.  Del.  askivn,  raw, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  104;  S.  B.  14.] 
askequttum,  n.  a  snail,  Lev.  11,  30;  Ps. 
58,  8. 

askkuhnk.  See  askunkq. 
askon  (?),  n.  a  horn  (?),  2  Sam.  22,  3; 
Ps.  75,  4;  1  K.  1,  29:  wut-askon,  his 
horn,  Ps.  112,  9;  pi.  dskonog,  Dan. 
7,  8  ( weween ,  horn,  C. ).  Cf.  muskon, 
a  bone. 

askon,  ashkon,  n.  an  undressed  skin,  a 
raw  hide,  Lev.  S,  17;  9,  11;  Gen.  27, 16; 
uskon,  Ex.  29,  14  ( oskon ,  C.);  untaskon, 
his  hide,  Lev.  4,  11;  pi.  -naog.  From 
aske;  askun,  it  is  not  yet  (prepared). 
Cf.  ohkeon. 

[Del.  askcliey,  Zeisb.] 
askonemes  (?),  n.  dim.  a  little  horn, 
Dan.  7,  8. 

askeok,  n.  a  serpent,  pi.  askeokog,  Gen. 
3, 1;  Deut.  8, 15.  (“Snakes  divers;  .  .  . 
the  general  Salvage  name  of  them  is 
ascou-ke.” — Morton’s  N.  E.  Canaan,  b. 
2,  ch.  5.)  ashkook,  5 lass.  Ps.,  John  3, 
14.  See  aohk;  sesekq. 

[Narr.  askug;  moaskug ,  a  black  snake. 
Abn.  sk8k,  pi.  sk8gak.  Peq.  skoogs, 
Stiles.  Chip,  kenahbeg,  J. ;  ginebig,  Bar. ; 
(St  Mary’s)  ke  nai  bik,  Sch.  Del.  aeh- 
gook  (cf.  schahachgekhasu,  v.  adj.  long, 
straight,  striped),  Zeisb.  Gr.] 
askootasq,  n.,  pi.  -asquash,  Num.  11,  5, 
where  it  is  put  for  ‘cucumbers’;  mon- 
askeut asquash,  ‘melons’,  ibid,  (but  maon- 
\  osketdmuk,  ‘cucumbers’,  ‘or  a  raw 
thing’,  and  ohhosketdm.uk,  ‘watermel¬ 
on’,  C. )  From  -asq,  n.  generic  for  that 
which  is  eaten  raw  or  green,  with  askeld, 
green  (in  color);  green-colored  fruit 
which  may  be  eaten  raw  or  unripe. 
“ Isquouier squashes  is  their  best  bread  in 
summer  when  their  corn  is  spent;  a 
fruit  like  a  young  pumpion.” — Wood’s 
N.  E.  Prospect,  b.  2,  ch.  6.  See  asq. 


16 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


askootasq — continued. 

[Narr.  askutasquash,  “their  vine  ap¬ 
ple,  which  the  English  from  them  call 
squashes,  about  the  bigness  of  apples, 
of  several  colors,”  R.  W.  Chip.  (Gr. 
Trav. )  ashketuhmo,  melon;  (Saginaw) 
esh-ke-tah-mo,  Sch.  n,  462.  Shawn. 
yesketoah.7nd.ikee,  melon  [cf.  ohhoskM- 
muk,  C.  supra].  Del.  ehaskitamank  (pi. ) , 
watermelons,  Zeisb.] 
askuhhum,  v.  t.  he  waits  (and  watches) 
for  (it),  pi.  -humwog,  John  5,  3;  im- 
perat.  2d  pi.  -humcok,  watch  ye  (it), 
Ezra  8,  29. 

askuhwheteau,  v.  i.  he  keeps  watch, 
watches,  1  Sam.  4,  13;  nut-askuhwhe- 
team  (- askweteam ,  Ps.  102,  7),  I  watch ; 
imper.  2d  pi.  -teagk,  watch  ye,  Mark  13, 
35,  37.  Adj.  and  adv.  -ieae,  of  watch¬ 
ing  (with  komuk ,  a  watch  tower),  Is. 
21,  5.  Ybl.  n.  -teaonk,  watching,  a 
watch.  N.  agent,  -team,  a  watchman, 
Ps.  90,  4;  Judg.  7,  19. 

*askun  (Narr.),  it  is  raw.  See  aske. 
askunkq,  askkuhnk,  n.  a  green  tree, 
Ezek.  17,  24;  20,  47;  cf.  kishkunk;  mus- 
sooonk. 

askuwhekonau,  v.  t.  an.  (with  charac- 
teristic  of  continued  action)  he  habitu¬ 
ally  watches  or  is  a  spy  upon  (him), 
ascokekodteamoo,  v.  i.  he  is  a  de¬ 
ceiver,  (habitually)  deceives;  suppos. 
noh  asookekodteamwit,  he  who  deceives, 
Job  12,  16.  ( nut-assookekodteam ,  I 

cheat,  C.)  Ybl.  n.  -amcoonk,  -aumuonk, 
deceiving,  deceit,  craft.  N.  agent. 
-amooen,  a  deceiver,  one  who  is  crafty, 
Job  5,  12;  15,  5. 

[Narr.  kutt  assokak&mme,  you  deceive 
me.] 

ascokekomaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  deceives, 
cheats  (him),  John  7,  12;  suppos. 
noh  asookekomont,  he  who  deceives 
(another),  Prov.  26,  19;  pass,  noh 
ascokekomit,  he  who  is  deceived,  Job 
12,  16. 

ascotu,  v.  i.  he  is  foolish,  ignorant,  sim¬ 
ple,  Prov.  14,  15,  18;  17,  7;  pi.  -uog, 
Is.  56,  10.  Vbl.  n.  asootuonk,  folly. 

[Narr.  ass6tu  and  assoko,  a  fool.  Abn. 
azSgSailgan,  folie;  asSghi,  il  est  fou,  il 
n’a  point  d’esprit.] 
aspuhquaeti.  See  uskpuhquaeu. 


asq.  ashq,  asquam,  not  yet,  before  that, 
Jer.  1,  5;  1  Sam.  3,  7;  Luke  22,  34. 
Opposed  to  dime,  further,  more  than. 
It  is  the  base  of  aske,  *askun,  it  is  raw 
or  not  prepared  for  food :  ashkoshki, 
green;  wuske,  young,  new.  In  compo¬ 
sition  it  serves  as  the  n.  generic  for 
whatever  is  eaten  or  otherwise  used 
when  green  or  immature;  not  yet  ripe; 
pi.  asquash,  whence  our  ‘squash.’  See 
askootasq. 

[Narr.  asquam,  not  yet;  as  pummewi, 
he  is  not  gone  by;  askim,  it  is  raw. 
Abn.  eskitamek  8a‘saSe,  melon  d’eau, 
qu’on  ne  fait  pas  cuire.  Micm.  echk, 
lorsque,  pendant  que;  echk8menahh,  au- 
paravant.  Cree  numma  eskwa,  not  yet. 
Del.  esquo,  esquota,  not  yet,  Zeisb.  Ill. 
es c8a,  not  yet.] 

*asqhuttcoche,  whilst,  C.  =  asq-uttcoche. 

assa[au(?)],  v.  i.  to  turn  back:  matta 
nut-assawp,  I  did  not  turn  back,  Is. 
50,  5.  See  assoushau. 

[Chip,  nind  ajeta,  ‘I  draw  (move) 
backwards,’  Bar.] 

assamaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  feeds  (him),  gives 
(him)  to  eat,  Ps.  136,  25;  imperat. 
2d  pi.  ossammk,  feed  ye  (the  flock), 
Zech.  11,  4;  2d -f- 1st  sing,  assameh,  give 
me  to  eat;  sohkomau  \_=assohkomau\, 
he  goes  on  feeding,  habitually  feeds 
or  provides  food  for  (him);  nus-sohko- 
mon  (suppos.  when)  I  feed  (the  flock), 
Zech.  11,  7;  imperat.  2d  sing,  sohkom- 
moos  nul-shepsemesog,  feed  my  lambs, 
John  21, 15.  From  assamaii,  with  char¬ 
acteristic  ( ohk )  of  continued  action. 

[Narr.  assAmme,  give  me  to  eat.  Abn. 
ned' at samah,  je  lui  donne  a  manger; 
ned’a'sar,  je  donne  a  manger,  Micm. 
eshernSey,  je  donne  4  manger.  Cree 
dssamayoo,  he  gives  him  food;  Assam- 
issoo,  he  gives  himself  food,  serves  him¬ 
self.] 

assau.  See  assa. 

assepinum,  v.  t.  he  ties  (it)  together, 
binds  up;  imper.  2d  pi.  assepinook,  bind 
ye  (the  tares,  in  bundles),  Matt.  13, 30; 
—  viushpunnum,  q.  v. 

assishquttauaog,  n.  pi.  the  Pleiades,  or 
seven  stars,  according  to  Eliot,  in  Job 
38,  31;  Amos  5,  8;  but  R.  Williams 
gives  shwishcultowwauog  as  the  name  of 
‘the  golden  metewand’,  i.  e.  the  three 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK.-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


17 


assishquttauaog — continued, 
stars  in  the  belt  of  Orion,  and  this  is 
more  probably  correct,  the  name  sig¬ 
nifying  ‘three  fires’,  or  a  long  wigwam 
in  which  there  are  three  fires;  shwlsli- 
ciiltow,  R.  W.  47,  80.  See  (Narr. )  chip- 
jxipuock  under  chipappu. 
assoeposu,  os-,  v.  i.  he  slides  or  slips 
backward,  Hos.  4,  16. 
assompamukquodt,  asamp-,  (suppos. 
where  he  hides,)  n.  a  hiding-place,  a 

place  of  concealment:  - - -  tut,  ‘in  a 

secret  place,’  1  Sam.  19,  2;  Jer.  23,  24; 
‘in  a  den,’  Heb.  11, 38.  Adj.  and  adv. 

assompamukque:  -  ayeuonk,  hiding 

place,  covert,  Is.  32,  2. 

[Abn.  sabkSahgan,  cache,  espece 
d’armoire  dans  un  arbre,  etc.] 
assoushaii,  v.  i.  he  goes  backward;  nut- 
assousham,  I  go  backward,  Job  23,  8; 
hit-,  thou  goeth  backward,  Jer.  15,  6;  as- 
soushaog,  they  go  backward,  Jer.  7,  24 
( am.ihsha.og ,  John  18,  6). 

[Cree  asskche,  backward.  Abn.  ase- 
* tan'iSi ,  d’une  facon  directement  op- 
posee;  ned-ase  taiise,  je  marche  it  recu- 
lons.] 

a’ssownch.  See  *ausounch. 
asscotamcoonk,  n.  a  kingdom,  Dan.  7, 
27;  Obad.  21;  —tahscotamcoonk,  q.  v. 
Cf.  ketassoot. 

assuhshaii.  See  assddshau,  he  goes  back¬ 
ward. 

assun.  See  liassun,  a  stone, 
assunekoaz.  See  cissinnekoiis. 
asuh,  conj.  disj.  or  (El.  Gr.  22);  asuhmat, 
nor,  Gen.  21,  23;  Matt.  5,  34,  35.  Its 
primary  meaning  is  ‘after’  or  ‘behind.’ 
Perhaps  related  to  neese,  two. 

[Cree  ache,  dche,  else,  other,  alias; 
eg  ah,  or.  Chip.  ishkwd-,  in  comp, 
‘after,  or  the  end  of  something’; 
ajawaii,  behind.  Del.  schi,  schita,  or, 
Zeisb.] 

asuhkaiiau,  v.  t.  an.  he  goes  after  (him) , 
pursues,  follows,  Deut.  1,  36;  pi.  -kau- 
dog;  imperat.  pi.  asuhkiek,  follow  me, 
1  Cor.  4,  16;  suppos.  noh  asukiit,  he 
who  follows,  comes  after,  Eccl.  2,  18. 
With  inan.  subj.  asuhkom,  he  goes  after 
(it);  pi.  asuhkomwog,  Jer.  2,  8. 
asuhkaue,  (it  comes)  after;  as  prep,  and 
adv.  after;  negonne  onk  nen  .  .  .  asuh¬ 
kaue  onk  nen,  before  me  .  .  .  after  me, 
B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 2 


asuhkaue — continued. 

Is.  43,  10.  From  asuh  and  ail,  with 
characteristic  of  continuing  action  or 
progress  (-’k). 

asumungquodt,  ussu-,  it  smells  of,  has 
the  smell  or  odor  of;  pi.  inan.  -quodtash, 
they  smell  of,  Ps.  45,  8;  suppos.  ne 
asumungquok,  what  it  smells  of,  its 
smell  or  odor,  Cant.  4, 10;  7,  8;  with  an. 
subj.  wut-issumungqussu,  he  smells  of. 
Vbl.  n . -qussuonk,  his  smell;  manontam 
ne  asumungquok  hogkcoonk,  ‘he  smelled 
the  smell  of  his  raiment,’  Gen.  27,  27. 
Cf.  matchemunguot,  weetimungquot. 
at.  See  adt. 

*atauntowash  (Narr.),  imper.  2d  sing, 
climb  (it);  nt’ duntawem,  I  climb.  See 
wuttontauau. 

*atauskawaw  (Narr. ),  pi.  -wduog,  -waug, 
lords,  rulers,  R.  W.  See  ahtushkouwau. 
*attaboan  (Quir. ),  to  pray,  Pier.  59;  attdb- 
bowaumnk,  prayer,  ibid.  58,  59. 
*attitaasb  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  ‘hurtle-ber¬ 
ries,  of  which  there  are  divers  sorts, 
sweet  like  currants,’  R.  W.  91.  See 
sautduthig. 

[Abn.  scitar,  bluets  frais,  sans  6tre 
secs  (sing,  sate)-,  lorsqu’ils  sont  secs, 
sikisatar  ( at’sitar ,  les  fruits  sont  murs; 
bons  a  manger).  Narr.  sautaash,  ‘are 
these  currants  [these  berries  are]  dried 
by  the  natives.’] 
attoau.  See  adtdau. 
attuk.  See  ahtuk,  a  deer, 
attumunnum,  v.  t.  he  receives  (it); 
takes,  as  his  own,  from  another;  lit. 
takes  in  his  hand  (- nnum ),  Gen.  26, 12; 
suppos.  noh  attumunuk,  he  who  re- 
ceiveth,  Prov.  29,  4;  pass.  inan.  ne  at- 
tumunumuk,  that  which  is  received, 
2  K.  5,  26.  With  an.  2d  obj.  attumun- 
numauau,  he  receives  (it)  from  (him). 

[Cree  ootinum,  he  takes  it.] 
ati,  au,  v.  i.  he  goes  thither  (to  or  to¬ 
ward  a  person  or  place);  opposed  to 
wcom,  com,  he  goes  thence  (from  a  per¬ 
son  or  place),  Gen.  26,  1;  33,  17;  Ex. 
4, 18  {aid,  he  is  gone,  Prov.  7, 19);  pi. 
auog  (‘they  journeyed’,  i.  e.  went  on 
their  way,  Gen.  35,  5),  Hos.  7,  11;  im¬ 
perat.  2d  sing,  aush;  1st  pi.  ohtuli  {otuh, 
aonotuh,  Mass.  Ps. ),  let  us  go  to;  2d  pi. 
ongq,  go  ye,  Matt.  21, 2;  Josh.  2, 16;  sup¬ 
pos.  uttoli  aydi  (aoi,  Mass.  Ps. ),  whither 


18 


BUEEAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY  s 


[bulletin  25 


aii,  au — continued. 

I  (may)  go,  John  14,  4;  may  ne  dyoi, 
the  way  in  which  I  go,  Job  23,  10  (but 
addn,  as  I  go,  as  I  went  to,  Acts  26,  12; 
6&n  uttoli  woh  doi,  going  whither  I  may 
go,  2  Sam.  15,  20;  auon,  if  I  go  to,  Ps. 
139,  8);  toh  ayoan,  where  thou  goest; 
ne  ay  dan,  ‘in  thy  way’,  as  thou  goest, 
Ex.  23,  20;  suppos.  3d  sing,  and  part. 
ayont  ( aiont ,  aont),  when  he  goes,  he 
going,  Jer.  41,  6;  John  12,  35;  2d  pi. 
adog,  when  you  go,  Deut.  4,  5;  11,  8; 
3d  pi.  ne  dahettit,  ‘as  they  went’,  when 
they  were  going,  Luke  10,  38  (with 
inan.  subj.  auoma>;  nttoh  auomoo-uk, 
‘whither  it  goeth’,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  3, 
8).  From  the  root  of  this  verb  is 
formed,  by  prefixing  in'  (preteritive?), 
m’ai,  may,  a  path;  i.  e.  where  there  has 
been  going  (old  Engl.  gang). 

aii  or  woom  was  used  when  going  to 
or  from  a  place  which  was  spoken  of 
without  reference  to  the  locality  of  the 
speaker;  peyaii  (he  comes)  and  monehu 
(he  goes)  to  or  from  the  place  of  the 
speaker,  or  in  which  the  speaker  as¬ 
sumes  to  be;  aindeii,  he  absents  him¬ 
self,  takes  himself  away,  without  refer¬ 
ence  to  the  act  of  going. 

[Narr.  yd  kutt  dunan,  go  (you)  that 
way;  yd  atinta,  let  us  go  that  way. 
Chip,  nind-ezhah,  I  go  (John  11,  11); 
pret.  keezhah,  he  went  to  (2,  12);  sup¬ 
pos.  azhdhyon,  whither  I  go  (8,  14;  14, 
4) ;  azhahwahnan,  whither  thou  goest 
(14,  5).  Abn.  neniah  neda,  je  vas  la; 
nemahtsi,  je  vas,  je  m’en  vas.  Del.  eu 
or  warn,  he  goes  (thither,  to  a  place); 
suppos.  aane,  if  I  go;  ate,  if  he  goes; 
part,  eyat,  going;  imperat.  oak,  go  ye.] 
*aucup  (Narr.),  a  little  cove,  or  creek, 
R.  W.  See  kuppi. 
audchaonk.  See  adehau . 
audta.  See  autah. 

*auhaqut  (Narr. ),  a  mantle.  See  hogkoo. 
*aukeeteamitch  (Narr.),  spring  or  seed¬ 
time,  R.  W.  69. 

*aumanep  (Narr.),  a  fishing  line,  pi. 
-napeash,  R.  W.  104. 

[Del.  a  ma  na  tac,  Zeisb.] 

*aumaui  (Narr.),  he  is  fishing,  ‘is  gone 
to  fish’;  pi.  aumadog,  they  fish;  nt  ad¬ 
men,  I  am  fishing;  suppos.  pi.  aumach- 
ick  ( omacheg ,  El.),  they  who  fish,  fish¬ 
ermen.  (N.  agent,  dmaen,  pi.  -enuog, 


I  *aumaui — continued. 

fishermen,  El.)  This  verb  signifies  to 
fish  with  hook  and  line.  It  is  not  used 
by  Eliot  except  in  the  participial  oma¬ 
cheg,  and  the  derived  n.  agent.  (Cf. 
neotamdgquam,  I  go  a  fishing.)  Its 
base  is  dm  ( aum ) ,  a  fishhook  (Matt. 
17,  27),  primarily  a  verb  signifying  ‘he 
takes  fish,’  or  simply  ‘he  takes’  (cf. 
amdunum,  he  takes,  with  his  hand 
etc.),  which  in  the  suppos.  has  dmaik 
{dmrndg,  dmmdg),  ‘when  he  takes,’  and 
pass,  ‘what  is  taken’;  pi.  dmdgquog, 
dmmagquog.  This  suppos.  or  participial 
serves  in  composition  as  a  noun  generic 
for  ‘fish  taken  by  the  hook’,  and  (in  the 
singular)  for  a  place  of  taking  fish,  ‘  fish¬ 
ing  place’;  and  it  was  used  by  Eliot, in 
a  wider  sense,  for  all  fish,  as  kehtah- 
lian-dimaquog,  sea-fishes,  Num.  11,  22; 
mogk-ommdquog ,  great  fishes,  John  21, 
11;  how-amag-qut,  (objective)  to  any 
fish,  Deut.  4, 18.  See  namohs. 

[Abn.  ned-anmi,  je  p4che  a  l’hame- 
(;on ;  aiiine,  il  peche,  etc.;  ahmangan. 
on  peche  la,  il  y  a  peche.  Del.  a-man, 
fishhook,  Zeisb.] 

*aumsu-og  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  a  fish  some¬ 
what  like  a  herring,  R.  W.  See  dmmis. 

aunag,  onag,  unnag,  suppos.  of  unne, 
q.  v.,  if  it  be  so,  when  it  is  so;  ne 
aunag,  neaunak,  that  which  is  (i.  e. 
when  it  is)  so  or  thus;  pi.  nish  aunagieh, 
-kish;  used  substantively  for  event,  oc¬ 
currence,  action;  what  is  to  be,  or  may 
be,  so,  or  in  such  manner:  warne  ne  aunag 
papaume  ayeuumttuonk,  ‘all  the  things 
concerning  the  war’,  2  Sam.  11,  18; 
uttoh  aunak,  ‘how  the  matter  may  fall’, 
Ruth  3,  18;  parnk  ne  woh  aunag,  ‘one 
thing  is  needful’,  must  be  so,  Luke  10, 
42;  ne  dunak,  ‘the  color  of  it’,  i.  e.  its 
appearance,  likeness,  Num.  11,  7;  Ezek. 
1,  16.  Negat.  matta  dnancogk,  ‘if  it 
were  not  so’,  John  14,  12,  =  matta  una- 
ncog,  Judg.  9,  15  ( nednag ,  such,  C. ). 
As  prep,  according  to,  after  the  man¬ 
ner  of.  See  nan;  neane;  nnih. 

*aunakesu,  he  is  painted.  See  anogku. 

aunchemcokau,  unnaunch-,  v.  i.  he 
tells  news,  bears  tidings,  relates,  com¬ 
municates  information;  pi.  -kaog,  they 
told  the  tidings,  1  Sam.  11,  4;  pwh  kut- 
aunchemookom,  thou  shalt  bear  tidings, 


TKTJMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


19 


aunchemcokaii,  unnauncli — cont’d. 

2  Sam.  18,  20.  With  an.  obj.  -cokauail, 
he  bears  tidings  to,  tells  news  to  (him); 
nuttinauncliemcokauondoh  wunnaunche- 
mookauonk,  I  told  them  good  news,  ‘  I 
communicated  to  them  the  gospel’, 
Gal.  2,  2.  Vbl.  n.  -ookaonk,  -cokauonk, 
news,  tidings,  2  Sam.  13,  30;  18,  25,  26 
( achmcowonk ,  news,  C. ).  Continuative 
of  aunchemau  (-moo),  he  tells,  gives  in¬ 
formation.  , 

[Xarr.  aunchemokaw,  tell  me  your 
news;  cnvaun  mesh  aunchemokau,  who 
(has)  brought  this  news;  tockete-aun- 
chim,  what  news  (do  you  tell)?  Cree 
dchemoo,  he  relates.  Abn.  keg§i  aritah- 
gSat,  quelles  nouvelles  dit  on?  Sritah- 
g8at,  bonnes  nouvelles;  antsem8,  il  en 
dit,  il  en  raconte.  ] 

*aunckuck  (Narr.),  pi.  -quduog,  ‘heath 
cocks’,  R.W.  Pinnated  grouse,  prairie 
hen  (Tetrao  cupido,  Wils.?),  formerly 
common  in  Massachusetts.  From 
anogku  ( aunakesu ,  R.  W. ),  he  paints 
himself,  or  is  painted)?), 
auohquaeu,  at  the  end,  or  extremity. 
See  uhquaeu. 

auskomuwaii,  auiisk-,  v.  t.  an.  he 
chides,  reproves,  scolds  (him).  Vbl. 
n.  act.  auuskomuwaonk,  chiding,  re¬ 
proof  given;  pass,  auiiskontuonk,  being 
reproved,  reproof  received,  correction, 
Prov.  15,  10;  27,  5. 

*ausounch,  a’ssownch,  (Peq. )  n.  a 
skunk,  Stiles.  See  squnck. 

[Abn.  sigahk8,  bete  puante.] 

*ausup  (Narr.),  pi.  -pannog,  the  rac¬ 
coon,  R.  W. 

[Abn.  essebanes,  ‘chat  sauvage’, 
Rasies;  modern  Abn.  asban,  raccoon, 
K.  A.  Del.  nachenum,  raccoon;  but  es- 
panni-minschi,  ‘raccoon  wood,  yellow 
wood’,  Zeisb.  S.  B.  66.  Chip,  asseeban, 
Long;  ais'sebun,  Sch.;  aasebun,  Sum.] 
*autah,  audta,  autawhun  (Narr.),  the 
apron  or  covering  worn  in  front,  R.  W. ; 
for  adtau,  he  hides;  and  (caus. )  adtalx- 
heau-un  (adtahwhun),  hidden.  Cf.  ad- 
lahtou.  Eliot  has  nish  ivut-adtahwhu- 
nuhkonnaoash,  (of)  these  they  made 
aprons,  Gen.  3,  7;  i.  e.  things  which  con¬ 
tinue  to  (or  permanently,  uh-k-),  hide, 
auwakompanaonk,  vbl.  n.  torment 
(endured  or  suffered),  Rev.  18,  7.  See 
onkapunanitt  uonk. 


auwakompanau,  v.  i.  he  suffers  tor¬ 
ment,  is  tormented.  Adv.  and  adj. 
auwakompande  ayeuonk,  the  place  of 
torment. 

auwakompunnassu,  v.  i.  (act. )  he  in¬ 
flicts  torment,  he  tortures, 
auwakontowaonk,  aiuhk-,  vbl.  n. 

groaning,  Ps.  6,  6;  38,  9. 
auwassu,  auwosu,  awossu,  ou-,  v.  i. 
(adj.  an.)  he  warms  himself,  Is.  44, 15, 
16;  Mark  14,  54;  John  18,  18;  nut- 
auwas,  I  am  warmed,  Is.  44,  16  (auwd- 
sish,  warm  thyself,  C. ). 

[Narr.  awassish,  warm  thyself.  Abn. 
a8ds8,  il  se  chauffe.  Del.  a  wos  si,  warm 
yourself,  Zeisb.] 

auwe'pin,  v.  i.  the  wind  ceases,  Mark  4, 
39;  there  is  a  calm  (awweppOhquot,  ‘calm 
weather’,  when  it  is  calm;  auwepiU 
ahquompi,  a  calm  season;  owwepinnue , 
calmly,  C. ). 

[Narr.  awepu,  a  calm,  (the  calm  of) 
peace.  Abn.  aSihen,  il  fait  calme  sui 
la  riviere.] 

auwohhdmcoonk,  ahhaoh-,  ahhau- 
woh-,  vbl.  n.  complaining,  expressing 
of  suffering,  ‘groaning’,  Ex.  2,  24;  6,5. 
auwohkon,  v.  i.  it  is  used  or  made  use 
of  (habitually);  of  the  fat  of  meat,  etc., 
Lev.  7,  24;  of  a  sword,  Ezek.  21,  1] 
(auwohkonat,  to  use,  to  be  used,  to  weai 
clothes  out,  C. ) . 

[Del.  au  wee  ke,  to  use,  Zeisb.] 
auwohkonche,  awak-,  adv.  scarcely, 
hardly  (with  difficulty),  Acts  14,  18, 
1  Pet.  4,  18  ( auohkonche ,  hardly;  awd- 
konche,  scarcely,  C. ). 
auwohkontcoau,  owohk-,  v.  i.  he 
groans  (aloud),  Joel  1,  18;  Rom.  8,  22. 
auwohteaongash.  See  *ompategash. 
auwohteau,  v.  t.  inan.  he  makes  use  of, 
uses  (it);  pi.  -teaog  muttinohkou,  they 

use  the  right  hand,  1  Chr.  12,  2;  - 

yeu  siogkooivaonk,  they  use  this  proverb, 
Ezek.  18,  2;  suppos.  noh  auwohteadt,  he 
who  uses,  the  user,  Deut.  18,  10.  (nutt- 
auoMeam,  I  use;  nutt  auwohteam,  I  wear, 
C. ).  Vbl.  n.  auwohteaonk,  making  use 
of,  using;  pi.  -ongash,  weapons,  Gen. 
27,  3;  1  Sam.  21,  8.  (Cf.  ayeuhteau.) 
auwosu.  See  auwassu. 
awakonche.  See  auwohkonche. 
*a’waumps,  a’wumps  (Peq.),  a  fox, 
Stiles. 


20 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN"  25 


*awaun  (Narr.), someone;  interrog.  who? 
=  hoivan,  q.  v. 

*awausseus  (Peq.)>  a  l)ear,  Stiles. 

[Abn.  a8ess8s.  Menom.  ah  way  ska. 
Del.  au  we  sis,  a  beast,  Zeisb.  Chip,  ah- 
waysee,  a  wild  beast,  S.  B.] 
awossu.  See  auwassu. 

*awwusse  (Narr.),  adv.  farther;  awwas- 
sese,  ‘a  little  further’,  R.  W. 

[Chip.  (St  Mary’s)  waus'suli,  far  off; 
(Mack.)  was-sau  ( wdssa ,  Bar.).  Cree 
wdthow,  afar  off.  Abn.  aSassiSi,  plus 
avant,  derriere;  nanSut,  c’est  loin; 
mahda  naii8at8i,  ce  n’est  pas  loin.  (See 
n6adt;  nodhteauundt. )  Del.  awossi,  -iyeu, 
beyond,  over,  the  other  side,  Zeisb.] 
ayeu,  v.  i.  ( 1 )  he  is  here,  or  there;  he  is  in 
a  place,  is  located.  (2)  he  dwells;  noli 
ayeu  kali  appu,  he  dwells  and  abides, 
Job  39,  28;  null  ai,  mitt  aih,  I  dwell  (in 
or  at),  Ps.  23,  6;  Ezek.  43,  9;  kutt  ai, 
thou  dwellest;  pi.  ayeuog,  they  dwell, 
Dan.  4,  12;  Is.  30,  19;  negat.  matta 
ayeuooog,  they  do  not  dwell,  do  not 
have  place,  ‘they  were  not’,  Jer.  31, 
15;  preti  nutt  ai-up,  I  was  (there),  Acts 
11,5  [indef.  na  mo  null  ain,  I  was  there, 
Prov.  8,  27 ;  toll  butt  ain,  toh  kutt  ai-in, 
where  dwellest  thou?  John  1,  38];  im- 
perat.  ayish,  dwell  thou;  suppos.  1st 
pers.  uttoh  ayee  ( aei ),  where  I  may 
dwell,  Is.  49,  20;  Ezek.  43,  7;  2d  pers. 
Ayean;  3d  pers.  noli  dy it,  he  who  dwells, 
Is.  8,  18;  ne  ayig,  where  he  dwells,  Job 
15,  28;  pi.  (particip. )  neg  ayegig,  neg  na 
ayilelieg,  the  inhabitants,  they  who 
dwell  there,  Ezek.  38,  11;  Mic.  7,  13. 
Vbl.  n.  ayeuonk,  a  place,  Gen.  18,  24; 
Deut.  12,  21;  dwelling  place,  Num.  24, 
21. 

[Muh.  (suppos.)  oieet,  he  ‘who  lives 
or  dwells  in  a  place’,  Edw.  Chip. 
ahy&h,  he  is  (in  a  place),  John  6,  9;  8, 
35,  40;  tali  altydh,  he  shall  be  (there), 
John  12, 26;  ( ahneende  aindahyun,  where 
dwellest  thou?  1,  38);  suppos.  dhydyon, 
while  I  am  (here),  9, 5;  ahy-od,  (where) 
he  is,  7,  11.  Cree,  net  lan,  ‘I  am  being 
or  existent’;  i-6u>,  i-cloo,  he  is,  etc.; 
inan.  i-6w,  it  is,  etc. ;  suppos.  i-i-An,  or 
i-a-ydn,  if  I  am,  etc. ;  i-dt,  if  he  is,  etc. 
( i-d-thit ,  if  he  is,  in  relation  to  another). 
Howse  (136,  198)  regards  this  as  “the 
verb  substantive  in  its  absolute  form, 


ayeu — continued. 

and  Schoolcraft  (n,  436-441)  gives  the 
whole  conjugation  of  the  corresponding 
Chip,  verb,  “i-e-au,  to  be,”  as  a  sub¬ 
stantive  verb.] 

ayeuhteau,  ayeuwehteau,  v.  i.  he 
makes  war,  engages  in  war,  fights;  im- 
perat.  ayeuhleduash,  make  war,  do  bat¬ 
tle,  fight,  Prov.  20,  18.  Vbl.  n.  ayeuh- 
teaonk,  ayeuwut-,  war,  a  battle;  pi. 
-ongash,  Job  10,  17.  N.  agent,  ayeu- 
teaen,  -in,  one  who  fights  or  makes  war, 
Josh.  17,  1;  1  Sam.  16,  18.  Cf.  San¬ 
skrit  yudh  (pret.  dyutsi),  pugnare;  cum 
acc.,  impugnare;  dyudha,  arma. 

[Narr.  (imperat.  2d  pi.)  julietteke, 
fight;  (1st  pi.)  jiihettittea,  let  us  fight. 
Muh.  (suppos.)  oioteet,  the  man  who 
fights,  Edw.  Abn.  ai8d8ak,  ils  com- 
battent;  ned-ai8d8anman,  je  combats 
contre  lui.  Cree  ooteetendyoo,  he  at¬ 
tacks  him.] 

ayeuqueiik,  pi.  -queagig,  he  who  is  op¬ 
posed,  an  adversary.  See  dcoque. 

ayeuteaontoowaonk,  vbl.  n.  an  alarm 
of  war,  Jer.  4,  19.  (From  ayeuhteau, 
and  ontoowaonk,  calling  out,  shouting.) 

[Narr.  wauwhadlowawdnawat,  ‘  ’tis 
an  alarm’;  wawwhawtowduog,  they  hal¬ 
loo,  shout,  R.  W.] 

ayeuiihkonau,  v.  t.  an.  he  goes  against, 
makes  war  on  (him),  Ps.  18,  34;  144, 1. 
With  inan.  subj.  wun-nutcheg  ayeuuli- 
koneau,  his  hand  is  against,  opposes 
(him),  Gen.  16,  12;  suppos.  an.  ayeuli- 
konont,  when  he  goes  to  war  with 
(him),  Luke  14,  31.  Adv.  and  adj. 
ayeuulikone,  against,  in  opposition,  Prov. 
17,  11;  Luke  10,  11;  (mutual)  ayeuuh- 
konitiue,  in  mutual  or  reciprocal  op¬ 
position,  reciprocally  against,  Matt. 
10,  35. 

ayim,  ayum,  v.  t.  he  makes  (it),  Ex. 
37,  1;  Ps.  78,  16;  pi.  ayimwog,  they 
make  ( nutt  iyanx,  I  make,  C. );  with  an. 
obj.  ayeuaii  ahtompeh,  he  makes  a  bow 
(but  ayim  kduhquodtash,  he  makes  ar¬ 
rows)  ;  suppos.  noli  ayik,  ayig,  he  who 
makes  (it),  the  maker.  Pass.  inan. 
ayimoo,  it  is  made;  pret.  ayimai-up,  it  was 
made,  ‘it  became’,  John  1, 14;  particip. 
ayimooun,  made,  built,  Deut.  13, 16.  [Is 
this,  in  fact,  a  v.  t.  inan.  corresponding 
I  to  ayeu,  he  places  it?] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


21 


Oil 

[Eliot  did  not  use  the  letter  e,  “  saving  in  eh,  of  which  there  is  frequent  use  in  the  language,”  and 
he  gave  to  ch  the  name  of  ehee  (with  the  sound  of  eh  in  cheat,  cheese),  Gr.  2,  3.  Words  written  by 
R.  Williams  with  c  hard  will  be  found  under  fc.] 


chachepissue.  See  * chatchepissiie, 
wildly. 

chadchabenum,  v.  t.  he  divides  (it), 
Job  26,  12.  Freq.  of  chippinum,  q.  v. 

chadchabenumoonk,  chacha-,  vbl.  n. 
a  (permanent  or  continuing)  division, 
a  bound-mark,  Hos.  5,  10. 

chadchapen.uk,  (when)  he  divided  (to 
the  nations) ,  i.  e.  set  the  bounds,  etc., 
Deut.  32,  8. 

chadchekeyeuau,  v.  i.  he  speaks  vehe¬ 
mently;  (used  by  Eliot  for)  he  swears. 
[“The  word  we  make  for  swearing 
signifieth  to  speak  vehemently,”  Gr. 
21.]  More  exactly,  to  be  vehement; 
the  freq.  or  augment,  of  cheke-yeu,  it  is 
violent,  vehement.  Imperat.  -yeuash, 
swear  thou,  Deut.  10,  20;  suppos.  chnd- 
cliekeyeuadt,  if  he  swear,  Lev.  5,  4.  Ybl. 
n.  -yeuwdonk,  swearing,  an  oath,  Lev. 
5,  4.  See  cltekee. 

chagohtag',  chik-,  suppos.  of  chikohteau, 
it  burns. 

chagwas,  chauguas,  prom  interrog.  and 
relative,  what,  Matt.  5,  46;  6,  25.  See 
teaguax;  teagwe. 

[Quir.  chagwun,  that  which;  pi. 
chawgwunsh,  Pier.  Abn.  kegS  ds8,  qu’y 
a-t-il?  qu’est-ce  que  e’est?;  MgSi  ke. si, 
que  veux  tu  dire?  Cree  kekoo,  what? 
kekiuan,  something,  anything,  whatso¬ 
ever,  what?  Chip,  kdgoo,  what?  any¬ 
thing,  etc.] 

*chah,  interj.  fie  upon  itl  C.  See 
quah. 

[Cree  eh!  chef  ‘expressive  of  surprise 
and  disappointment.’  Chip,  sti,  shame! 
pshaw!  Bar.] 

chahquog.  See  chohqudg,  a  knife. 

chanantam,  v.  i.  he  doubts,  is  doubtful; 
-tamwog,  they  doubt,  Matt.  28,  17  (nut- 
chdndntam,  I  doubt;  ahque  chancintah, 
do  not  doubt  me,  ‘  you  may  take  it  for 
granted’,  C.). 

*chanisshau,  v.  i.  he  reels  or  staggers 
(like  a  drunken  man),  C.  Vbl.  n. 
(augm.)  chachannisshaonk ,  staggering, 
reeling. 


chansomps,  n.  ‘the  locust’,  Joel  1,  4; 
2,25;  pi.  -xuog,  2  Chr.  6,28;  but  ‘grass¬ 
hopper’,  Judg.  7,  12;  Jer.  46,  23;  Nali. 
3,  17.  Cf.  quaquequeshont.  The  word 
‘locust’  is  transferred  without  transla¬ 
tion  in  Lev.  11,  22;  Matt.  3,  4.  chon- 
somps,  locust,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  78,  46;  ehdn- 
sops  queoshau,  ‘a grasshopper  jumps’,  C. 

[Abn.  tzanres;  pi.  -sak,  sauterelles, 
Rasies;  chdls,  cricket,  K.  A.] 
*chatchepissue,  chach-,  adv.  wildly; 

chatchepissu,  [he  is]  wild  (?),  C. 
chaubohkish,  ‘except,  or,  besides’,  El. 
Gr.  22;  1  K.  10, 15;  Judg.  8,  26.  From 
chippi,  separate,  apart.  (Is  it  primarily 
a  plural?  nish  chaubuk-ish,  these  things 
apart?) 

chauguas.  See  chdgwas,  what, 
chauohpuhteau,  v.  caus.  inan.  he  puts 
it  in  water;  imperat.  ehauohpiihteash  om, 
‘cast  thou  [into  the  water]  an  hook’, 
Matt.  17,  27. 

chauopham,  v.  t.  he  puts  into  water; 

hence  he  seethes  or  boils  (it):  - 

weyaus,  he  boiled  the  flesh,  1  K.  16,  21. 
Cf.  touopham. 

[Narr.  chowwophdmmin,  to  cast  over¬ 
board;  chouwophash,  cast  (thou  it)  over¬ 
board.  Abn.  tsaSapS,  il  est  jette  dans 
1’eau.] 

chauopsheau,  v.  i.  he  falls  into  the 
water  (by  mischance,  -sh) ,  Matt.  17, 15; 
chnuopshash,  ‘be  thou  cast  into  [i.  e. 
cast  thyself  into]  the  sea’,  Matt.  21,  21. 

[Abn.  ne-tza8api'r<i,  je  tombe  dans 
l’eau;  IzaSapi'rrf,  il  tombe,  etc.] 
*Chauquaquock  (Narr.),  Englishmen. 
See  Chokquog. 

cheaouash,  cheouash (?),  n.  pi. 
branches  or  shoots  (of  a  vine,  Gen.  40, 
10,12). 

chechequnaii.  See  chequnau. 

*checout,  chequit,  n.  the  name  of  a  fish 
( Labrus squeteage,  Mitch. )  From  clioh- 
ki,  spotted  (?). 
cheeby.  See  *eliepy. 
cheke,  checheke,  adv.  slowly,  Prov.  14, 
26;  Neh.  6,  17;  late  (in  the  day  or 


/ 


22 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


cheke,  checheke — continued, 
night),  Ps.  127,  2.  V.  i.  chekeu ,  cheku, 
it  is  late,  a  long  time:  nevmtch  cheku , 
‘after  a  long  time’,  Matt.  25,  19.  See 
chequnappu,  etc. 

[Narr.  wussaume  tatsha,  it  is  too  late 
(in  the  day  or  night).] 
chekee,  adv.  violently,  Hab.  1,  9;  Is.  22, 

18  [chekeyeu,  v.  i.  it  is  violent,  vehement, 
forcible;  frequent,  and  intens.  chadche- 
keyeu;  with  an.  subj.  -keyeau,  q.  v.]; 
chekee  usseonk,  doing  violently,  an  act 
of  violence,  Is.  59,  6;  ( chekewae ,  forci¬ 
bly,  C. )  See  chequnau. 

[Abn.  tsiganSiSi,  nialgre,  a  contre- 
coeur;  par  force.] 

chekeenehtuonk,  vbl.  n.  pass,  for  -ittu- 
onk,  violence  (suffered),  Hab.  1,  3  ( che - 
keittinne-at,  to  be  compelled,  C.?). 
chekeheati,  v.  caus.  an.  ( 1 )  he  forces,  uses 
force  with  or  on  (him).  (2)  he  ravishes 
(her),  2  Sam.  13,22;  wut-chekehe-uh,  he 
forced  her,  2  Sam.  13,  14  ( nut-chekeyeu - 
wae,  I  compel,  C.). 

*chekesu  (Narr.),  the  northwest  wind; 
suppos.  chekesitch,  when  it  blows  north¬ 
west,  R.  W.  Cf.  wut-cheksuau,  north¬ 
westward.  From  chekeyeu,  it  is  violent. 
*Chekesuwand,  n.  pr.  ‘the  [north-] 
western  god’,  R.  W. 

cheketamooonk  (?),  vbl.  n.  rebellion, 
Prov.  17,  11  ( cheketamde ,  rebellious,  C. ). 
chekbam,  v.  t.  he  sweeps  (it) ;  nut-chek- 
ham-un,  I  sweep  it,  Is.  14,  23  (nut- 
jeeskham,  I  wipe,  C. ).  Suppos.  inan. 
chekhikunk,  (it  sweeps,)  a  broom,  Is.  14, 
23  ( checonnachatoonk ,  C. ).  S eejiskham. 

[Abn.  tsikkehlgan,  balai ;  ne-tsikekehem- 
en  8ig8am,  je  balaye  la  cabane.  Chip. 
nin  tchigatdige,  I  sweep;  tchigatdigan, 
broom,  Bar.  Del.  tschikhammen,  to 
sweep;  tschikhikan,  broom,  Zeisb.] 
chekhaiisu,  -osu,  v.  i.  act.  an.  he  sweeps, 
is  sweeping;  pass,  it  is  swept,  wiped, 
Luke,  11,  25;  Matt.  12,  44. 
cheku,  ‘after  a  long  time’,  Matt.  25, 

19  [?]. 

chemaii,  v.  i.  he  paddles  or  rows  (a 
boat);  menuhke  chemaog,  they  paddle 
hard,  with  exertion;  ‘toil  in  rowing’, 
Mark  6, 48;  suppos.  noli  chem&it,  pi.  neg 
chemacheg,  they  who  paddle,  who  ‘  han¬ 
dle  the  oar’,  Ezek.  27,  29. 

[Narr.  chemosh  (imperat.  2d  sing.), 
paddle,  row;  pi.  chhneck.  Chip,  che- 


chemaii — continued. 
mai,  he  paddles;  imperat.  2d  sing,  chi- 
main  ( chemaun ,  a  canoe),  Sch.  n,  387; 
tchiman,  canoe,  Bar.  Del.  tschimacan, 
a  paddle,  Zeisb.] 

*chenauosue,  adj.  (an.)  churlish,  cross, 
Cott. 

chenesit,  (suppos.  of  chepem'l)  a  dwarf, 
Lev.  21,  20. 

cheouash.  See  cheaouash. 
chepaiyeuonk,  vbl.  n.  freedom,  Acts  22, 
28.  See  chippe. 

*chepeck  (Narr.),  a  dead  person.  See 
*chepy. 

*chepessin  (Narr.),  the  northeast  wind, 
R.  W.  See wutch epwoiyeu  (in  the  east) ; 
wutchepwosh  (the  east  wind).  The 
cold  northeast  was  perhaps  assigned  to 
Ch'epy  and  the  spirits  of  evil,  as  was 
sowaniu,  the  pleasant  southwest,  to 
Kaut&ntount. 

*chepewaukitauog  (Narr.),  v.  pi.  ‘they 
fly  northward’  [i.  e.  to  the  northeast], 
R.  W. ;  =  chepwoi-uhk-it  ailog. 
chepiohke  [chippi,  ohke ],  n.  the  place 
apart,  place  of  separation;  cliepioh- 
komuk,  the  inclosed  place  [komuk]  of 
separation,  hades,  hell,  Deut.  32,  22; 
Rev.  6,  8;  20, 13;  Is.  14,  9.  With  locat. 
affix,  chepiohk-it,  chepiohkomuk-qut . 

[Del.  tschipey-achgink,  ‘the  world  of 
spirits,  spectres,  or  ghosts’,  Hkw.] 
chepiontup  [ chippi ,  on  tup] ,  n.  a  skull, 
Matt.  27,  33.  Cf.  mishkondntup. 

[Abn.  tsipanaiitep ,  tete  de  mort.] 
chepisk.  See  chippipsk. 
chepshati,  v.  i.  he  is  astonished,  amazed, 
frightened,  Dan.  4,  19  ( chepshi ,  Is. 
50,  7);  pi.  -dog,  Mark  5,  42;  Job  32, 15; 
Dan.  5,  9.  Adv.  chepsae,  in  astonish¬ 
ment,  in  amazement,  amazedly,  Ezra 
9,  3;  Ezek.  4,  16.  Vbl.  n.  chepshaonk, 
astonishment,  Deut.  28,  37 ;  2  Chr.  29,  8. 

[Abn.  tsibaghinangSat,  cela  est  effroy- 
able.] 

chepshontam,  v.  t.  he  fears  or  is  amazed 
at  (it);  pret.  nuk-chepshonlamup,  I  M  as 
astonished  at  (it),  Dan.  8,  27. 

*chepy,  cheeby  (Peq.),  ‘evil  spirit,  or 
devil,’  Stiles.  “ Abbamocho  or  Cheepie 
many  times  smites  them  M  ith  incurable 
diseases,  scares  them  with  apparitions 
and  panic  terrors,”  etc.,  Josselyn’s 
Voy.,  133.  From  a  letter  of  Hecke- 
welder’s  (quoted  in  2  Mass.  Hist.  Coll., 


TRUMBULL] 


N ATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


23 


*chepy,  cheeby — continued. 

x,  147)  it  appears  that  the  correspond- 
ing  Delaware  word  ( tschipey )  “had  been 
made  use  of,  even  by  missionaries,  who 
knew  no  better,”  for  “the  soul  or  spirit 
in  man”;  a  use,  he  adds,  which  “none 
of  our  old  converted  Indians  would 
suffer.”  The  word  is,  in  fact,  only 
another  form  of  chippe  (q.  v. ),  it  is  sep¬ 
arate,  or  apart;  chippeu,  ( 1 )  he  separates 
or  goes  apart;  hence,  (2)  he  is  dead  or 
separated  (from  the  living);  pi.  chip- 
peog  (Narr.  chepeck),  they  are  separated, 
the  dead;  (3)  a  specter,  ghost,  or  ap¬ 
parition  of  one  deceased;  something 
separated,  and  preternatural,  as  manit 
(fromdnwe)  is  something  supernatural. 

[Narr.  chepeck  (pi.  j,  the  dead;  chep- 
ass6tam,  the  dead  sachem ;  chep-asqudw, 
a  dead  woman.  Abn.  tsebiSi,  separe- 
ment,  Rasies  (chiba'i, ghost,  K.  A. ).  Del. 
tschipey.  Nanticoke,  tsee-e-p,  ghost, 
dead  man.] 

cbequit.  See  *checout. 
cbequnappu,  v.  i.  (1)  he  sits  still,  is  at 
rest;  (2)  he  keeps  silence,  he  is  quiet;  pi. 
-puog,  Judg.  16,  2;  Ex.  15, 16;  2  K.  7,  4; 
imperat.  2d  sing,  chekunapsh,  be  still, 
Mark  4,  39;  2d  pi.  - appek ,  be  ye  still, 
Ps.  46,  10;  nanepaushadt  chequnappu, 
‘the  moon  staved’,  Josh.  10,  13;  and 
nepcvuz  chequnapjieup,  ‘the  sun  stood 
still’,  ibid.  ( nut-cliequnnap ,  I  am  silent, 
C. )  From  cheke  and  dppu. 

[Abn.  ne-tsikdpi,  je  me  tais,  taceo; 
tsigiSi,  sans  rien  dire,  en  silence.] 
cbequnaii,  cbecbequnaii,  v.  t.  an.  he 
takes  by  violence  from  (him),  he  robs 
(him):  neg  chechekqunukqueaneg  ]yish 
chechequnaog  (pass.),  ‘they  that  prey 
upon  thee  will  I  give  for  a  prey  ’  (they 
who.  rob  thee  shall  be  robbed),  Jer.  j 
30,  16. 

[Narr.  aquie  chechequnnuwash,  do  not 
rob  me;  suppos.  pi.  chechequnnuwachick, 
robbers;  pass,  chechequnnittin,  there  is 
a  robbery  committed.  Abn.  tfdgahSiSi, 
par  force,  malgre.] 

cbequnikompali,  v.  i.  he  stands  still;  j 
pi.  -paog,  -poog,  2  Sam.  2,  23;  imper.  2d 
sing,  chequnikompaush,  stand  thou  still, 
Josh.  10,  12;  and  indie,  chequnikompau, 
(he)  stood  still,  v.  13  [where  it  was 
mistaken  for  the  preceding  substantive, 
nepauz,  ‘sun,’  by  Adelung,  who  in  the 


chequnikompaii — continued. 
Mithridates  (3  Th.,  3e  Abth.,  p.  388) 
has  given  a  place  among  words  of  the 
“Naticks,  nach  Elliott”  to  ‘ chequikom - 
puh,  Sonne.’  Cf.  nanepaushadt  chequn¬ 
appu,  ‘  the  moon  stayed  ’ ,  v.  13] .  From 
cheke  and  -kompau. 

chequnussin,  v.  i.  he  lies  still;  woh 
nutchequnussin,  I  would  lie  still,  Job 
3,  13. 

chequodwehham,  v.  caus.  inan.  he 
shaves  (it)  off,  cuts  (it)  off  (makes  clean 
by  cutting;  caus.  of  chekodtam,  v.  t. 
inan. ;  cf.  chekham,  he  sweeps  or  wipes) ; 
chequodwehliamwog  up-puhkukoash,  they 
shave  their  heads  (with  negat. ,  Ezek.  44, 
20).  With  an.  obj.  chequodtweyaheau 
nashpe  chequodtweyaheg,  he  shaves  (him ) 
with  a  razor,  Is.  7,  20  ( chequddweehquog , 
razor,  C.). 

chequttummco,  v.  i.  he  roars  (as  a  lion 
or  wild  beast);  pi.  -umwog,  Jer.  51,  38. 

[Abn.  zaskademS,  (le  chien)  jappe.] 

cbetaeu,  v.  i.  it  is  stiff.  As  adj.  - 

rnissittupuk,  a  stiff  neck,  Ps.  75,  5.  Caus. 
inan.  chelauwehteau ,  he  stiffens,  makes 
(it)  stiff,  2  Chr.  36, 13.  Intr.  (adj.  an. ) 
chetauesu,  he  is  stiff,  unyielding  ( nut - 
chetaues,  I  am  stiff,  C. ). 
cbetanunaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  supports  (him) ; 
imperat.  2d  pi.  clietanuncok  ncochum- 
wesitcheg,  ‘support  ye  the  weak’,  1 
Thess.  5,  14. 

cbetimau,  v.  t.  he  compels  (him),  2  Chr. 
21,  11;  wut-chelim-o-uh,  they  compelled 
him,  Matt.  27, 32  ( nut-chetimuivam ,  I  am 
urgent,  C. ). 

chetuhquab,  n.  a  crown,  Cant.  3,  11; 
Is.  28,  3. 

[Abn.  tsitokk8ebiar,  parures,  soit  de 
cou,  soit  de  tete.] 

*cbicbauquat  (Narr. ),  it  is  day  [-break], 
R.  W.  67. 

[Abn.  tse‘k8at,  il  est  jour,  jour  com¬ 
mence.  ] 

*cbicbegin  (Narr.),  a  hatchet,  R.  W. 
*cbfckot  (Narr.),  fire  ( chikkoht ,  C. ). 
From  chekee  and  ohteau,  it  rages,  is  vio¬ 
lent.  See  chikoliteau. 
chikkinasuog,  n.  pi.  sparks  of  tire;  with 
noutae  (of  fire),  Job 41,  19;  Is.  50, 11. 
chikkup,  n.  a  cedar,  Is.  44,  14;  pi.  -pog, 
Ps.  148,  9  (utchukkiippemis,  cedar,  C. ). 
Adj.  and  adv.  chikkuppie,  of  cedar,  1  K. 
5,  8. 


24 


[BULLETIN  15 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 

\ 


chikkup  — con  t  i  n  uei  1 . 

[Chip,  jingwdk,  pine  tree,  Bar.;  shin 
gwauk,  Sch.] 

chikohteau,  v.  i.  it  burns,  as  a  fire  or  a 
torch.  Ex.  3,  2;  Deut.  5,  23;  Jer.  7,  20; 
pret.  naotau  chikohtop,  the  fire  burned, 
Ps.  39,  3;  suppos.  ne  chdgohtag,  that 
which  burns,  Gen,  15, 17.  From  chekee 
and  ohteau,  it  is  (by  nature,  inherently) 
violent,  it  rages,  is  fierce. 

[Narr.  chickot  ( chikkoht ,  C.),  fire.] 
chikosum,  chikkohsum,  v.  t.  he  burns 
(it),  Ex.  40,  27;  Is.  44,  16;  withan.obj. 
-sau;  wut-chikoss-oh,  he  burned  (him), 
Lev.  9, 11.  From  chekee,  with  the  form¬ 
ative  (sum,  an.  -sau)  of  verbs  denoting 
the  action  of  heat.  Vbl.  n.  act.  chik- 
kdsuonk,  a  burning,  Lev.  10,  6;  Is.  9,5; 
vbl.  n.  pass.  chikkdswutldonk,  being 
burned,  a  burn,  Ex.  21,  25. 
chipappu,  v.  i.  (1)  he  remains  apart, 
separate,  Prov.  19,  4;  from  chippi  and 
dppu.  (2)  he  is  free,  at  liberty  (i.  e. 
separated  or  apart  from  any  tribe,  not 
the  subject  of  any  sachem);  chipappu 
cowetauomonat,  she  is  at  liberty  to 
marry,  1  Cor.  7,  39.  Cf.  *chepy. 

[Narr.  chippdpuock,  the  Pleiades,  i.  e. 
they  sit  apart,  form  a  group  by  them¬ 
selves.  ] 

chipohke,  n.  land  not  occupied;  en 
chipohk-it,  ‘into  a  land  not  inhabited’, 
Lev.  16,  22.  From  chippe  and  ohke, 
separate  or  free  land. 

*chippachausin,  it  divides  (as  a  path 
where  it  forks),  R.  W.  From  chippeu. 
chippe,  -pi,  (it  is)  separated,  apart; 
chippe  ayeuonk,  the  separate  place,  Ezek. 
41, 13.  Adv.  and  adj.  chippiyeue,  Ezek. 
41,  12;  42,  1,  10,  13.  [For  derivatives 
see  chepy,  chepiohke,  chepionLup,  etc.] 
Vbl.  n.  chipaiyeuonk,  separation,  free¬ 
dom.  As  n.  a  part,  a  portion;  piukque 
chippi,  a  tenth  part,  Ex.  16,  36.  Cf. 
chonchippe. 

[Abn.  tsehiSi,  tsatsebiSi,  tzatzebiSi,  sep- 
a rtf  men  t.  Del.  tspiwi,  tspat,  separately; 
tschetsch-pi,  asunder,  apart,  Zeisb.] 
chippehtam,  v.  t.  he  makes  (it)  separate, 
keeps  (it)  apart,  Num.  6,  2;  with  an. 
obj.  -ehtaiiau;  suppos.  chapehtaiiont, 
Heb.  7,  26. 

chippesu.  See  chippissu. 
chippeu,  v.  i.  he  separates  himself,  goes 
apart,  Num.  6,  12;  Gal.  2,  12;  suppos. 


chippeu — continued. 
noh  chapit,  he  who  separates  himself; 
pi.  neg  chapecheg,  Ezra  6,  21;  Jude  19; 
freq.  chadchapeu;  with  inan.  subj. 
-pemco,  it  divides,  marks  separation 
(or  pass,  is  divided,  Hos.  10,  2);  im- 
perat.  chadchapemcoudj,  let  it  divide 
(one  thing  from  another,  Gen.  1,  6). 
As  adv.  wut-chaclchaube  ponamun,  he 
put  it  dividingly  or  for  separation,  Gen. 
1,  4.  Perhaps  this  last  form  should  lie 
referred  to  a  freq.  or  augm.  of  chipappu, 
q.  v.  See  *chepy. 

chippi.  See  chippe. 

chippinehteau,  v.  caus.  (inan.  subj.)  it 
causes  or  effects  separation.  Vbl.  n. 
chippinutunk,  that  which  separates,  a 
wall,  Ezek.  42,  20  (a  hedge,  C.). 

chippinetu,  v.  i.  he  is  born  free;  nut- 
chippenetip,  I  was  born  free,  Acts  22,  28. 

chippinnin,  n.  a  free  man,  Rev.  6,  15: 
-inninnu,  he  is  a  free  man ;  sunnummatta 
nut-chippinninnu-m,  am  not  I  free?  1 
Cor.  9,  1;  suppos.  pass,  chapininnumit, 
when  he  is  freed,  ‘being  free’,  1  Cor. 
7,  22.  Lit.  a  man  apart,  not  subject  to 
any  sachem  or  master.  Cf.  missinnin, 
a  captive. 

chippinum,  v.  t.  he  separates  (it),  puts 
it  apart.  From  chippi,  with  character¬ 
istic  (-num)  of  action  performed  by  the 
hand.  Augm.  chadchaubenum  [=  cha- 
chippinum ],  he  separates  permanently 
or  authoritatively,  establishes  a  divi¬ 
sion;  with  inan.  subj.  -mm,  it  estab¬ 
lishes  a  division,  it  divides.  Vbl.  n. 
-ummonk,  -umoonk,  a  dividing,  a  bound- 
mark  ;  -monk,  -anmwonk,  a  separation  of 
animate  beings,  a  tribe,  Judg.  21,  3; 
Heb.  7, 13.  With  an.  obj.  chippinaii,  he 
separates  or  parts  (them);  imperat. 
2d  sing,  chippin,  Gen.  13,  9;  pi.  -innmk, 
Num.  31,  27;  suppos.  chapunont,  when 
he  parts  (them),  Num.  6,  5;  Prov. 
18,  1. 

chippipsk,  chepisk,  n.  a  [single  or  de¬ 
tached?]  rock,  or  crag;  for  chippi-ompsk; 
ut  chippipsqut,  on  the  rocks,  Acts  27,  29. 

[Narr.  machipscat,  a  stony  path;  i.  e. 
may-chippisk-ut.  ] 

chippishinneuhtugk(?),  n.  a  bush,  Job 
30,  7;  Is.  7,  19. 

chippissu,  -esu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  sep¬ 
arate,  apart;  pi.  snog,  a  people,  a  dis¬ 
tinct  race,  Gen.  25,  23. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


25 


chippohteau,  v.  i.  he  is  (habitually, 
by  custom)  separate;  he  keeps  apart. 
Ybl.  n.  ckippcotaonk,  a  keeping  apart, 
separation,  Lev.  12,  5. 
chipwuttconapwau,  v.  t.  an.  he  kisses 
(him);  chipicodtam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  kisses 
(it);  wut- chipwuttconap  -  oh ,  he  kisses 
him,  Gen.  27,  27;  wut-chipwodtam- 
unkquoh  wusseetash,  she  kissed  (to  him) 
his  feet,  Luke  7,  38  ( nut-chipwuttoonap , 
I  kiss,  C.). 

[Abn.  Stsedamen,  il  le  baise.] 
chishkham.  See  jiskham,  he  wipes 
(it). 

chiskenitchdhhou,  n.  a  towel,  John  13, 
5;  that  which  wipes  the  hands,  or 
with  which  the  hand  is  wiped.  From 
chishkham  and  nutch,  with  the  inan.  in¬ 
strum.  formative  -dhhou. 

*chogan  (Narr. ),  a  blackbird;  pi.  cho- 
ganeuck,  R.  W. 

[Peq.  auchugyese;  massowyan,  Stiles. 
Abn.  tsSgheres;  tsSghereskS,  etourneau, 
Rasies;  modern  Abn.  chog-luspw,  K.  A. 
Del.  tschoquali,  blackbird,  Zeisb.] 
chogq,  n.  a  spot,  a  bit,  a  small  piece  (for 
‘farthing’,  Matt.  5,  26).  For  chohki 
or  chuhki,  (it  is)  like  a  point  or  spot. 
Cf.  kodckuki.  Suppos.  inan.  chohkag,  a 
spot,  a  blemish;  wompe  chohkag,  a  bright 
spot,  Lev.  13,  4,  19. 

[Cree,  chd-chdchagow,  it  is  striped.] 
Chogqussuog.  See  * Chokquog. 
*chog,set.  See  *cachauxel,  under  K. 
chohchohkag  (freq.  of  chohkag,  a  spot), 
that  which  is  spotted,  or  marked  with 
spots,  Jude  23.  See  chogq. 
chohchohkesu,  v.  adj.  an.  (freq.  of 
chohkesu )  he  is  spotted,  blemished. 
Ybl.  n.  -esuonk,  a  spot,  mark,  or  blem¬ 
ish,  Jer.  13,  23. 

*chohchunkquttahham.  Seechuhchunk- 
qutlohhdm,  he  knocks, 
chohkesu,  v.  adj.  an.  (1)  he  is  spotted; 
pi.  mohmcoe  chohkesuog,  they  are  thickly 
spotted,  ‘speckled’,  Gen.  31,  10,  12. 


chohkesu — continued. 

(2)  he  has  a  blemish,  or  deformity, 
Lev.  21,  21, 23.  Suppos.  chohkesit,  when 
he  is  spotted;  pi.  neg  chohkesitcheg  (freq. 
chohchohk-) ,  they  who  are  spotted,  ( Jen. 
30,  32,  39. 

[Del.  chi  qua  su,  patched,  Zeisb.] 
*chohki,  (a  point)  a  minute,  C.  (=  chogq). 
chohkcowaonk  (?),  vbl.  n.  a  sting[ing], 
1  Cor.  15,  55,  56;  chohkuhlico,  a  sting,  C. 
chohkushik,  (suppos.  as)  n.  ‘a  jot’,  a 
point,  a  speck,  Matt.  5,  18;  Luke  16, 17. 
chohquog,  chahquog,  n.  a  knife,  Gen. 
22,  6;  Judg.  19,  29;  pi.  -gash  (cf.  keneh- 
quog,  a  sharp  knife,  under  kenai) ;  kenag 
chahquog,  a  sharp  razor,  Ps.  52,  2. 

[Narr.  chauqock  (for  -quock^).  Abn. 
ntsekSakS,  eouteau;  pi.  -ag8r.  Menom. 
ahshaykon .] 

*Chokquog,  Chogqussuog,  n.  pi.  Eng¬ 
lishmen,  C.  “  Englhhman&og  asuh 

Chohkquog,”  title-page  of  Indian  laws, 
1709.  “They  call  Englishmen  Chdu- 
quaquock,  that  is,  Knife-men”,  R.  W. 
51. 

[Abn.  ntsekSak8i,  he  has  a  knife.] 
chonchippe,  besides  (praeter),  Is.  44,6, 
8;  1  K.  22,  7.  For  chachippe  ( chad - 
chaubef),  as  implying  separation,  ‘that 
apart’,  besides.  S  eechippe.  The  Mass. 
Ps.  has  chippe,  ‘save’  (besides,  except¬ 
ing),  Ps.  18,  31. 

chcochrowaog,  n.  pi.  quails,  Ex.  16,  13 
(but  ‘quailsog’,  transferred,  Nuin.  11, 
31).  See  *paupock. 

chuh,  interj.  ho!  look!  clnih,  ken,  qush- 
kish,  ‘  ho!  such  a  one  [thou],  turn  aside,’ 
Ruth  4,  1. 

chuhchunkquttohham,  v.  t.  he  knocks 

at  or  upon  (it);  nut - ,  I  knock  (at 

the  door,  Rev.  3,  20).  For  chuh,  chuh, 
quttuhham,  he  makes  a  measured  chuh 
chuh,  or  call  of  attention)?).  Cf.  (Narr. ) 
popowuttdhig,  a  drum,  R.  W. 

*chunkco,  n.  an  oyster,  C.  See  oppon- 
enauhock. 


E 


*eachimmineash,  n.  pi.  (Indian)  corn, 

C.  See  ivealchiminneash. 

*eatawus  (Narr.),  it  is  old,  said  of  cloth; 
eataubana,  old  traps. 

ebhoh,  interj.  ‘of  exhorting  or  encoura¬ 
ging’,  El.  Gr.  21,  22. 


ehtaii.  See  aetdi,  on  (at)  both  sides, 
eiantogkonauaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  mocks  at 
(him) .  See  dontohkonauonat. 
*eiassunck  and  wfaseck  (Narr.),  a 
knife,  R.  W.  Peq.  vriyauzzege,  Stiles, 
eiyane  (iane,  Mass.  Ps. ),  of  divers  sorts 


26 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


eiyane — continued, 
or  kinds;  all  sorts  of;  of  every  kind; 
viooche  eiyane  nine,  ‘store  of  all  sorts  of 
wine’,  Neh.  5,  18;  wame  eiyane,  all 
kinds  of,  Dan.  3,  15;  iydn-askehtuash, 
many  (divers  kinds  of)  medicines,  Jer. 
46,  11.  See  unne. 

eiyomp,  n.  a  male  deer,  a  buck.  See 
ahtuk. 

en,  prep,  to,  toward  (after  verbs  of  mo¬ 
tion),  Lev.  21,  6;  Acts  10,  32. 

-en,  -enin,  the  formative  of  verbals  de¬ 
noting  the  active  subject,  male  (nomen 
agentis),  represents  -ninnu  ( nnin ,  enln, 
R.  W. ),  a  male,  man.  The  second 
( -min  =  -en-unne )  is  the  general  or  in¬ 
definite  form,  e.  g.  adcha-u,  he  hunts; 
adcha-en,  he  who  is  hunting,  as  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  one  who  may  be  hunt¬ 
ing  or  who  habitually  hunts  (suppos. 
an.  noli  adcha-nont)  game;  adchaenin 
(pi.  -eninnu-og) ,  anyone  who  is  hunting, 
some  hunter;  usse-u,  agit;  suppos.  noli 
dse-il,  qui  (quum)  agit,  oraget;  n.  agent. 
usse-a-en,  ille  agens.  usseaen-in,  qui 
agens.  See  *nnin. 


*enada  (Narr. ),  seven  ( enutta  tahshe,  M. 
V.  Rec.). 

*enewashimi  (Narr.),  a  male  (beast). 

See  ninnu;  nomposhim. 

*enin  (Narr.),  a  man.  See  *nnin. 
enneapeyau  (unne-),  v.  i.  he  sojourns. 
Cf.  namshpeyau;  imperat.  ennedpeyaush 
yen  ohke,  ‘sojourn  in  this  land’,  Gen.  26, 
3;  unneapeyonat,  to  sojourn  (here),  Gen. 
47,4;  suppos.  part,  (pi.)  dneapeoncheg, 
( who  are)  strangers,  sojourners,  Lev.  25, 
45;  (sing. )  anyeapeont,  v.  40;  anea-,  v.  47. 
enninneaonk,  vbl.  n.  a  pestilence,  con¬ 
tagious  or  infectious  disease;  Lev.  13, 
44,  46;  Num.  11,  33;  Jer.  29,  17  (en 
ninnu-og,  enl  dfjpoi,  an  epidemic?). 
See  wesaMshdonk,  the  pestilence  or  yel¬ 
low  disease. 

*ennomai.  See  unnomdi,  a  reason. 
*eteaussonk(?),  pi.  -kash,  knives,  C.  Cf. 
*eiassunck. 

*ew o  (Narr.),  pron.  3d  sing,  he,  she; 
awdun  ewb,  who  is  that?  ewb  manit, 
this  God;  ewb  uckqushdnchick,  they  wr ho 
fear  him,  R.  W.  See  yeuoh;  noh;  -co-. 
It  is  properly  a  demonstrative. 


H 


hahanehtam,  v.  t.  he  laughs  at  (it),  Job 
41,  29;  -ehtauau,  he  laughs  at  (him), 
Job  9,  23;  suppos.  ahanehtauont,  when 
he  laughs  at  or  mocks  (him),  Prov.  30, 
17. 

hahanu,  ahanu  (-nou),  v.  i.  he  laughs, 
Gen.  17,  17;  18,  12;  Ps.  2,  4;  matta  nut- 
ahanu,  I  do  not  laugh;  pret.  kut-alidnup, 
thou  didst  laugh,  Gen.  18,  15;  toh- 
vrutch  hahanit  (suppos.),  wherefore  does 
she  laugh?  v.  13;  ahquompi  adt  ohani- 
muk  (suppos.  inan.  or  supine),  ‘a  time 
to  laugh’,  Eccl.  3,  4. 

[Narr.  ahdtnu,  he  laughs;  pi.  -uock; 
tawhitch  ahdnean  (suppos.),  why  dost 
thou  laugh?  Menom.  ah-y-ah-nen,  to 
laugh.  Shawn,  ah-yai-lee.] 
hahanuonk,  ahan-,  vbl.  n.  laughing, 
laughter,  Job  8,  21;  Eccl.  7,  3  (ahhanu- 
onk,  ahanshaonk,  C.). 
hashabp,  hashab,  n.  (1)  a  net,  Micah 
7,  2;  Luke  5,  5;  pi.  hashabpog,  Ezek. 
47,  10;  Hab.  1,  16  ( dshdp ,  pi.  -appog, 
C.).  (2)  vegetal  fiber  or  fibrous  ma¬ 
terial  used  for  making  thread  or  cprd; 


hashabp,  hashab — continued. 
hashabpog,  ‘flax’  (the  plant,  when  in 
the  field),  Ex.  9,  31;  hashabp,  flax  (pre¬ 
pared),  Judg.  15,  14;  ‘tow,’  Is.  43,  17; 
hashabpe  tuttuppun,  a  tow  thread,  Judg. 
16,  9;  hashabp-onak,  linen  cloth,  Mark 
14,  51  ( liashaponag ,  Ex.  35,  25).  (3)  a 
spider’s  web,  i.  e.  net,  Job  8, 14;  Is.  59, 
5.  “Les  sauvages  racontentque  ce  fut 
Michabou  qui  apprit  a  leurs  ancctres  a 
p£cher,  qu’il  inventa  les  Rets,  et  que 
ce  fut  la  toile  d’araignee  qui  lui  en 
donna  l’id6e.” — Charlevoix,  in,  282. 

[Narr.  asliop,  ‘their  nets;’  ashdppock, 
hemp;  masadnock,  flax  (Canada  net¬ 
tle?),  R.  W.  Abn.  rhape ,  filets,  rets; 
setagSk,  espece  de  chanvre  dont  on  fait 
des  rets  ( taghenahk ,  le  chanvre).  Chip. 
assdb,  pi.  -big,  nets.] 

basbabubtugq,  -bpubtugqi  ?)  ( hash - 

abpulitugq,  flax-wood),  n.  stalks  of 
flax,  Josh.  2,  7;  a  distaff,  Prov.  31,  19. 
basbconukco,  n.  a  hat;  pi.  hashccmukoo- 
unash,  their  hats,  Dan.  3,  21. 

[Narr.  aslionaquo,  or  saunkelippo,  a 
cap  or  hat,  R.  W.] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


27 


hasinnekoiis.  See  asinnekous. 
hassun,  n.  a  stone;  hussun,  pi.  -nash,  El. 
Gr.  10;  dim.  hassunemes,  a  little  stone, 
ib.  p.  12;  pi.  -sash,  little  stones,  ‘gravel’, 
Prov.  20,  17.  From  a  word  signifying 
to  pierce,  to  cut  (?). 

[Chip,  assin,  pi.  -nig  (inan.),  Bar.; 
oss'in,  assin,  pi.  (an.)  -neen,  Sch.  Cree 
assmnee;  dimin.  assinnis.  Del.  achsun, 
Zeisb.] 

hassunekoaz.  See  assinnekous. 

hassunnek,  -negk,  n.  a  cave,  Gen.  23, 
17,20.  (That  which  covers?  Cf.  hashco- 
nukco,  a  hat. ) 

hassunneutunk,  n.  a  (stone)  wall,  .Ter. 

51,  44;  Ezek.  13,  12. 

*kawunsh.ech  (Narr. ),  farewell,  R.  W. 
hennali,  hennou,  ahunou,  v.  t.  an.  he 
calls  him  (by  a  name  or  appellation; 
appellat.  Cf.  ussoivenau,  he  calls  him 
by  his  name,  nominat);  pass,  he  is 
called:  pish  liennou  Islmh,  ‘she  shall  be 
called  Woman’,  Gen.  2,  23;  pish  hennau  \ 
’  magooenin,  ‘  he  shall  lie  called  Bountiful  ’ 
(i.  e.  the  Giver),  Is.  32,  5;  suffix  form 
vmttinuh,  appellat  eum,  he  addresses 
him,  he  calls  him:  David  nagum  vmt- 
tinuh  [ —  wut-lienna-uht]  num-Manit- 
tcom,  ‘David  himself  calleth  him  [my] 
Lord’,  Mark  12,  37;  toh  kuttehenit,  ‘what 
art  thou  called?  ’  Gen.  32, 27 ;  noh  ahhenit 
(ahhunut,  Mass.  Ps. )  he  who  is  called, 
John  9,  11;  suppos.  dhunont,  when  he 
calls,  when  calling  (him),  1  Pet.  3,  6. 
Mutual  or  reciprocal  hettuog,  they  call 
one  another,  they  address  one  another, 
Gen.  11,  3.  Vbl.  n.  hettaowonk,  hettu- 
onk,  mutual  address,  language,  speech, 
Gen.  11,  1.  See  ahenit. 

[Narr.  tahena  [—toh  hennau ],  ‘what 
is  his  name?’  how  is  he  called?] 
hettam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  calls  (it);  pass. 
hettamun,  it  is  called  [cf.  ussaoieettam,  he 
names  (it) ;  usscowettamun,  it  is  named] ; 
pi.  hettamwog,  they  call  (it),  Ps.  49,  11; 
pass,  mwesuonk  hettamun,  his  name  is 
called,  Luke  2,  21 ;  hettamun,  it  is  called, 
Gen.  2,  11,  14;  Is.  56,  7. 

[Narr.  tahettamen  [—toh  hettamun'], 
what  is  this  called?] 

-lik.  See  -k-. 

*Hobbamoco,  n.  ‘their  evil  God,’  Lech- 
ford’s  PI.  Dealing,  52.  “That  we  sup¬ 
pose  their  Devil,  they  call  Habamouk,” 
Capt.  J.  Smith  (1631).  “Abamocho  or 


NHobbamoco — continued. 

Cheepie,”  Josselyn  Yoy.  (See  chepy.) 
“In  the  night  .  .  .  they  will  not  budge 
from  their  own  dwellings  for  fear  of 
their  Abamocho  (the  Devil)  whom  they 
much  fear.” — Wood’s  N.  E.  Prospect, 
pt.  2,  ch.  8.  “Whom  they  [the  In¬ 
dians  near  Plymouth]  call  Ilobbamock, 
and  to  the  northward  of  us,  Hobbamo- 
qui;  this,  as  far  as  we  can  conceive,  is 
the  Devil.” — E.  Winslow’s  Rel.  (1624). 

-hog,  -hogk,  n.  (1)  body,  corpus,  that 
which  is  external  or  which  covers  the 
living  man  or  animal.  For  hogki  (it 
covers),  or  hogkco  (he  covers  himself, 
wears  as  covering).  With  impers.  pre¬ 
fix,  muhliog,  the  (any)  body;  pi.  muh- 
hogkcoog,  El.  Gr.  9.  (2)  the  person; 

with  the  prefixed  pronouns  it  has  the 
force  of  ipse;  nuhhog  [n’hog],  my  body, 
or  myself,  ego  ipse;  kuhhog,  thy  body, 
thyself;  vjuhhog,  his  body,  himself. 

[Narr.  nohbck,  my  body;  wuhdck,  the 
body  (i.  e.  his  body).  Abn.  nhaghe, 
Shaghe,  mon,  son  corps.  Del.  liackey, 
Zeisb.  Cree  weydw,  the  body;  ne-yow, 
my  body,  myself.] 

hogki,  v.  i.  it  covers,  or  serves  as  a  cov¬ 
ering;  as  n.  vmh-hogki,  pi.  vmh-hogkiash, 
the  scales  (of  a  fish),  Job  41,  15;  sup¬ 
pos.  vmh-hogkiit,  if  it  have  (that  which 
has)  scales;  pi.  neg  wuh-hogkiitcheg,  they 
which  have  scales,  Lev.  11, 9  ( with  inan. 
or  impers.  subj.  wuhhogkiegig,  v.  10). 
So,  vmh-hogki,  a  shell  ( wohhogke ,  C. ). 
Cf.  Engl,  shell,  scale;  Germ,  schale; 
Greek  /vo/leo;,  6kvAov. 

[Narr.  suckauhock  [sucki-wuhhogki], 
black-shell  money,  R.  W.  Abn.  Sara- 
hdghe,  6caille  de  poisson.] 

hogk cq,  v.  i.  he  clothes  or  covers  him¬ 
self;  with  inan.  subj.,  it  is  a  covering,  it 
clothes;  sometimes  v.  t.  he  wears  (or 
is  covered  by)  it,  Prov.  23,  21;  Ezek. 
9,  2;  Ps.  93,  1;  imperat.  2d  pi.  hogkcok, 
‘put  ye  on’,  clothe  yourselves  with, 
Eph.  6,  11;  suppos.  an.  liogqut,  dqut, 
agquit,  when  he  wears,  or  is  clothed 
with,  Ps.  109,  18;  68,  13;  Dan.  12,  7;  ne 
dqut,  agquit,  that  which  he  wears,  which 
‘is  on  him’,  Gen.  37,  23;  1  K.  11,  30. 
Ybl.  n.  hogkcoonk,  clothing,  a  garment, 
Num.  31,  20;  Prov.  30,  4;  pi.  -ongash 
( aukcoonk ,  C. ).  With  a  subst.  express¬ 
ing  the  thing  worn  or  put  on,  hogkun- 
num,  v.  t.  he  puts  (it)  on. 


28 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


hogkoo — continued. 

[Narr.  acoh,  ‘their  deer  skin’,  which 
serves  for  clothing  [=  hogkoo];  ocquash 
[  =  hogkush,  El.],  put  on;  auhaqut,  a 
mantle  (i.  e.  what  he  wears).  Del. 
achgunnau,  he  is  clothed;  e  hach  quit, 
his  cloth;  e  hach  quink,  clothing, 
Zeisb.] 

hogkcochin.  See  ogkcochin. 
hohkcDn.  See  ohkaon,  a  dressed  skin, 
hohpaheau,  v.  i.  (caus. )  he  humbles 
himself,  2  Chr.  32,  26;  Ps.  10, 10;  makes 
himself  small  (?).  Cf.  p&eheau,  hemakes 
him  small,  or  low  (see  peii);  suppos. 
howan  hohpaheont,  whoso  humbleth 
himself,  Matt.  18,  4. 

hohpaii,  v.  i.  he  is  humble;  pi.  hohpdog 
(indicat.  for  suppos. ),  ‘the  humble’, 
they  are  humble,  Ps.  34,  2;  imperat. 
hohpash,  ‘humble  thyself’,  be  humble, 
Prov.  6,  3;  suppos.  ahhohpdcheg  [hah- 
pdit;  pi.  hahpaitcheg ],  Prov.  16,  19; 
hohhohpdcheg,  the  humble,  Ps.  10,  12. 
Vbl.  n.  hohp&onk,  hohpdunk,  humbling, 
humility,  Prov.  15,  33;  22,  4.  N.  agent. 
hohpaen,  one  who  humbles  himself,  a 
humble  man,  Job  22,  29.  Adj.  and  adv. 
hohpde,  Prov.  16,  19  ( liohpcoe ,  C. ). 
hohtoeu,  -toeu,  adv.  ex  ordine,  in  order, 
Acts  11,  4;  ‘from  time  to  time’,  Ezek. 
4,  10,  11.  The  primary  signification  of 
the  verb  is,  ‘it  comes  next’,  or  ‘in 
course’;  ne  hohtoeu,  that  which  comes 
next,  the  second,  =nahoht6eu,  secondly 
(El.  Gr.  21).  With  the  formative 
(-kin)  of  verbs  of  growth,  hohtdekin,  he 
or  it  grows  next,  is  next  in  growth; 
whence,  probably,  suppos.  noh  ad- 
toekit,  she  who  is  next  in  age,  ‘a second 
daughter’,  Job  42, 14.  Cf.  adtoekit. 

[Abn.  ittaSi;  eliesokke,  tour  il  tour; 
ahahtsiSi,  ahaMeghikkSi,  de  plus  en 
plus.] 

*homes  (Narr.),  an  old  man;  pi.  home- 
suck,  R.  W.  [?] 

[Abn.  nem8s-8mes,  mon  grand  pere; 
n8k-8mes,  ma  grande  mere,  etc.  Chip. 
nimwhomiss,  my  grandfather,  Bar.] 
*hominey.  “They  beat  [the  Indian 
corn]  in  a  mortar  and  sift  the  flour  out 
of  it:  the  remainder  they  call  hom- 
miney,  which  they  put  into  a  pot  .  .  . 
with  water,  and  boil,”  etc. — Josselyn’s 
Rar.,  53.  Powhatan,  homony,  broken 
maize,  Beverley.  “  Homini,  which  is 


*hominey — continued, 
the  corn  of  that  country  beat  and  boiled 
to  mash.” — Norwood’s  Voy.  to  Virginia 
(1649).  “They  live  mostly  on  a  pap, 
which  they  call  pone  or  homini,  each  of 
which  is  made  of  corn.” — White’s  Re¬ 
lation  of  Maryland  (1633).  From  the 
generic  for  ‘small  fruit’,  ‘berry’,  or 
‘grain’,  -min-ne,  pi.  -minneash,  which 
formed  part  of  all  names  given  to  pre¬ 
pared  corn.  Cf.  Narr.  aupiimminnea- 
nash,  parched  corn;  aupu  minea-naw- 
saump,  parched  meal  boiled,  etc. ;  mts- 
kokkamuck-6mene-asli,  new-ground  corn; 
ewdchi-m’ ne-ash,  corn,  etc.  Abn.  ska- 
iminS,  il  pile  le  bl6;  skam8n-nar  (pi.)', 
ble  d’Inde  (bl6  pil6). 

*honck  (Narr.),  a  goose;  pi.  honckock, 
R.  W;  the  gray  or  Canada  goose  (Anser 
canadensis,  L. ).  See  wompatuck  (the 
snow-goose). 

[Del.  kaak,  Zeisb.;  msereck  kaak,  gray 
goose,  Camp.  Abn.  kaAk8(f).  Peq. 
kohunk,  Stiles.] 

Vhopuonck  (Narr.),  a  tobacco  pipe,  R. 
W.  See  uhpooonk. 

*hoquaim  (Narr.),  a  fishhook.  See 
uhquan. 

hose-,  ase-,  in  composition,  is  a  distrib¬ 
utive,  signifying  each  in  its  turn,  one 
after  another  in  course:  cise-kesukokish, 
day  by  day,  in  daily  course,  Gen.  39, 10; 
Matt.  6,  11;  dse-nompukish,  morning  by 
morning,  every  morning,  Ex.  30,  7. 
hosekoeu,  adv.  in  course;  turn  by  turn: 

- kesukodlash,  ‘day  unto  day’  ( ke.su- 

kodash  hohsuhkoeu,  Mass.  Ps. ) ; - nu- 

konash,  ‘  night  unto  night’,  Ps.  19, 2.  Cf. 
asuhkciue,  it  follows,  comes  after;  duh- 
suhque,  aosuhque,  to  and  fro;  papaum- 
sheau  duhsuhque,  he  walked  to  and  fro, 
2  K.  4,  35;  adhmhqueau  and  ahaCihsuk- 
queaii,  he  goes  to  and  fro,  this  way  and 
that,  Job  1,  7;  2,  2  (infinit. );  aliadmk- 
queu  unuhqudeu,  he  looked  this  way 
and  that,  Ex.  2,  12. 

[Abn.  ehesokke,  tour  il  tour;  eheiaSu- 
si8i,  de  deux  l’un;  esi,  iltoute  occasion, 
ainsi  toujours  de  meme.] 
howaas,  n.  See  udas,  a  living  creature; 
a  live  animal. 

howan  [ewo-unni,  rn-unni ],  someone, 
anyone;  as  interrog.  who?  (El.  Gr.  7); 
pi.  howanig  ( auwen ,  who?  auwon,  howan, 
anybody,  C. ).  In  Prov.  14,  34,  the  adj. 


TRDMBULI.] 


N ATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


29 


Rowan — continued, 
adv.  form  is  used:  howae  missinninnuog, 
any  people. 

[Karr,  awdim,  ‘there  is  somebody’; 
awdun  ewb,  who  is  that?  pi.  awanick, 
‘some  come.’  Peep  Waunnuxuk,  ‘Eng¬ 
lishmen’,  Stiles,  i.  e.  ‘some  men’,  or 
‘who  are  these?’;  owanux ,  Mason’s 
Narrat.  of  Peq.  War.  Micm.  Sen,  quel- 
qu’un,  celui  qui,  etc.  Abn.  aSenni,  quel- 


howan — continued, 
qu’un;  aSennanga,  quel  homme  est-ce 
qui,  etc.  Del.  auiveen;  pi.  aurvenik,  who 
are  they?  Zeisb.  Gr.  176.  Cree  ow'end, 
pi.  ouinekee,  who?  whosoever;  indef. 
oui'euk,  someone,  anyone.  Chip.  aw£- 
nen,  who?  pi.  -\-ag;  awiia,  one,  some¬ 
body,  anybody;  awegw&n,  whoever, 
whosoever,  I  don’t  know  who;  pi. 
+  «!7-] 


I 


-i,  postpositive,  gives  to  the  indicative 
present,  which  is  in  fact  a  preterit,  the 
definite  and  limited  force  of  the  truly 
present  or  actual;  e.  g.  ail,  he  goes; 
aili,  he  is  going,  is  now  on  his  way, 
Prov.  7,  19;  sokanon,  there  is  rain; 
sokenoni  ( scokenonni ,  C.),  it  is  now  rain¬ 
ing.  Though  this  limited  present  is 
not  noticed  by  Eliot  in  his  Grammar, 
and  is  not  often  to  be  found  in  his 
translations,  it  unquestionably  had 
place  in  the  Massachusetts,  as  well  as 
in  other  dialects  of  the  same  group. 

[Abn.  i,  postposit.  significat  actuali- 
tatem  actionis;  sSgheranne,  il  pleut 
actuellement;  psan,  il  neige;  psanne,  il 
neige  actuellement,  etc.] 
ianauwussu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  lean;  pi. 
-suog,  Gen.  41,  3;  suppos.pl.  (particip. ) 
-sitcheg,  v.  4.  See  dnouwussu. 
iane.  See  eiyane. 

ianussuog,  suppos.  pi.  ianussitcheg,  for 
‘swarms  of  flies’,  Ex.  8,  21,  24,  29; 
they  are  of  divers  kinds  (?),  all  sorts  of 
creatures  (?). 

in,  (in  fine  comp,  -hen,  - unne )  of  the 
kind  or  manner  of;  yeu  in  kah  yeu  in,  of 
this  manner  and  of  this,  ‘thus  and 
thus’,  2  Sam.  17,  15. 


iog-kosishomoo,  v.  i. - onatuh  neechip- 

pog-wut,  it  ‘distils  as  the  dew’,  Deut. 
32,  2;  it  moistens  (?).  Cf.  ogqushki. 
*ishkauaussue,  (he  is)  envious;  iskou- 
oussiie,  enviously,  C. 

ishkont,  conj.  lest  (El.  Gr.  22),  Gen. 
38,  9;  Luke  22,  46.  For  ashqunuk, 
ashqunit,  there  remains  ( ne  ashqshunk, 
what  remains,  is  left)? 
ishkouanatuonk,  vbl.  n.  envy,  Prov.  14, 
30.  Cf.  jishanitluonk,  hatred,  under 
jishontam. 

ishpuhquaeu.  See  ushpuhqudeu,  he 
looks  upward. 

ishquanogkod,  -kot,  (after  a  numeral) 
a  cubit’s  length;  suppos.  ishquanogkok, 
measured  by  cubits,  by  cubits’  length; 
with  an.  subj.  -ogkussu,  2  Chr.  2,  11, 
12.  Nean  ishquanogkok;  nequt-ishqua- 
nogkocl  ne  nequt  ishquanogkod,  etc., 
(measured)  by  cubits;  the  cubit  is  a 
cubit,  etc.,  Ezek.  43, 13.  From  misquan 
( meesk ,  C.,  q.  v.),  the  elbow,  and  -ogk, 
the  base  of  verbs  of  counting  or  num¬ 
bering:  so  many  times  the  length  to 
the  elbow. 


J 


jishontam,  v.  t.  he  despises,  rejects, 
hates  (it):  nus-sekeneam  kah  nut-jishon- 
iam,  I  hate  and  despise  (it),  Amos  5, 
21;  I  abhor,  Ps.  119,  163;  Amos  6,  8; 
suppos.  jishantog,  when  he  despises,  he 
despising,  hating,  Prov.  15,  10.  With 
an.  obj.  jishanumau,  he  despises  or  hates 
(him);  suppos.  noh  jishanumont,  he  who 
despises;  pass,  noh  jishanumii,  he  who 
is  despised,  Job  12,  5.  Vbl.  n .  jishan- 
umauonk;  pass,  jishanitluonk,  hatred, 
Ps.  25,  19. 


jiskham,  jishkham,  chishkham,  v.  i.  he 

wipes  (it);  nut-jishkam,  I  wipe  (it) ;  sup¬ 
pos.  onatuh  wosketornp  jishkog  wunnonk, 
as  [when]  a  man  wipes  a  dish,  2  K.  21, 
13.  With  an.  attributive,  jiskhainaii, 
he  wipes  (it)  for  (him);  chiskhamailop 
vmsseetash,  she  wiped  [to  him]  his  feet, 
John  11,  2.  Cf.  chekham,  he  sweeps. 

[Abn.  ne-kasshah,  je  l’essuie;  ne-kas- 
sesitehah,  je  lui  essuie  les  pies;  kassehats, 
qu’on  l’essuie.  Del.  tschiskham-men,  to 
wipe  off,  Zeisb.  ] 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


(bulletin  25 


30 


1C 


-’k-,  -hk-,  in  composition,  denotes  the 
continued  or  progressive  action  of  the 
verb;  a  going  on,  or  continuing  to  do: 
e.  g.  assarnau,  he  gives  him  food;  soliko- 
mau,  [ =  axsohkamau ],  he  supports,  or 
continues  to  give  him  food;  petail,  he 
he  puts  (it)  into;  petuhkau,  he  goes 
into;  am&eiX,  he  departs;  dmacohkau,  he 
drives  (him)  away,  keeps  him  going, 
etc.  See  kali. 

*cachauxet  (Peq.),  the  name  of  a  fish; 
‘cunner’,  Stiles.  The  ‘chogset’,  Lab- 
rus  chogset,  Mitch.  (Ctenilabrus  bur- 
gall,  Stour. )  For  chohcholikesit,  marked 
with  spots,  spotted,  or  striped. 

kachemco,  kahchemco,  v.  i.  inan.  it 
comes  (and  continues  coming)  out 
from:  nootan  kachemco,  ‘a  fiery  stream 
issued’,  etc.,  Dan.  7,  10.  See  kutche. 
kacheu,  v.  i.  he  goes  or  comes  out  of: 
kacheog,  they  went  out  of  (the  ship), 
went  ashore,  Luke  5,  2. 
kadshik,  when  it  begins;  the  beginning 
of.  See  kutchissik. 

kadtupwut,  when,  or  if,  he  is  hungry, 
suppos.  of  kodtuppco. 

kah,  copulative,  and  ’k,  progressive,  in 
its  simple  separable  form,  ‘it  goes  on’ 
or  ‘continues’.  Cf.  Greek  erz;  Sansk. 
ati,  according  to  Weber,  from  root  at, 
‘to  go’,  i.  e.  ‘a  going  farther.’  Sansk. 
yd,  to  go;  ga,  going,  or  cha,  ‘et,  que’; 
Greek  ke,  te,  K<xi. 

[Narr.  led.  Peq.  qudh,  E.  M.  Chip. 
gate  (postpositive,  prepositive,  and  sep¬ 
arable),  Bar.  Micm.  ak  [  =  ahh] .  ] 
kahehe.  matta  kdche,  ‘no  doubt’,  it 
is  not  doubtful,  Acts  28,  4  ( kuhclie , 
Danf. ) 

kdkenumunne,  the  first-ripe  (fruit), 
Mic.  7,  1.  See  keneumunne-axh. 

kakenupshont,  (when)  going  very 
swiftly;  suppos.  of  kogkenupshau.  See 
kenupshciu. 

*kakewau,  v.  i.  he  is  mad,  Mass.  Ps. 
See  kogkhm. 

[kasenussit,  suppos.  a  churl,  Is.  32, 5, 7.] 
*kaskohat,  n.  a  sturgeon,  C.  See  *kau- 
posh. 


*caukoanash  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  stockings, 
R.  W. 

[Abn.  kenes8n-nar,  chausses,  bas. 
Peq.  cungowunlch,  a  stocking,  Stiles. 
Del.  kau  kon,  legging,  Sch.  ii,  472;  ga 
gan,  Zeisb.] 

*cau6mpsk  (Narr.),  a  whetstone,  R.  W. 
*kauposh  (Narr. ) ,  a  sturgeon ;  pi.  -shaiiog, 
R.  W.  (kdpposh  &nd  kaskdhat,  C.)  From 
kupjji  (an.  adj.  kvppesu,  he  is)  shut  up, 
inclosed,  protected,  i.  e.  by  his  hard 
scales  or  plates  (?). 

[Abn.  kabasse,  pi.  -sak.  Chip,  nam  ai', 
naugh  may  [i.e.  the  fish;  namohs,  EL, 
or  n’amag ].  Menom.  nah  mawe,  stur¬ 
geon  ( nahmaish ,  fish) .  Powh.  kopotone, 
J.  Smith  (=  close-mouthed?).] 
*causkashunck  (Narr.),  the  skin  of  a 
deer,  R.  W. 

*Kautantowwit  (Narr.),  “the  great 
Southwest  God,  to  whose  house  all 
souls  go  and  from  whom  came  their 
corn,  beans,  etc.,  as  they  say,”  R.  W. 
Cf.  Keihtanit  [ Kehtanit ],  the  great  God, 
Gen.  24,  7. 

kechequabinau,  v.  t.  an.  he  hangs  (him) 
by  the  neck,  Gen.  40,  22:  pish  kuk- 
kechequabinuk,  he  will  hang  thee,  Gen. 
40,  19;  ahliut  kechequabenittimuk  (sup¬ 
pos.  pass,  inan.),  that  which  he  is  hung 
upon,  a  gallows,  Esth.  5,  14;  7,  9  ( nuk - 
kehcldquabes  peminneat,  I  am  choked 
with  a  halter,  C.  It  should  be  nashpe 
pemunneat). 

kechequanaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  takes  him  by 
the  throat;  with  pron.  affixes,  uk- 
kecliequan-uh,  Matt.  18,  28;  hence,  he 
embraces  (him).  (nuk-kehcMkquan,  I 
embrace,  I  hold  by  the  throat,  C. ) 

[Abn.  ne-keskedSnbian,  je  lesuffoque.] 
kechisu.  See  kehchissu. 
keechippam,  kehch-,  keihch-,  on  the 
shore,  Josh.  11,  4;  Judg.  5,  17;  John 

21, 4; - kehtahhanit, on  the  seashore, 

Gen.  22,  17. 

*keegsquaw  (Narr.),  a  virgin  or  maid, 
R.  W. 

[Chip,  gigangowi,  she  is  a  virgin. 
Del.  kikochquees,  a  virgin;  kick  och  que  u, 
a  single  woman,  Zeisb. ;  kigape-u,  Camp. 
Abn.  kigahbe,  a  young  man  unmarried.] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


81 


*keesaqushin  (Narr. ),  it  is  high  water, 
R.  W.,  i.  e.  it  is  at  its  full  height,  full 
grown.  Cf.  kesukun. 

*Keesuckquand  (Narr.),  the  Sun  God, 
a  name  of  the  sun,  R.  W.  [Kesukquae- 
nnit,  God  of  Day  or  of  the  Sky] .  See 
kesuk. 

kehche,  keh.ch.eu,  v.  i.  (it  is)  chief,  prin¬ 
cipal,  superior  (because,  ex  principio; 
cf.  ko,  kutche);  hence,  superior  by 
reason  of  age,  old,  ancient;  an.  pi.  keh- 
chiog,  kutchiog,  the  old  (collectively), 
the  ancients,  i.  e.  those  who  are  from 
the  beginning,  Ps.  119,  100;  148,  12; 
Esth.  3,  13;  kehchiog  wacintamwog,  the 
old  are  wise,  1  with  the  ancients  is  wis¬ 
dom’,  Job  12,  12.  In  the  sing,  kehche 
ayeuonk,  the  chief  place,  2  Sam.  23,  8; 
kehcheu  vnitcoshinneunk,  the  chief  fath¬ 
ers  [i.  e.  fatherhood,  n.  collect.],  Num. 
31,  26.  Cf.  keht-;  kehtauau. 
kehchemugqwomp,  n.  chief  captain. 
See  mugqu'omp. 

kehch.eson.ksq  [=  kehche-sonksqua],  a 
queen,  Esth.  1,  9,  11.  S ee  sonksq. 
kehchesuonk,  vbl.  n.  a  boil,  a  sore;  pi. 

-ongash,  Job  2,  7.  See  kehkechem. 
kehchippam.  See  keechippam. 
kehchisqua,  kutchisqua,  an  old  woman, 
Ruth  1,  12;  1  Tim.  4,  7;  pi.  -quaog, 
Zech.  8,  4;  1  Tim.  5,  2. 
kehchissu,  kechisu,  kehchis,  v.  adj. 
he  is  old,  superior  by  age;  as  n.  an 
aged  person,  Gen.  44,  20;  Lev.  19,  32; 
nuk-kechisu,  I  am  old,  Job  15,  10  {nuk- 
kechiseu,  Luke  1,  18);  kuhchisu-it, 
‘when  he  is  old’,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  3,  4. 
Like  the  Latin  senex,  senectus,  kehchis 
denotes  old  age  entitled  to  respect, 
without  associating  with  it  the  idea  of 
decrepitude  or  senility.  Cf.  mahtdn- 
tam.  “  Chise  is  an  old  man,  and  kieh- 
cftisea  man  that  exceedeth  in  age.” — E. 
"Winslow’s  Relation  (1624). 

[Narr.  kilchize,  an  old  man;  pi.  -zuck; 
kutchinnu,  a  middle-aged  man  (i.  e.  he 
is  growing  old).  Micm.  kijigS,  vieux; 
kijigSuik,  les  vieux.  Del.  kikey,  old, 
Zeisb.] 

kehchithail,  v.  i.  he  forbears  or  re¬ 
frains  from  doing  (?):  nus-sauunumup 
kehchithon  (infinit.),  matta  nuk-Jxhchit- 
tohhou  (causat.),  ‘I  was  weary  with 
forbearing,  I  could  not  stay’,  Jer.  20,  9; 


kehchith.au — continued, 
suppos.  kehchithadn,  if  I  forbear,  Job 
16,  6. 

kehkechai,  n.  a  sore,  ‘botch’,  Deut.  28, 
27. 

kehkechesu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  sore,  ‘full 
of  sores’,  Luke  16,  20  (augm.  of  keh- 
chesu).  Vbl.  n.  kehkechesuonk,  a  (run¬ 
ning)  sore,  a  boil,  Ps.  38, 11;  77,  2;  Job 
2,  7. 

[Narr.  n' chesammam,  I  am  in  pain; 
nchesamam  n’sete,  my  foot  is  sore.] 
kehketrohkau,  v.  i.  he  goes  on  talking, 
talks  much.-  Freq.  of  kuttco,  he  speaks, 
with  ’k  progressive.  Vbl.  n.  kehketcoh- 
kaonk,  keketcok-,  talk,  loquacity,  Prov. 
14,  23;  Eccl.  10,  13;  pi.  -ongash,  ‘bab¬ 
blings’,  1  Tim.  6,  20.  N.  agent,  -kaen, 
a  great  talker;  pi.  -kaenuog,  Tit.  1,  10. 
See  kuttco. 

kehkomau,  kekomau,  v.  t.  an.  he  talks 
about  (him),  slanders,  or  speaks  re¬ 
proachfully  of:  nuk-kdmuk-quog,  they 
slander  me,  Ps.  31,  14.  Vbl.  n.  kehko- 
mauen,  -mwaen,  a  talebearer,  a  slan¬ 
derer,  Prov.  18,  8. 

[Cree  keegamayoo,  he  scolds  him  (?).] 
keht-,  keiht-,  in  comp,  words  chief, 
principal,  (relatively)  greatest.  As  a 
prefix  to  nouns  inan.  corresponding  to 
kehche-  before  nouns  an.  See  kutche. 

[Del.  kitta,  great.  Abn.  “maassa  vel 
kett£,  in  antecessum,”  Rasies.] 
kehtadtau,  v.  caus.  inan.  he  makes 
sharp,  sharpens,  whets  (it),  Ps.  7,  12; 
with  inan.  subj.  -tauomco,  it  sharpens 
(it),  Prov.  27,  17;  -tauun,  he  sharpens 
it;  pass,  it  is  sharpened,  made  sharp, 
Ezek.  21,  9;  suppos.  kehtattauon,  if  I 
whet  (my  sword),  Deut.  32,  41  ( ketottvg , 
a  whetstone,  Wood).  Cf.  *cauompsk. 

[Abn.  ne-kittad8n,  je  l’aiguise;  akit- 
tadSn,  il  l’aiguise;  kidadangan,  pierre  a 
aiguiser.  ] 

Kehtanit,  Keihtannit  [keht-(rn)anit,  the 
chief  or  greatest  manit],  for  ‘the  Lord 
God’,  Gen.  24,  3,  7.  With  the  verb 
subst.  kehtanitco,  keihtannitto,  he  is  (or 
it  is)  the  greatest  manitto;  and  with  the 
locative  suffix,  kelUanito-ut,  the  place  of 
the  great  manito,  or  where  he  is: 
hence,  probably,  Kavidntowuit,  ‘the 
great  Southwest  God,’  (R.  W. ),  or 
rather  his  home  in  the  Southwest. 

[Del.  getannitovAt,  Zeisb.  Gr.  37.] 


32 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIX  25 


kehtauaii(?),  v.  t.  an.  he  is  chief  among 
or  supei’ior  to;  as  n.  a  chief  man;  pi. 
kehtauaog ,  ‘lords’,  Dan.  5,  23.  Rarely 
used  and  of  questionable  propriety.  N. 
agent,  kehtauwaen,  pi.  -inuog,  ‘nobles’, 
Prov.  8,  18. 

kehtequanitch,  kehtroq-  [keht,  uhquae, 
-nutch,  great,  end  of,  hand],  n.  the 
thumb,  Ex.  29,  20;  pi.  -tcheash,  Judg. 
1,  6,  7. 

[Abn.  aghilkSeretsi,  pollex.] 

kehtequaseet  [keht,  uhquae,  -seet,  great, 
end  of,  foot],  n.  the  great  toe:  uk-kehte- 
quaseet,  his  great  toe,  Ex.  29,  20;  Judg. 
1,  6,  7. 

[Abn.  meghitkSesit,  ne-ghitk§mt,  mon 
gros  orteil.]' 

kehtimaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  appoints  (him) 
over,  appoints  (him)  to  office  or  com¬ 
mand,  2  K.  11,  18;  nuk-keitim,  I  ap¬ 
point  (him  to  rule  over,  etc.),  1  K.  1, 
35;  kuk-kehtim  quoshodtumwabiuog,  thou 
appointest  prophets,  Neh.  6,  7.  From 
keht-,  with  ’ m-au ,  the  formative  of  an. 
verbs  of  speaking,  or  of  action  per¬ 
formed  by  the  mouth;  literally,  ‘he 
great-speaks  him.’ 

kehtippittenab,  n.  an  armlet;  pi. 
-dpeash,  Is.  3,  19;  ‘the  bracelet  that 
was  on  his  arm’,  2  Sam.  1,  10;  kehtup-, 
Gen.  24,  30;  Jceh teupelend \peash ,  Ex.  35, 

22.  From  keht-,  (m)uhpitlen  (arm), 
appeu  (it  remains,  or  is  permanent). 

kehtoh,  keihtoh,  n.  the  ocean,  ‘sea’, 
Gen.  1,  10;  Ps.  78,  13;  Hag.  2,  6;  with 
indef.  affix,  kelitohhan,  kehlahhan,  any 
sea;  pi.  -hannash,  seas,  oceans,  Neh.  9,  6; 
with  locat.  affix,  noeu  kehtahhannit,  in 
the  midst  of  the  sea,  Num.  33,  8;  Prov. 

23,  34;  kishke  kehtahhannit,  by  the  sea, 
on  the  seashore,  1  Sam.  13,  5;  Deut. 
1,  7.  Adj.  and  adv.  kehtahhane,  of  the 
sea:  kehtahhan-nuppog,  the  water  of 
the  sea,  Ex.  14,  21.  For  kehteau,  it  is 
very  great,  vast;  =  ’ k-ahteau,  it  is  going 
on,  or  is  indefinitely  extended. 

[Narr.  kitthan  and  ivech&kum,  the  sea, 
R.  W.;  kikhonnohk  [?],  Stiles.  Del. 
kittan,  a  great  river  (?);  kitahican,  the 
great  ocean,  Zeisb.  (The  Del.  Indians 
called  the  great  river  (Delaware)  and 
bay  Kittan  ( Kitlianne ,  Hkw. );  ‘  kid  han 
nunk,  in  the  main  river’,  Zeisb.)  Chip. 
(Sag.)  keechegahma,  lake;  keeche-keeche- 


kehtoh,  keihtoh— continued. 
gamaa,  great  lake,  sea;  (.Mack.)  gitche- 
gurnee,  sea.  Shawn,  k’chlkumie,  sea.] 
kehtohhannomuk,  n.  ‘the  sand  of  the 
sea’,  Ps.  78,  27  ( kehtahhanomuhk , 

Jer.  33,  22;)  kehtahhanom.uk,  Mass.  Ps. 
[=beach(?),  ‘where  the  sea  goes’  (?),]. 
kehtotan,  keiht-,  n.  a  great  town,  Gen. 
10,  12;  Rev.  21,  15  (keht-,  otan ). 

[Del.  kitateney,  Zeisb.] 
kehtconog,  kuht-,  n.  a  ship,  Prov.  30, 
19;  Is.  33,  21;  Jonah  1,3;  pi.  -ogquash; 
keht-oonog,  great  vessel  (or  carrier);  cf. 
pe-amog.  [From  verb ‘to  dig  out’,  ‘hol¬ 
lowed’;  see  Rasies  under  ‘crever.’] 

[Narr.  ki0nuck ;  dim.  kitonuckquese. 
Abn.  ketSrakS,  navire.  Menom.  kah- 
taynemodn.  Del.  ki  toed  te  wall  (pi.) 
ships,  Zeisb.] 

kehtcoquanich.  See  kehtequanitch. 
keihehippam.  See  keechippam. 
keiht-.  See  keht-. 

Keihtannit.  See  Kehtanit. 
keihtoh.  See  kehtoh. 
kekomaii.  See  kehkomau. 
kekuttro,  v.  i.  he  speaks  habitually,  has 
the  faculty  of  speech.  Freq.  of  kuttco. 
kemeu,  (it  is)  secret,  private;  as  adv.  ‘in 
secret  ’ ,  Matt.  6,  4,  6  ( kemeyeue ,  secretly, 
C. ;  -ut  khneayeu-ut,  in  a  secret  place, 
Job  40,  13);  pi.  kemeoogish,  secret 
things,  Deut.  29,  29.  With  verb  subst. 
kemeyeuco;  suppos.  kemeyeucouk,  or 
-yeuuk,  when  it  is  secret;  as  n.  a  secret, 
Prov.  25,  9;  Dan.  4,  9.  See  kommeoto. 

[Abn.  kimiSi,  en  cachette.  Del.  kimi, 
’  Zeisb.] 

*kemineiachick  (Narr. ),  n.  pi.  murder¬ 
ers;  kuk-kemineantm,  you  are  the  mur¬ 
derer,  R.  W. 

ken,  pron.  2d  pers.  sing,  thou;  sun  ken 
noh  woh  paont,  art  thou  he  who  shall 
come?  Matt.  11,  3;  pi.  kenauau,  you,  ye 
(El.  Gr.  7). 

[Narr.  keen;  pi.  kienouwin .] 
kenai,  keneh,  (it  is)  sharp,  keen,  Prov. 
25,  18;  in  comp,  kene-,  ken-:  e.  g.  ken- 
ompsk,  a  sharp  stone,  Ex.  4,  25;  keneh- 
quog,  a  sharp  knife,  Ezek.  5,  1;  kdke- 
neuhquayaogish  (freq.  pi.),  sharp- 
pointed  things,  Job  41,  20  ( keniyeue , 
sharply,  C. ) ;  suppos.  kenag,  when  it  is 
sharp,  that  which  is  sharp,  Is.  5,  28; 
Rev.  14,14;  wussetunk,  .  .  .  kenag,  the 


TP.VMBVI.T.] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


33 


kenai,  keneh. — continued, 
haft  .  .  .  the  blade  (of  a  knife),  Judg. 
3,  22;  ehtaikenag ,  on-both-sides  sharp, 
two-edged,  Prov.  5,  4. 

[Illin.  nikintS,  j’aiguise,  j’apointis 
(Gray. );  Jcinta,  Tdnte,  hints,  dans  la  com¬ 
position  marquent  souvent  aiguiser, 
apointir.  Abn.  kaiiSis,  kahSiak,  epine; 
kahSeio,  cela  est  4pineux,  aigu.  Del. 
kineu,  it  is  sharp,  Zeisb.  Voc.  18;  Jcihnsu, 
he  is  sharp  (harsh,  jealous,  etc. ),  Zeisb. 
Gr.  167.] 

kenaiheau,  v.  caus.  an.  he  forms  (him), 
gives  him  shape,  Gen.  2,  7,  19.  See 
kuh kenauweheau  (augm. ). 
kenam,  n.  a  spoon;  pi.  -moog,  1  K.  7,50 
( kunndm ,  quonnam,  a  spoon  or  ladle, 
C. ).  Cf.  kenun;  konumuk;  kounum. 

[Narr.  kunam-mduog.  Abn.  emk8ann.\ 
kenaii.  See  kenun. 

kenauwameonk,  vbl.  n.  [an  arraying  or 
putting  in  array  (?),]  an  army,  Joel  2, 
20;  1  K.  20,  25.  Cf.  kuhkenaytwe,  or¬ 
derly,  in  order,  in  shape, 
kenawun,  pron.  1st  pers.  pi.  inclusive, 
we  all  of  us,  i.  e.  including  you  to 
whom  we  speak.  See  nenawun. 
keneh.  See  kenai. 

kenepinaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  binds  (him),  as 
by  oath  or  promise,  imposes  an  obliga¬ 
tion  on  (him);  keneep-,  keeneep-,  suppos. 
keeneepinont,  Num.  30,  3,  4. 
kenepsuonk,  vbl.  n.  a  binding  of  one’s 
self,  a  bond  or  obligation,  Num.  30,  3. 
keneiimunne-ash,  n.  pi.  first-fruits,  Lev. 
2,  12,  14;  augm.  kdkeneumunneash, 

Num.  18,  12,  13;  kdkenum-,  Ex.  22,  29. 
See  kdkenumunne. 

kenogkeneg,  -koneg,  n.  a  window, 
Gen.  6,  16;  Judg.  5,  28;  pi.  -gash,  Dan. 
6, 10  {kenag' kinneg ,  kunnatequanick,  C. ). 
kenomp,  keenomp,  n.  ‘a  captain’,  John 
18, 12;  a  ‘brave’,  a  valiant  man  ( kenom - 
pde,  valiant,  valiantly  (- pdonk ,  valor, 
C. ).  [Cf.  Charaibi  (Caribs),  ‘ magnse 
sapientiae  viri’,  Yespucius,  1497,  Nav. 
Col.,  3,  233.] 

[Narr.  keenomp,  captain  or  valiant 
man,  R.  W.  Abn.  krnanbe,  kinanbaS 
homme  courageux;  ne-kinanba'i,  je  suis 
brave,  genereux,  etc.] 
kenompattam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  looks  at,  ob¬ 
serves  (it),  1  Sam.  16,  7. 

B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 3 


kenompsquab,  n.  an  anchor;  pi.  -abeog, 
Acts  27, 29.  See  kenuhquab;  *kunnosnep. 
kenamaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  speaks  (with  au¬ 
thority,  or  as  a  superior  to  an  inferior) 
to  (him),  he  counsels,  advises,  in¬ 
structs,  Ex.  33,  9;  Deut.  5,  24;  2  Sam. 

17,  15;  imperat.  2d  sing,  kenoos;  pi. 
kenconook.  Vbl.  n.  kenamudonk;  pass. 
kenooniltuonk,  counsel,  advice,  Prov.  20, 

18.  N.  agent,  kenamuaen,  a  counselor; 
pi.  -enuog,  Job  3,  14  (and  kenooscowa- 
enin,  Is.  9,  6). 

kenugke,  ‘among’,  Gen.  17,  10;  Lev. 
11,2;  Jcunnuke,  Mass.  Ps.  (Vbl.  n.  ken- 
ugkiyeuonk,  a  mixture,  C.)  The  pri¬ 
mary  signification  is  ‘mixed’  or  ‘inter¬ 
mingled’:  kdnukke  multaanukeg,  ‘a 
mixed  multitude’,  Num.  11,4;  =kenuk- 
shae  mattadnukeg,  Neh.  13,  3.  See  kenuk- 
shau. 

kenuhquab,  kenunkquab,  n.  an  an¬ 
chor,  Heb.  6,  19;  pi.  Acts  27,  40.  See 
kenompsquab. 

kenuhtugquonk,  n.  ‘a  nail’,  Judg.  4, 
21;  a  wooden  pin(?)  [ken-uhtugq,  sharp 
wood]. 

kenuhwheg,  n.  a  nail;  pi.  -gash,  John 
20,  25  [kenehheau,  it  is  made  sharp], 
kenukkenausu,  v.  adj.  pass,  it  is  mixed 
(by  animate  agency),  Dan.  2, 41 ;  as  adj. 
Prov.  23,  30  (of  ‘mixed  wine’), 
kenukkinaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  goes  among, 
mingles  with  (them) ;  pi.  -aog,  Dan.  2, 43. 
kenukkinum.  See  kinukkinum. 
kenukshaii,  kenugshaii,  v.  t.  he  is 
mixed  with  (them).  From  kenugke, 
with  the  characteristic  (-sh)  of  invol¬ 
untary  action,  Hos.  7,  8;  Ps.  106,  35; 
Dan.  2,  43:  ncotau  kenuksh.au  mussegonit, 
fire  was  mingled  with  the  hail,  Ex.  9, 
24.  Adj.  and  adv.  -slide,  Neh.  13,  3. 

[Narr.  wunnickshan,  to  mingle;  wun- 
nickshaas,  mingled.  Del.  gli  eke  na  su, 
mixed,  Zeisb.] 

kenun,  kinun,  v.  t. ;  with  an.obj.  kenaii, 
kinou,  he  bears  or  carries.  This  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  the  earlier  form  (corre¬ 
sponding  to  annun,  q.  v.),  from  which 
kenunnum,  -nail,  are  derived.  To  it 
must  be  referred  uk-kin-duh,  they  bore 
him,  Mark  2,  4,  unless  this  is  mis¬ 
printed  for  uk-kinun-n6uh,  as  in  Lev. 
10,  5;  cf.  uk-kenin-uli,  Is.  40,  11  ( nuk - 


34 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


kenun,  kinun — continued. 

kunun  wosketomp,  I  carry  a  man,  C. ). 
See  koilnum. 

[Narr.  kunnlish,  I  will  carry  you.] 
kenunkquab.  See  kenuhquab. 
kenunkwhonk,  kin-,  n.  a  pin;  pi.  -on- 
gash;  Ex.  27,  19;  38,  20,  21.  From 
kenai  and  uhquae,  sharpened  at  the  point, 
kenunnaii,  kin-,  v.  t.  an.  he  carries  (an 
an.  obj.)  in  his  hand  or  arms;  sup- 
pos.  konunnont,  when  he  carries  (him), 

when  carrying:  - - ahlompeh,  -  a 

bow,  Amos  2,  15;  - mukkiesoh, - 

a  child,  Num.  11,  12.  With  pronom. 
affixes,  uk-kinun-oh,  she  bears  them, 
Deut.  32,  11.  See  kenun. 
kenunnum,  v.  t.  he  carries  or  bears 
(it)  by  hand  [and  therefore  improp¬ 
erly  used  in  Is.  53,  4,  11],  Mark  14, 13: 
kunnunum-up,  ‘he  bare  it’,  Mass.  Ps., 
John  12,  6.  Of.  kendn,  koilnum. 
kenuppe,  swiftly,  in  haste,  Dan.  3,  24; 
Is.  5,  26;  as  adj.  -peyeu;  with  verbsubst. 
-peyeuoo,  there  is  haste,  it  ‘requires 
haste’,  1  Sam.  21,  8.] 
kenuppetu,  v.  i.  he  grows  fast,  Gen.  21, 

8,  20;  pi.  -tuog,  Gen.  25,  27.  From 
kenuppe,  with  the  formative  of  verbs  of 
an.  growth. 

kenupshaii,  v.  i.  he  makes  haste,  he  goes 
quickly,  Eccl.  1,  5;  1  Sam.  17,  48; 
imperat.  kenupshaush,  go  thou  quickly, 
make  haste,  1  Sam.  20,  38;  23,  27;  sup- 
pos.  kanupshont,  kenupshont,  Job  9,  26; 
Prov.  7,  23.  Adj.  and  adv.  kmupshae, 

swift-going:  - kuhloonogquash,  ‘swift 

ships’,  Job  9,  26;  kenuppe  kenupshae 
pegaog,  ‘  they  come  with  speed  swiftly  ’, 
Is.  5,  26  ( konupishae ,  very  swiftly,  Dan. 

9,  21).  Augm.  and  intens.  kogkenup- 
sha'd,  he  goes  swiftly;  suppos.  kakenup- 
shont,  (when)  going  swiftly,  ‘swift  of 
foot’,  Amos  2,  15;  neg  kakenupshonit- 
cheg,  they  who  are  swift,  Amos  2,  14; 
Jer.  46,  6. 

[Abn.  ne-kerbar8kke,  je  me  dcpeche  a 
faire  cela.] 

kepenum,  v.  t.  he  harvests  (corn,  fruit, 
etc.);  imperat.  2d  sing,  kepenush,  har¬ 
vest  it,  ‘reap’,  Rev.  14,  15;  suppos. 
pass.  inan.  kepenumuk,  when  it  is  har¬ 
vested,  in  (time  of)  harvest,  Ex.  34,  21. 
Vbl.  n.  kepenumcoonk,  harvesting,  the 
harvest,  Jer.  8,  10;  Rev.  14,  15. 

[Narr.  kepenummin,  to  gather  corn.] 


kepshau,  v.  i.  he  falls;  - ohkeit,  he 

falls  on  the  ground,  Mark  9,  20;  pi. 
kepshaog,  they  fall,  Is.  8,  20. 
kes-.  See  kusse-. 

kesanohteau,  kesanooteau,  v.  i.  it  is 
ripe;  suppos.  ne  kesancotag,  that  which 
is  ripe,  Is.  18,  5;  pi.  nish  kesanootagish, 
Jer.  24,  2  ( kesannmta ,  ripe,  C. ). 
kesantam,  v.  i.  (and  t.  inan.)  he  has  a 
purpose,  purposes,  intends:  nukkeson- 
tam,  I  purpose,  1  K.  5,  5.  Ybl.  n. 
-tamoonk,  purposing,  a  purpose,  Eccl. 
3, 17;  8,  6.  kesi-,  kes-  (or  kussi-,  kus-)  in 
comp,  words  has  the  force  of  ‘fully’, 
‘  completely  ’,  or  sometimes  simply  aug¬ 
ment.,  ‘very  much.’ 

[Abn.  kesi,  tres.  Del.  gischi,  kischi, 
done,  ready,  Zeisb.] 

kesittae,  adj.  and  adv.  cooked,  prepared 
for  eating  (i.  e.  completed  or  finished; 
see  kesteau ):  kesittae  u-eyaus,  ‘boiled 
meat’,  1  Sam.  2, 15  (kestde  u-eyaus,  C. ). 

[Narr.  matteag  keesitduano,  is  there 
nothing  ready  boiled?;  wussclume  wekis- 
su,  too  much  boiled  or  roasted.  Ahn. 
kisede  eto,  cela  est-il  c.uit?  Del.  kischi- 
toon,  to  make  (it)  ready,  Zeisb.] 
kesittu,  v.  i.  he  is  full  grown,  he  has 
finished  growing,  Gen.  38,  14;  pi.  -nog, 
Judg.  11,  2.  (With  inan.  subj.  kesukun, 
q.  v.)  Cf.  kesteau,  it  is  finished, 
kesteau  [kesitteau],  v.  i.  it  is  finished, 
completed,  made  complete:  anakausu- 
onk  kesiedu-un,  the  work  is  finished,  1 
K.  7,  22  (sometimes  used  as  v.  t.  inan.; 
kesteau-un,  he  finishes  it,  he  creates  it, 
Jer.  31,  22;  };esteaunat  wut-anakausuonk, 
to  finish  his  work,  John  4,  34) ;  suppos. 
noli  kesteunk,  he  who  makes  complete, 
‘the  creator’,  Is.  40,  28.  With  an. 
obj.  kezlieau,  q.  v.  ( kestouunal ,  to  fin¬ 
ish,  C. ) 

[Abn.  ne-kesi'tSn,  j’acheve  quelque 
chose.  Cree  keesetow,  he  finishes  it. 
Narr.  umckeesitin  u-equdi,  he  made  the 
light;  awaun  keesiteduuin  keesuck,  who 
made  the  heavens?  Del.  gi  schi  toon,  it 
is  done,  finished,  Zeisb.] 
kesteauonk,  -teoonk,  vbl.  n.  a  making 
complete,  ‘creation’,  Mark  13,  19. 
kesteausu,  v.  adj.  an.  it  is  made  com¬ 
plete,  ‘it  is  finished’,  John  19,  30;  sup¬ 
pos.  kesteausik,  made  complete,  a  ‘crea¬ 
ture’,  Rom.  1,  25. 


Trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


35 


kesuk,  n.  (1 )  the  visible  heavens,  the  sky, 
Gen.  1,1.  (2)  a  day:  pasuk  kesuk,  in  one 
day,  Gen.  27,  45;  1  Sam.  2,  34;  quinni 
kesuk,  all  the  day  long,  Ps.  25,  5;  71,  15; 
pi.  -kquash;  monatash  kesukquash,  many 
days,  Is.  24,  22  (but  more  commonly 
used,  maochelikquinogok;  see  quinne ); 
suppos.  kesukok,  when  it  is  day,  on  a 
day:  ne  kesukok,  on  that  day,  Gen.  21, 8; 
yen  kesukok,  on  (or  within)  this  day, 
today,  Ps.  95,  7;  Ex.  2,  18;  pi.  kesuk- 
okisli;  dsekesukokish,  every  day,  daily, 
Is.  51,  13;  Ps.  145,  2.  Adj.  and  adv. 
kesukqude,  of  heaven,  Ps.  78,  23,  24;  of 
the  day,  Jer.  31,  35:  kesukque  wequai,  a 
light  by  day. 

kesuk  by  its  form  appears  to  be  the 
suppositive  or  participial  of  a  verb  kem, 
or  with  inan.  subj.  kesin  ( kussin ),  it 
warms  or  is  warm.  Though  this  verb 
is  not  formed  separately  in  the  indica¬ 
tive,  it  may  be  traced  in  the  prefix  kus-, 
kussa-  (q.  v. ),  in  the  passive  form  kus- 
sittau,  he  is  heated,  made  warm  (as  n. 
heat  of  the  sun),  and  in  the  verb-adj. 
an.  kesoosu  ( kescosinneat ,  to  be  warm, 
C. ).  Hence  in  other  dialects  the  name  ! 
of  the  sun  as  the  source  of  heat: 
Abn.  kiz8s  (comp.  nekis88s,  je  suis 
chaudement);  old  Alg.  kijis  ( =  kezhis) ; 
Chip,  ge'zis,  kesis  (cf.  ge'zhik,  sky; 
ge'zhikod,  day);  Menom.  kay-shoh  (cf. 
'kay-shdick,  sky);  Mull,  keesogh,  Edw. ; 
Del.  gischuch,  etc.  The  same  radical, 
probably,  is  found  in  kesanohteau 
( kesannaota ,  C. ),  it  is  ripened;  kesteau 
(Cree  keesetow ) ,  be  perfects,  com¬ 
pletes,  and  with  an.  obj.  kezheau  (Cree 
keeseliayoo,  he  finishes),  he  makes,  : 
‘creates’,  gives  life  to;  kesukin,  it  grows 
to  maturity,  is  full  grown,  is  ripe;  and 
with  an.  subj.  kesittu — in  all  which 
there  is  an  apparent  reference  to  the 
sun  as  the  source  of  vital  warmth  and  | 
of  mature  development  of  animal  and 
vegetal  life.  Sansk.  kds  and  kds  ( lucere, 
splendere);  kus  (splendere). 

[Narr.  kiesuck,  the  heavens,  R.  W. 

( keesk ,  Stiles);  keesuckqudi,  by  day,  R. 
W.  Peq.  keezuk,  Stiles.  Abn.  kizSkS, 
jour;  le  ciel,  l’air.  Chip,  ge'zhik,  ge- 
zick,  sky.  Menom.  kayshaick,  sky. 
Shawn,  kel-sa-kke,  day.  Micm.  kish- 
k8k,  aujourd’hui.  Del.  gischuch,  sun; 
gischgu,  day,  Zeisb.] 


kesukod,  as  n.  daytime,  the  day,  as  a 
measure  of  time  (i.  e.  while  day  is), 
Gen.  1,  5, 13, 16;  opposed  to  nukon,  the 
night  season,  Gen.  1,  5;  pi.  kesukodtash, 
Dan.  8, 14,  27.  Adj.  and  adv.  kesukodde, 
-daeu,  in  the  daytime,  by  day,  Ex.  13, 
21;  Job  5,  14:  kesukodtdeu  kali  nuk- 
konaeu,  by  day  and  by  night,  Ps.  1,2 
( kesukodde  kali  nukkonae,  Josh.  1,  8); 
kesukkuttcie,  C. 

kesukodtumash,  n.  pi.  days,  in  the 
sense  of  years  [ kodturnoo-ash ]  or  as 
measuring  long  periods  of  time,  Dent. 
11,  21;  Job  14, 1:  tohshinash  uk-kesukodt- 
umash,  how  many  are  his  days?  Ps.  119, 
84. 

kesukquieu,  (it  is)  toward  heaven, 
heavenward  (El.  Gr.  21). 

[Narr.  keesuckqiu,  upward.] 
kesukun,  v.  i.  it  is  mature,  full  grown, 
ripe:  kepenumcoonk  kesukun,  ‘the  har¬ 
vest  is  ripe’,  Rev.  14,  15.  With  an. 
subj.  kesittu  (q.  v. );  suppos.  pajeh 
kesukit,  till  he  is  ( full )  grown,  Gen.  38, 
11. 

[Del.  gischi,  kischi,  ready,  done;  gis- 
chiecheu,  it  is  ready,  done,  finished; 
gi  schi  gu,  he  is  born,  Zeisb.] 
ketasscot,  n.  king,  Cant.  7,  5;  Is.  6,  5; 
pi.  -tcimwog,  Josh.  10,  5;  Job  3, 14  (tali- 
sootamwog,  kings,  Gen.  35,  11).  Vbl. 
n.  ketassootmnooouk,  a  kingdom,  Matt. 
5,  20  (asscotamoonk,  Dan.  5,  31;  7,  27; 
tahsmtamcoonk,  pi.  -ongcish,  Zeph.  3,  8; 
Hag.  2,  22). 

[Quir.  koitascodamauok,  ‘princes’, 
=.s dchemduauk,  Pier.  35.] 
keteahheaii,  v.  cans,  he  giveth  life  to, 
maketh  live,  ‘quickeneth’ :  uk-keleah- 
oh,  ‘he  quickeneth  them’,  John  5,  21; 
kuk-ketealieh,  thou  quickeneth  me,  Ps. 
71,  20. 

keteahogkou  \ketede-hogk],  n.  a  living 
creature,  a  living  body  or  personality 
(see  hogk) :  pomantamwe  keteahogkounnu, 
he  becomes  (- unnu )  a  living  soul,  Gen. 
2,  7;  pomantamwe  ketedliogkou,  a  living 
creature,  Lev.  11,  46;  life,  Dent.  24,  6; 
the  soul,  the  spirit,  Is.  42,  1 ;  Gen.  14, 
21;  34,  8  (keteahogkau,  a  soul,  C.). 
keteau,  v.  i.  (1)  he  is  alive,  he  lives,  or  is 
quick,  implying  the  possession  of  vital 
energy  or  of  animation;  comp,  poman- 
tam;  (2)  he  is  in  good  health,  he  is  re¬ 
covered  from  sickness,  2  K.  20,  7;  Is. 


36 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


keteau — continued. 

39,  1 :  nag  pish  keteaog,  they  shall  re¬ 
cover,  Mark  16,  18;  asq  kongketeau 
(augm.),is  he  well?;  asq  keteau,  he  is 
well,  Gen.  29,  6;  sun  wok  nuk-keteam, 
shall  1  recover?  2  K.  8,  8.  9.  Adj.  and 

adv.,  ketede,  of  life,  in  life:  - matug, 

‘tree  of  life’,  Prov.  13,  12;  - tohke- 

kom,  ‘fountain  of  life’,  Prov.  13,  14; 
‘quick’,  Num.  16,  30.  Vbl.  n.  ketea- 
onk,  living  or  being  alive;  the  life  prin¬ 
ciple  or  vital  force;  ‘the  soul’  (i.  e.  the 
life),  Job  12,  10;  uk-keteaonk  weyaus 
wusqueheonganit,  ‘the  life  of  the  flesh 
[is]  in  the  blood’,  Lev.  17,  11.  See 
*kitunckqudi. 

[Narr.  nic-keetem,  I  am  recovered; 
konkeetedug,  they  are  well.  Abn.  kighe, 
il  se  redonne  la  vie.] 

ketoohomom,  v.  i.  he  sings,  recites  in 
song:  nuk-ketcohomom,  I  sing,  Ps.  57,  7; 
with  an.  obj.  ketoohomauau,  he  sings  to 
(him)  or  tells  by  song;  pi.  -amaudog, 
they  sing  to  (him),  1  Chr.  16,  33;  sup- 
pos.  kodtcohamont,  pi.  -oncheg,  Eccl.  2, 8. 
Adv.  and  adj.  ketcohomae,  -hamwde,  of 
singing,  of  song,  2  Sam.  19,  35;  Neh. 
7,  67.  Ybl.  n.  ketoohomdonk,  a  singing, 
song:  wame  ketcohomae  uk-ketoohomaon- 
gash  (pi.)  David,  all  the  psalms  (sing¬ 
ing  songs)  of  David  [title  of  the  psalms 
in  meter].  N.  agent,  keloohomwden 
(indef.  -waenin),  a  singer,  1  Chr.  6,  33. 
Cf.  kuttco,  he  speaks;  ketwkau,  he  goes 
on  speaking,  he  talks.  See  ancohom. 

[Abn.  kiSahadS,  il  chant e.] 
ketcokau,  v.  t.  an.  he  tells  (him),  he 
goes  on  speaking  to  (him),  2  Sam.  20, 
18;  imperat.  2d  sing,  ketcokash,  1  Sam. 
3,  10;  suppos.  pass,  ahquompi  ne  adt 
keketookomuk  (freq.),  a  time  for  speak¬ 
ing  [when  it  is  to  bespoken],  Eccl.  3,  7. 
From  kidtao,  he  speaks,  with  ’k  progres¬ 
sive. 

[Narr.  kekidto  kdunta,  let  us  speak 
(talk)  together;  kuttdkash,  speak.] 
kezheaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  perfects,  completes, 
finishes  (him),  ‘creates’,  Gen.  1,  27; 
5,  1:  nuk-kezeh,  nuk-kezheeh,  I  create 
him;  pret.  nuk-kezheomp,  Is.  54, 16;  sup¬ 
pos.  noh  kezheunt,  he  who  makes  com¬ 
plete,  who  creates,  Gen.  5,  1.  With 
inan.  obj.  kesteau  (q.  v.). 

[Cree  h'esehayoo,  he  finishes  him; 
keechehayoo,  he  begins  him.  (See  in 


kezheaii — continued. 

Howse,  Cree  Gr.,  pp.  19,  20,  and  84, 
verbs  of  ‘making’  in  -kdyoo,  -kaldyoo, 
and  - kdsoo .)  Abn.  ne-kisitSn,  j’acheve 
quelque  chose;  (with  an.  obj.)  ne-kisi- 
han.  Del.  kischiton,  he  makes,  prepares 
(something) ;  kisch i,  ready,  done;  kischi- 
toon,  to  make  something  ready;  kischi- 
echeu,  it  is  ready,  done,  finished,  Zeisb.] 
kinou.  See  kenun. 

*kinukkinum,  v.  t.  he  mixes  or  mingles 
(one  thing  with  another),  C. ;  suppos. 
kinukkinuk,  when  he  mixes  it;  and  sub¬ 
stantively,  a  mixture,  the  kinnikinnic 
and  killikinnic  of  western  tribes, — to¬ 
bacco  mixed  with  the  bark  of  the  red 
osier  (Corn us  sericea)  or  leaves  of  bear- 
berry  (Arctostaphylos  uva-ursi).  Cf. 
kenugke. 

[Del.  gli  eke  ni  can,  anything  to  mix 
with,  mixture,  Zeisb.] 
kinun.  See  kenun. 
kinunnaii.  See  kenunnail. 
kishke,  (it  is)  by  the  side  of,  near  to,  by: 
kishke  may-ut,  by  the  wayside,  Gen.  38, 
14,  21;  kishke-tuk,  by  the  riverside, 
Num.  24,  6;  Ezek.  47,  6,  7;  kishke  peyau, 
he  came  near  to,  etc.,  Dan.  8,  17. 

[Abn.  kikatsiSi,  contre  quelque  chose, 
joignant  quelque  chose,  lelongdu  bord 
de  la  riviere;  ketsiSi,  tout  proche.  Del. 
giechgi.  Chip,  tchigau  or  tchig.  Cree 
clieeke,  close  bv,  near,  nigh,  by.] 
kishki,  (it  is)  broad,  great  from  side  to 
side:  keitotan  missi  kah  kishki,  the  city 
(was)  large  and  great,  Neh.  7,  7;  mishe- 
kishkae,  broad,  wide  (absolutely,  or  as 
opposed  to  narrow),  Is.  33,  21;  Matt. 
23,  5;  suppos.  ne  kishkarf  (koshkag,  kos- 
kag),  the  breadth  of  it,  its  breadth  or 
width  from  side  to  side,  Job  37,  10; 
Ex.  26,  2,  8  ( =  ne  ancohque-kishkag,  Ex. 
25,  10). 

[Abn.  Ssaiimi-keskegS,  il  est  trop  large, 
trop  ample  (e.  g.  a  garment);  keske, 
large,  cela  l’est.] 

kishkunk,  n. :  ut  kishkunk,  under  a  tree, 
Gen.  18,  4,  8.  See  mehtug. 
kishpinum,  kusp-,  v.  t.  he  ties  (it) 
firmly,  binds  close,  makes  fast.  From 
kuppi  (close,  fast),  with  the  formative 
(-num,  with  an.  obj.  -nail)  of  verbs  de¬ 
noting  action  of  the  hand;  imperat.  2d 
sing,  kispinush,  kusp-,  Prov.  6,  21;  pi. 
kishpincok,  1  Sam.  6,  7;  with  an.  obj. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


37 


kishpinum,  kusp - continued. 

uk-  kislipin-6uh,  they  tied  them,  1  Sam. 
6, 10.  ( Vbl.  n.  kishpinoonk,  binding,  C. ) 
kiskpissu,  -ussu,  v.  i.  he  ties  or  fastens, 
makes  fast;  and  pass,  he  is  tied,  made 
fast,  Matt.  21,  2;  pi.  -suog,  they  are  tied, 
2  K.  7,  10.  Vbl.  n.  kishpismonk,  pi. 
-ongash,  bonds,  Ezek.  3,  25;  Job  38,  31. 

[Narr.  kspunsh,  pi.  kspunemoke,  tie  it 
fast.  Cree  keehepissoo,  he  is  girt.] 
*[kissittashau,  v.  i.  he  sweats;]  nuk- 
kissittashom,  I  sweat,  C.  See  kussitteau. 
*Kitan  (for  Kehtanit),  the  great  'god 
( manit ).  See  *Kautdntowuit,  Kehtanit. 
kitchewewes  [ kehche  weiees ],  n.  the  great 
owl,  Lev.  11,  17;  =  kehche  koohkookhaus, 
Deut.  14,  16.  (Strix  virginiana?) 
kitchisahshau  (?),  v.  i.  he  falls  into  the 
fire,  Matt.  17,  15. 

*kitonckquei  (Narr.),  v.  i.  he  is  dead; 
suppos.  2d  sing.  Mtonckquean,  when  thou 
diest  [shalt  die];  3d  pi.  -quehettit,  when 
they  die;  pret.  (intens.)  kakilonckquS- 
ban,  ‘they  are  dead  and  gone’;  pausa- 
icut  kilonckqueiva ,  ‘he  can  not  live  long’ 
[he  is  near  dying],  R.  W.  Apparently 
from  ketedonk  (vbl.  n.  from  keteaa, 
q.  v.),  the  life,  with  the  formative  of 
verbs  of  going;  keteaonkqdeu,  life  goes. 
In  the  Abnaki,  a  verb  adj.,  from  the 
same  base,  ketahSsS,  signified  both  a 
dead  person  and  a  specter  or  the  appari¬ 
tion  of  the  dead  (answering  to  chepy, 
cp  v.);  “un  qui  est  mort,  si  on  parle  de 
lui,  dicitur  ketan8s8a;  un  mort  qui 
reviens  apres  sa  mort,  ketan8s8,”  Rasies, 
kitshittau,  =  kutchimttau,  he  washes 
(it).  See  kwtchissumau. 
kitteamonteanumaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  pities, 
is  kind  to,  shows  mercy  to  (him);  im- 
perat.  2d  sing,  -monch,  Zech_  7,  9;  pi. 
-megk,  Job  19,  21;  suppos.  noli  kodtum- 
onteanumont,  he  who  is  merciful,  who 
pities,  Gen.  19,  16;  Prov.  19,  17.  Vbl. 
n.  pass,  kitteamonteanittuonk,  compas¬ 
sion,  mercy,  Num.  11,  15  ( nuk-kittea - 
monteanitteam,  v.  i.  I  pity;  kittumong- 
keneankquat,  (when  he  is)  miserable, 
pitiable;  kuttumung,  sadly,  C. ).  See 
kutamungineaeau;  kuttumungee. 

[Abn.  ne-keternanghermah,  j’ai  com¬ 
passion  de  lui.] 

kitteashe.  toh  kittcashe,  toh  kutteashish, 
how  many  times?  1  K.  22,  16;  2  Chr. 
18,  15.  See  toh-su. 


kittumma.  See  kuttumma. 
kiyunk,  n.  ‘the  cuckoo’,  Lev.  11,  16; 
but  in  Deut.  14,  15,  kukkow  is  trans¬ 
ferred. 

ko,  koh,  may  be  regarded  as  the  present 
imperfect  or  continuing  present  tense 
of  an  irregular  and  defective  verb  of 
existence.  It  signifies  not  merely  he 
(or  it)  is,  but  connotes  prior  existence, 
he  continues  to  be;  k,  in  this  as  in 
derivate  verbs,  denoting  continuance  or 
progression.  Past  existence  was  ex¬ 
pressed  by  mo  (q.  v. ),  which  we  may 
call  the  preterite  absolute  of  the  same 
verb,  signifying  it  was  and  is  not,  and 
therefore  not  properly  employed  in 
speaking  of  that  which  continues  to  be. 
Eliot  has  in  some  instances  combined 
ko  and  mo,  and  ko  and  pish,  to  express 
the  past  (aorist.)  and  future  tenses  of 
the  verb  ‘to  be’:  noli  koh  mo,  no  koh, 
noli  pdonl,  ‘who  was,  and  is,  and  is  to- 
come’,  Rev.  4,  8;  so  ken  nukoh  [=noh 
koh]  mo,  ken  nukoh,  ken  padan  [and  ken 
nukoh  pish],  Rev.  11, 17;  16,  5;  nenukoh 
[for  nen  noli  koh],  I  am,  i.  e.  I  who  con¬ 
tinue  to  be;  and  neen  nukoh,  I  am,  Mark 
13,  6;  monkd  [for  mo  ne  kohJt]  nnih,  it 
was  so,  Gen.  1,  7,  9,  11,  etc.;  kali  uttoh 
k6  wutapin,  ‘and  where  is  he?’  Job.  14, 
10,  where  ko  serves  as  an  auxiliary  to 
uoutapin. 

kobhamuk,  koppo-,  suppos.  pass. 

(inan.)  of  kuppi,  stopped,  closed, 
kobpaonk,  vbl.  n.  an  inclosure  or  shut- 
up  place,  a  ‘haven’,  Acts  27,  8;  Gen. 
49,  13. 

kobpog,  suppos.  of  kuppi ;  as  n.  a  haven, 
Gen.  49,  13.  See  koppomuk. 
kobpohsheau,  v.  i.  (inan.  subj.)  it  goes 
into  a  haven  or  place  protected:  kuli- 
tconog  kobpohsheau,  ‘the  ship  was  at  the 
land’,  John  6,  21. 

kobshagkinit,  suppos.  when  he  is  shut 
up;  as  n.  a  prisoner;  pi.  -itcheg,  Is.  42,  7. 
kobshagkinittuonk,  vbl.  n.  a  being 
shut  up,  a  prison  (pi.  - ongash ),  Is.  42,  7. 
kod,  with  a  verb,  signifies  intention,  pur¬ 
pose,  wish,  desire,  and  sometimes  gives 
to  the  suppositive  present  the  force  of 
the  paulo-post-future,  as  uttoli  kod  usseit, 
what  he  is  about  to  do,  Gen.  41,  28;  kod- 
ayimog,  when  you  intend  (are  about)  to- 
build,  Luke  14,  28;  kod  nuhhug,  ‘he 
was  about  to  sail’,  Acts  20,  3;  with  the 


38 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


kod — continued. 

indicative,  nu-kod-wctantam,  ‘I  will  be 
wise’,  Eccl.  7,  23;  suppos.  kodoan , 
(when)  ‘thou  seekestto  go’,  1  K.11,22. 

[Narr.  katou  eneechaw,  ‘she  is  falling 
into  travail’,  i.  e.  is  about  to  be  deliv¬ 
ered.  Abn.  kndaSi,  inan.  subj.  keda8i, 
“nota  futuri,  vel  potius  ad  exprimen- 
dum  je  veux,  afin  que,  sur  le  point  de,” 
Rasies.  Del.  n’gatta,  I  will  (from  gat- 
tamen,  to  want,  will,  desire);  gotta,  he 
willeth,  Zeisb.  Gr.  162.  In  the  Chip, 
and  Cree  M  (before  a  vowel,  kad)  or  gci 
has  apparently  lost  its  desiderative  force 
and  become  a  prefix  or  auxiliary  of  the 
simple  future  indicative.  See  Baraga, 
88;  Howse,  199.] 

kodchuki,  ( it  is)  a  piece,  or  a  part  of  (it), 
Judg.  9,  53;  Dan.  5,  5,  24;  ‘a  morsel’ 
(of  food),  Prov.  23,  8:  kodchukishk 
(kodchuki-wisq) ,  ‘a  potsherd’,  Job  2,  8 
( kodchuhki  weyaus,  a  piece  of  meat,  C. ) . 
kodsheau,  v.  i.  inan.  subj.  it  falls  out  (of 
it),  as  a  sword  from  its  sheath,  2  Sam. 
20,  8.  Cf.  kodtinnum,  he  pulls  (it)  out. 
kodtantam,  v.  t.  he  desires,  longs  for, 
wishes  (it).  From  kod,  with  the  form¬ 
ative  of  verbs  of  mental  state  or  dispo¬ 
sition;  nuk-kodtantam,  I  desire  (it),  Job 
33,  32;  imperat.  2d  sing,  ahque  kodtan- 
tash,  do  not  desire,  Prov.  23,  3.  Ybl.  n. 
kodtantamooonk,  desire,  will,  Prov.  18,  1; 
Rom.  7, 18.  With  an.  obj.  kodtanumau, 
he  desires  or  longs  for  (him);  suppos. 
kodtanumadt,  ‘  if  thou  hast  a  desire  unto 
her’,  Deut.  21,  11. 

[Narr.  ncattatintum  or  ncattiteam,  I 
long  for  it.  Del.  gottatamen,  he  desires.  ] 
kodtantupont,  kodto-,  n.  the  top  or 
crown  of  the  head,  Gen.  49,  26;  Deut. 
33,  16,  20;  Job  2,  7. 

[Abn.  8sskitah'tebi,  au-dessus  de  la 
t6te;  8skitsi8i,  dehors,  au-dessus  de;  kette 
(in  antecessum),  avant,  auparavant, 
Rasies.] 

kodtauwompasu  (?),  v.  i.  act.  hesells  or 
barters; imperat.  2d  sing,  -pash,  2  K.  4,  7; 
suppos.  noli  kodtauompasit,  he  who  sells, 
a  seller,  Ezek.  7,  12.  N.  agent,  kod- 
tauompasuen,  Ezek.  7,  13. 
kodtinneau  (?),  v.  i.  he  faints;  pi.  -eaog, 
Is.  40,  30. 

kodtinnum,  v.  t.  he  draws  or  pulls  (one 
thing  out  of  another):  nuk-kodtannum 


kodtinnum — continued. 

nut-togkodteg,  I  draw  (out)  my  sword, 
Ex.  15,9;  kodtinnum  urn-molds,  he  drew 
off  his  shoe,  Ruth  4,  8;  suppos.  noh 
um-mokis  kodtinuk,  he  who  draws  off  his 
shoe,  ‘that  hath  his  shoe  loosed’,  Deut. 
25,  10;  imperat.  2d  sing,  kodlinash, 
-tunush;  with  an.  obj.  kodtinnau,  kod- 
nau,  he  pulls  (him)  out;  imperat.  2d 
pi.  kodncok  wutch  nootau-ut,  pull  him 
out  of  the  fire,  Jude  23;  with  pron. 
affix,  kod'.nneh,  pull  thou  me  out,  Ps. 
31,  4.  From  kodt-,  with  formative  of 
action  performed  bv  the  hand.  Cf. 
kodsheau,  it  falls  out  of. 

[Abn.  ne-ki.tene.men,  je  tire  (nianu), 
v.  g.  une  epine  du  doigt;  kethigan,  tire- 
bourre.] 

kodtompskoag,  as  n.  the  top  of  a  rock, 
the  summit  of  a  cliff  or  crag,  2  Chr.  25, 
12. 

kodtongquag,  suppos.  inan.  as  n.  a  pile, 
that  which  is  heaped  high,  by  placing 
one  above  another,  ‘a  heap’,  Ex.  15,  8. 
From  kodt-  and  onkwhau.  See  koltonk- 
quag. 

kodtcohamont,  pi.  -oncheg,  singers, 
Eccl.  2,  8;  suppos.  of  ketwhomauau. 
kodtuhkoe  (?),  suppos.  kodtuhkuag,  -oli- 
koag,  a  summit  or  high  place,  the  top 
of  a  hill,  Ex.  19,  20;  Cant.  4,  8;  Is.  57,  7; 
Jer.  49,  16. 

*kodtukquom-unat,  v.  i.  to  be  sleepy,  C. 
From  kod  ( desi derat. )  and  unnukquom- 
unat,  to  dream;  to  be  inclined  to  dream. 

[Narr.  nkataquaum,  I  am  sleepy. 
Abn.  kadS'xS,  il  a  sommeil.  Del.  n’gat- 
tungwan,  I  am  sleepy,  Hkw.] 
kodtumco,  (it  is)  a  year,  Lev.  25,  5; 
Deut.  14,  22;  Luke  2,  41;  pi.  -mcoash; 
suppos.  k6dtum.uk,  -mark,  2  K.  19,  29; 
Luke  13,  7.  Adj.  and  adv.  kodtumwde, 
of  a  year,  yearly,  Lev.  16,  34;  25,  53: 
nishwe  kodtumwae  kogkodtumwae  ( freq. ) , 
‘three  years  [i.  e.  three  times  yearly], 
year  after  year’,  1  Sam.  21,  1.  For 
quthumm,  it  measures  or  is  a  measure; 
suppos .  quadhumuk  (1).  See  quttuliham. 

[Narr.  nquitte-cautummo,  one  year. 
Abn.  nekStsi-gaden,  nissi-gaden,  one  year, 
two  years.  Del.  kattxsen,  year,  Camp. ; 
gachtin,  Zeisb.  Shawn,  kn.t'o.] 
kodtumwohkom,  v.  i.  from  kodtumco, 

|  with  the  formative  of  verbs  of  progress 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


39 


kodtumwohkom — continued. 

(-hkom),  he  goes  from  year  to  year ; 
(with  a  numeral  or  indefinite  quantita¬ 
tive)  he  is  -  years  old:  nabo-neese 

kodtumwohkom,  she  is  twelve  years  old, 
Mark  5,  42. 

[Narr.  toh  kutteashe  kodtumwohkom, 
how  many  years  old  are  you?] 
kodtuppoo,  v.  i.  he  is  hungry,  Is.  44, 
12;  Matt.  4,  2;  pret.  nuk-kodtup  [for 
-upup  (?)],  I  was  hungry,  Matt.  25,  35, 
42;  suppos.  kadtupwut,  kodt-,  when  he  is 
hungry,  Mark  2,  25;  Is.  58,  10.  From 
kod,  desiderative,  and  -uppco  (v.  ge¬ 
neric),  he  eats,  he  longs  to  eat. 

[Narr.  n’ccUtup,  I  am  hungry;  wun- 
nanc&ttup,  I  am  very  hungry.  Del.  kat 
to  pu  i,  to  hunger,  Zeisb.  ] 
*kogkahqutteau,  v.  i. :  nuk-kogkahqut- 
team ,  I  counsel  or  advise,  C. ;  with  an. 
obj.  kogkohkoowa.u,  he  gives  counsel  (to 
him),  C. 

kogkeau,  kogkewau,  v.  i.  he  is  mad, 
insane,  beside  himself,  1  Sam.  21,  14; 
John  10,  20  ( kakewau ,  Mass.  Ps. ):  kuk- 
kogkei  (pres,  actual),  thou  art  beside 
thyself;  matta  nuk-kogke-oh  (negat. ),  I 
am  not  mad,  Acts  26,  24,  25;  suppos. 
noli  kogkeait,  he  who  is  mad;  pi.  -eacheg, 
Matt.  4,  24;  suppos.  pass.  inan.  as  n.  kag- 
kedmuk,  madness,  being  mad,  1  Sam. 
21,  13.  Ybl.  n.  kogkedonk,  madness. 
N.  agent,  kogkeaen,  indef.  -a min,  a  mad¬ 
man.  Adv.  kogke,  kogkee  ( kogkeae ,  0.), 
madly,  of  madness.  Vb.  adj.  kogkeesu, 
he  does  madly,  he  is  actively  mad, 
‘lunatic’,  Matt.  17, 15. 
*kogkehooponat,  v.  i.  (infin. )  to  be 
drunk  [?],  C. 

[Cree  keeskwaypayoo,  he  is  drunk.] 
kogkeissippamwau,  -amou,  v.  i.  he  is 
drunk,  Ps.  107,  27  (suppos.  kak'esup- 
padt,  when  he  is  drunk,  Mass.  Ps. ) ;  im- 
perat.  ahque  kogkesuparnvnsh ,  don’t  be 
drunk,  C.  Vbl.  n.  -amcoonk,  drunken¬ 
ness,  Deut.  29,  19.  N.  agent,  -amwaen, 
a  drunkard,  Prov.  26,  9. 
kogkeusquau  (v.  i.  she  is  a  madwoman), 
a  harlot,  Is.  23,  15,  16;  pi.  -squdog, 
Prov.  7,  10.  Vbl.  n.  kogkeusquawonk, 
harlotry,  ‘lasciviousness’,  Mark  7,  22. 
kogkewau.  See  kogke.au. 
kogkohsum,  kogoxum,  kogkohkus- 
sum,  kubkussum,  v.  t.  he  cuts  in 


kogkohsum,  etc. — continued. 

shape,  carves,  engraves,  fashions  by  cut¬ 
ting  (it),  Zech.  3,  9;  (infin.)  Ex.  31,5; 
35,  33;  suppos.  noh  ndhtoe  kohkokdusit, 
he  who  skilfully  cuts,  who  has  ‘skill  to 
grave’,  2  Chr.  2,  7.  Vbl.  n.  kogoxum- 
coonk,  carving,  ‘graving’,  Zech.  3,  9. 
Adv.  and  adj.  kogoxumwe,  kogoksumwe, 
by  carving  or  graving,  carved,  graven, 
2  Chr.  34,  4,  7;  Jer.  51,  47,52. 
kogkopsau,  (he  is)  deaf,  Lev.  19, 14;  Is. 
29,  18;  suppos.  kokobsont,  kogkobsont, 
Ex.  4,  11;  Ps.  38,  13;  pi.  -oncheg,  Is. 
43,  8  ( kogkopsae  mehtauog,  a  deaf  ear, 
C. ):  kohkobsahtauog,  pi.  -ogash,  deaf 
ears,  Is.  35,  5,  =vmhtauogash  kuppiye- 
uash  (closed  ears),  Mic.  7,  16.  From 
kuppi,  closed,  fast,  with  augm.  redupl. 
and  intr.  an.  formative,  ’su  ko-kup’su, 
he  is  shut  close.  See  kuppohom. 

[Narr.  n’cupsa,  I  am  deaf.  Abn.  ne- 
gaghepsa.  Del.  gegepchoat,  a  deaf  per¬ 
son,  Zeisb.] 

kogkouequaii,  -quaou,  v.  i.  he  sleeps 
(lightly),  he  slumbers,  Ps.  121,  3,  4. 
Vbl.  n.  -qudonk,  slumber,  light  sleep, 
Prov.  24,  33. 

kogkounogohquohhou,  -ogkahquoh- 
hou,  n.  a  thistle,  2  K.  14,9;  2  Chr.  25,28. 
Cf.  kdnukkehtahwhau,  he  pierces,  pricks, 
kogkounum,  v.  t.  he  withholds  (it); 
with  an.  2d  obj.  he  withholds  (it)  from 
(him);  kuk-kogkounum.au,  thou  with- 
holdest  (it)  from  him,  Job  22,  7.  From 
kounum. 

kogkussobkoag,  n.  a  high  place;  pi. 
-gish,  1  Sam.  13,  6.  Augm.  of  kussoh- 
koag,  suppos.  of  kussohkoi,  high, 
kogoxum.  See  kogkohsum. 
kogsuhkoag,  n. ;  pi.  -\-ish,  ‘hills’,  Luke 
23,  30  (for  kogkussohkoagish). 
kob.  See  ko. 

kohkatam,  kohketcon.  See  kulikuttcon. 
kohkodhumau,  v.  i.  he  chews  the  cud; 
negat.  matta  kolikodhumcoou,  he  does 
not  chew  the  cud,  Deut.  14,  8,  —matta 
onchittamauco,  Lev.  11,  7;  suppos.  koh- 
kodhumont,  Deut.  14,  6,  —  onchittamont, 
Lev.  11,  3;  pi.  -oncheg,  Deut.  14,  7. 
Cf.  onchittamau. 

kohkonooau,  v.  t.  an.  he  denies  (him). 
See  quencnwau. 

kohkuhquag  [suppos.  of  kuhkuhqueu,  it 
goes  up],  n.  the  top  (of  a  hill  or  ascent), 


40 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25- 


kohkuhquag — continued, 
a  summit,  Deut.  34,  1;  a  heap  (of 
waters),  Josh.  3,  13. 
kohkuttoon,  =  kuhkuttcon,  he  thirsts, 
kohnkan,  (there  is)  drought,  v.  impers. 
as  n.  Deut.  8,  15;  en  neepunne  kunkanit, 
in  the  drought  of  summer.  Cf.  kuli- 
kuttoon  [kuhk-,  wuttcon,  dry,  mouth],  he 
thirsts. 

*kohunk  (Peq.),  a  goose,  Stiles.  See 
*hdnck. 

kommroto,  kummcoto,  v.  i.  and  t.  inan. 
he  steals,  Gen.  31,  19;  Matt.  6,  20;  pi. 
-towog,  Matt.  6,  20;  imperat.  of  prohib. 
2d  pi.  komrnootuhkon,  do  not  steal,  Ex. 
20,  15;  Mark  10,  19;  suppos.  pass.  inan. 
ne  kommootomuk,  that  which  is  stolen, 
Gen.  31,  39  ( nuk-kummoot ,  I  steal,  C. ). 
Vbl.  n.  kommcotowonk,  stealing,  theft, 
Ex.  22,  3;  Hos.  4,  2.  N.  agent,  kom- 
mootmvaen  (indef.  -aenin),  a  thief. 
From  ktmeu,  secretly,  by  stealth. 

[Narr.  kuk-kdmrhcot,  you  steal;  ka- 
rndotakick  (suppos.  pi. ),  thieves.  Chip. 
kemoodeslikeh ,  he  is  a  thief;  suppos. 
chegemoodid,  he  who  steals,  John  10,  1, 
10.  Abn.  kem8tene ,  il  derobe.  Del. 
kimochuien,  to  steal  away  privately, 
Zeisb.] 

komuk  (?),  n.  a  building,  an  (artificial) 
inclosure.  The  primary  signification  is, 
perhaps,  that  which  is  built,  for  other 
use  than  for  a  dwelling  place  ( wek ), 
Acts  5,  23:  woskeche  komuk,  the  top  of 
the  house,  Is.  22,  1 ;  askuhweteae  komuk- 
qut,  in  the  watch  tower,  Is.  21,  5;  qun- 
nunkque-komuk,  high  building,  ‘tower’; 
meechumee-komuk,  food-house,  a  barn, 
Luke  12,  24  ( muayea-komuk ,  meeting¬ 
house,  C. ). 

[Narr.  wunnauchi-cdmock,  a  chimney, 
R.  IV.  Micm.  co mi',  a  harbor,  Rand. 
Cf.  Abn.  -kamigS,  in  ketakamigS,  the 
mainland;  pepamkamighek,  univers  ( pe- 
panmiSi,  par  tout);  mesagSigamigS,  ‘ca- 
bane  de  pieux,  a  la  franyaise,’  Rasies; 
Micm.  makhamigue8,  terre,  Mail].] 
kongketeaii,  v.  i.  he  is  in  good  health, 
is  well,  Gen.  29,  6.  Intens.  of  keteau. 
*konkitchea  (Narr.),  as,  often  (?). 
konkont,  konkontu,  n.  (onomatope)  a 
crow,  ‘raven’,  Cant.  5, 11 ;  kutchikkonkont 
[ kehche  konkont],  Deut.  14,  14,  and  (pi.) 
kihchikkongontuog,  raven,  ravens,  Luke 


konkont,  konkontu — continued. 

12,  24  ( kongkont ,  a  crow,  C. ).  SansK. 
kdka,  k&ga;  cornix,  kdrava. 

[Narr.  kaukont,  pi.  -tuog.  Abn.  kara- 
lkara‘mes8s  (dimin.),  corneille.  Chip. 
(Gr.  Trav. )  kahgahge,  crow;  kahgahgese, 
raven  (?).  Menom.  kahkahkawe,  raven. 
Shawn,  kdh  kdlik  ee,  crow.  Onond.  kah 
kali .] 

konkuttronooonk,  vbl.  n.  thirst,  Neh.  9, 
15.  See  kuhkuttoon. 

*konooh  (Peq.?),  bear,  Stiles  IMS.,  1769, 
—  qunnonoo  (?). 

konukkehtahwhaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  pierces 
or  pricks  (him)  with  a  sharp  instru¬ 
ment;  lit.  he  causes  (it)  to  pierce 
(him);  pi.  -whodg,  they  pierce;  and 
pass,  they  are  pierced,  Acts  2,  37;  with 
pron.  affixes,  uk-kdnukkehlahwhoh,  he 
pierced  him  with  (a  spear],  John  19, 
34  (suppos.  instrum,  konnukctuhwheg, 
kunnukuhtohwheq,  a  spear,  Mass.  Ps., 
Ps.  35,  3;  47,9). 

konuksheau,  v.  i.  inan.  subj.  it  pierces,  it 
penetrates,  2  K.  18,  21 ;  suppos.  kanuk- 
ashunk,  when  it  pierces,  piercing,  Heb. 
4,  12. 

konumuk,  that  which  bears  or  supports: 
ohke  konamuk,  ‘  the  pillars  of  the  earth  ’, 
Ps.  75,  3.  From  kenun,  suppos.  inan. 
pass. 

konunnont,  suppos.  of  kenunnau,  he  car¬ 
ries  (an.  obj. ). 

*kopiauss,  kupyas  (Peq.),  a  frog,  Stile-. 

koppomuk  [=  kobhamuk],  a  haven  (that 
which  is  closed),  Acts  27,  12. 

*kopposh,  n.  a  sturgeon,  C.  See  *k<u\- 
posh. 

kdshkag,  koskag,  width  or  breadth. 

See  kishki. 

koshki.  See  kushki. 

kosittag,  kasittag,  when  it  is  hot;  sup¬ 
pos.  of  kussitlau,  q.  v. 

koskag.  See  kishki;  kdshkag. 

kosukquom  (?),  n.  a  witch. 

[Abn.  kSssigann,  k8mgann,  ‘une  jong- 
lerie,’  etc.;  ‘le  feu  fausses  observations 
de  futuro’,  Rasies.] 

[kottonkquag,  a  heap,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  33, 
7;  kodtunkquag,  78,  13.]  Cf.  kodlcmg- 
qu-ag;  kuhkuhqueu. 

koueu,  kouweu,  v.  i.  he  sleeps,  Gen.  2r 
21;  Matt.  8,  24;  9,  24;  (definit.  pres. 
koutii,  he  is  asleep,  he  now  sleeps,  1  K. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


41 


koueu,  kouweu — continued. 

18,  27);  nuk-kouem,  I  sleep,  Cant.  5,  2; 
suppos.  2d  sing,  kacan,  when  thousleep- 
est,  Eph.  5, 14;  3d  sing,  noh  kail,  kawit, 
he  who  sleeps;  pi.  kaicheg.  Vbl.  n. 
kowonk,  sleeping,  sleep,  Prov.  24,  33; 
mishe-koueonk,  a  deep  sleep,  Gen.  15, 
12.  N.  agent,  koueuen  (indef.  -min),  a 
sleeper,  Jonah  1,  6. 

[Narr.  (pres,  defin.)  eomvtiuri,  he  is 
asleep;  cowwewock,  they  sleep;  yd  cow¬ 
ish,  lodge  here;  (suppos.)  cdioit,  while 
he  slept.  Abn.  ne-kaSi,  je  dors;  kaS,  il 
dort.  Del.  gauwiu;  participle  pres, 
(suppos.)  gewi,  sleeping;  gauirin,  to 
sleep,  Zeisb. ;  n’gduvn,  Hkw.  ( n’goive , 
Cass),  I  sleep.] 

kQuhquodt,  kouhquod,  kounkq-,  n.  an 

arrow,  Ps.  11,  2;  Prov.  25,  18;  Job  41, 
28;  pi.  -tash,  2  K.  13,  15,  18.  From 
kous,  a  thorn,  uhq-  (rad.  of  uhqude,  at 
the  point  or  extremity),  pointed,  and 
ohleau  (suppos.  inan. ),  that  which  has 
a  sharp  point  or  is  sharp  at  the  end. 

[Narr.  pi.  kauquaiash.  Peq.  kee- 
guum,  khegunt,  Stiles.  Abn.  kdn8eio, 
cela  est  epineux,  aigu  ( a  rSs,  fleqhe 
sans  tet e]  pakSe,  fleche  a  tete);  kaiiksk- 
ar8s,  fleche  ou  il  y  a  des  plumes,  etc. 
Chip.  (Sag.)  keenowawkoyn.'] 
kdiinum,  v.  t.  he  carries,  supports,  holds 
in  hand;  suppos.  kounuk  ( ne  kdunuk, 
what  he  carried,  ‘  his  carriage ’ ,  1  Sam. 
17,  22);  pi.  qunuhtukquash  kounukeg, 
they  who  carry  spears,  ‘spearmen’, 
Acts  23,  23;  freq.  kogkounum,  he  holds 
or  carries  (it)  habitually,  continues  to 
hold  or  carry  (it),  as  a  distaff,  Prov. 
31,  19;  with  an.  obj.  kounau,  kogkou- 
nau,  Gen.  19, 16;  Ps.  139,  10;  Rev.  20,  2. 
kotis,  n.  a  thorn,  a  briar,  Is.  55, 13;  2  Cor. 
12,  7;  Mic.  7,  4;  a  bramble,  Judg.  4, 14, 
15:  kishke  kdus-sehtu,  by  the  (thorn) 
bushes,  Job  30,  4.  See  asinnekoils. 
The  radical  is  uhq,  pointed  (see  uli- 
quaeu ),  with  perhaps  the  vb.  adj.  form¬ 
ative  -ussu,  he  is  sharp  pointed  (pi. 
-sog),  which  gives  the  noun  the  ani¬ 
mate  form. 

[Abn.  kan8is,  epine.  ] 
kouweu.  See  koueu. 
koo.  See  koowa. 
kroche.  See  kutche. 


krochteau,  v.  t.  he  adds  to  or  increases 
by  progression;  primarily  a  causative, 
he  makes  it  progress  or  go  on;  infin. 
-eaunat,  ‘to  add’  (i.  e.  to  go  from)  one 
thing  to  another,  Deut.  29,  19;  with 
an.  2d  obj.  nuk-kwchte-oh ,  I  add  to  him 
(years  to  his  life,  2  K.  20,  6).  From 
kcoche  (kutche).  See  kcotnau. 
krohkrokhaus,  n.  (onomatope)  an  owl, 
Deut.  14,  15,  16;  Lev.  11,  16;  pi.  -sog, 
Job  30,  29;  kehche  (and  mishe)  ka>h- 
kcokhaus,  the  great  owl,  Deut.  14,  16; 
Is.  34,  15;  dimin.  kmlikcokhomicem ,  the 
little  owl,  Deut.  14,  16,  =oohcomous, 
Lev.  11, 17.  Cf.  wewes  (screech  owl). 

[Narr.  kokdkehom,  ohSrnous,  an  owl. 
Abn.  k8k8kas8,  chat-huant  (and  k8kass8, 
le  coucou) .  Chip,  o-ko-kd-o,  ko-ko-ko-o. 
Del.  gokhoos,  owl;  gokhotit,  a  little  owl, 
Zeisb.] 

krokcokanog-s,  n.  a  bell,  Ex.  39,  25,  26 
[- ogqussu ,  owl-like  (?)]. 
kron,  n.  snow,  Ex.  4,  6;  Job  6,  16;  Ps. 
148,  6.  Cf.  muhpcD,  sochepo. 

[Narr.  cone  (and  sochepo).  Del.  gun, 
guhn,  Zeisb.  Chip,  kon,  aw-kone.  Me- 
nom.  koon.\ 

krotnau,  kcotnehteau,  v.  t.  he  makes 
an  addition  to  (it),  increases  (it)  by 
adding  (cf.  koochteau):  ahque  koolnish, 
thou  shalt  not  [do  not]  add  to  it,  Deut. 
12,  32;  matta  uk-kootnau-6-un,  he  did 
not  add  (anything  or  more),  Deut.  5, 
22;  uk-kootnehteau-un,  he  addeth  to  it, 
Gal.  3,  15;  imperat.  2d  pi.  kcotnehleau- 
cok,  add  ye  to  (it),  1  Pet.  1,  5. 
krowa,  kro,  n.  a  pine  tree,  ‘fir’,  Hos. 
14,  8;  pi.  kanvaog.  From  the  same 
root  as  kous,  the  tree,  like  the  English 
pine  (pin  tree),  taking  its  name  from 
its  pointed  leaves,  epines,  or  its  general 
shape. 

[Narr.  kowaw,  a  pine  tree;  dimin. 
kowawesuck  (pi.),  young  pines.  Abn. 
k8e,  pin;  kan8is,  epine,  Rasies;  modern 
Abn.  ko-wa,  pine  tree,  Iv.  A.  Del.  cu-we, 
Zeisb.] 

kuhhog,  thy  body,  thy  person,  thyself, 
Matt.  22,  39.  See  -hog. 
kuh.kenauweh.heau,  v.  caus.  an.  (augm. 
of  kenaihheau)  he  shapes,  fashions, 
gives  form  to  (an  an.  obj.),  Job  26, 
13;  suppos.  kah kenauweheonl ,  he  form— 


42 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


kuhkenauwehheau — continued. 

ing  (when  he  forms),  Is.  44,  10;  pass. 
kuhkenaihetteau,  he  is  formed;  pret.  nuk- 
kulikenaihetteap,  I  was  shapen,  Ps.  51, 5. 
Adv.  kuhkenauwe,  shapely,  in  order, 
orderly,  Luke  1,  1,3.  With  inan.  obj. 
kuhkenauwehteau,  he  shapes  or  fashions 
( it) ;  pret.nuk-kuhkenauwehteop,  I  formed 
(it),  Is.  45,  7.  Cf.  kenauwameonk. 
kuhkham,  kuhham,  v.  t.  he  marks  (it) 
out;  uk-kuhkham-un,  he  marks  it  out 
{nashpe  pemunneat,  by  a  line,  Is.  44, 13); 
suppos.  instr.  [ kuhkheg ]  kuhheg,  that 
which  serves  to  mark  with,  a  line;  pi. 
nuk-kuhheganash,  my  lines,  Ps.  16,  6: 
kuhhegan-ehiu,  within  the  lines,  ‘gates’, 
Deut.  15,  7;  freq.  and  augm.  kulikuh- 
heg,  a  (land-)  mark,  bound,  limit,  Ex. 
23,  31;  Prov.  23,  10;  Matt.  25,  4;  line, 
Is.  28,  10  ( kuhkehheg ,  a  rule;  adj.  kuh- 
kuhhegane,  regular,  C. ). 
kuhkinneam,  v.  t.  he  observes,  takes 
note  of,  marks  (mentally  or  by  obser¬ 
vation),  Lev.  13,  33;  suppos.  kohkinnuk; 
3d  pi.  kohkinnwnoheltit,  Ex.  12,  42  (nuk- 
keehkeneam,  I  view,  C. ) . 
kubkinneasu,  v.  i.  he  makes  a  mark, 
distinguishes  by  mark  or  observation, 
Job  33,  11;  imperat.  2d  sing,  kuhkin- 
neasish,  mark  thou,  take  note,  observe, 
Ruth  3,  4.-  Ybl.  n.  -asuonk,  a  mark, 
sign,  token,  Rev.  13, 16;  14,  9;  Is.  20,  3; 
pi.  -ongash,  Gal.  6,  17;  Ps.  135,  9. 
kuhkcotomau,  v.  t.  inan.  and  an.  he 
points  (it)  out  to,  shows,  makes  known 
to  (him);  knk-kuhkcotom-oush  mogagish, 
I  will  show  thee  mighty  things,  Jer. 
33,  3;  uk-kuhkootomau-uh,  he  showed 
(it)  to  him,  Ex.  15,  25. 

[Narr.  kuk-kakotemous,  I  will  show 
thee  (the  way);  kokotemiinnea  m&yi, 
show  me  the  way.] 

kuhkcotomwehteaii,  v.  caus.  inan.  and 
an.  he  instructs  him,  teaches  (it)  to 
(him)  [nuk-kuhkmtvlnwehteam,  I  teach, 
C.]  N.  agent,  kulikaitomwehteden,  a 
teacher,  1  Chr.  25,  8  (a  minister  or 
schoolmaster,  C. ).  Ybl.  n.  -leaonk, 
teaching,  instruction,  C. 
kuhkuhbeg,  suppos.  instrum,  a  bound, 
landmark,  limit.  See  kuhkham. 
kubkubbunk,  a  boundary;  pi.  -kgash, 
Gen.  49,  26;  suppos.  of  kuhkuhheau,  it 
marks.  [ kuhkunnunk ,  a  bound,  Mass. 
Ps.  104,  9.] 


kuhkuhqueu,  v.  i.  he  goes  upward,  as¬ 
cends,  Ex.  24, 15,  18;  Judg.  13,  20;  sup¬ 
pos.  hoiran  kohkuhqueil,  who  shall  as¬ 
cend?  etc. ,  Rom.  10, 6.  Adv.  kuhkuhque, 
above,  higher,  Josh.  15,  19;  suppos. 
inan.  kohkuhquag  [ kottonkquag ,  Mass. 
Ps.  33,  7],  (that  which  goes  above,)  a 
summit,  a  heap.  With  inan.  subj.  kuh- 
kuhqshin,  it  goes  up,  Ezek.  41,  7.  Cf. 
qunnu kque,  qunnuhkqu e. 
kuhkuhqunaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  draws  him 
up;  pi.  -qun&og  nashpe  pemuneohtanash , 
they  drew  (him)  up  with  cords,  Jer. 
38,  13. 

kuhkussum.  See  kogkohsum. 

kuhkuttcon,  kohkatron,  kohketoon, 

v.  i.  he  thirsts,  is  thirsty  [has  a  dry 
mouth,  kohnkan  wut-tam ],  Judg.  15,  18; 
John  4,  13:  nuk-kohkuttcon  [ nuh-k61i - 
kittoon,  C.],  I  thirst,  Judg.  4,  19;  sup¬ 
pos.  noli  kaukuttcog,  he  who  thirsts,  Matt. 
5,  6;  Is.  55,  1;  pi.  particip.  neg  kau- 
kuttcogig,  the  thirsty,  they  who  thirst, 
Matt.  5,  6.  Adv.  and  adj.  kuhkuttamase, 
of  thirst,  thirsty,  Is.  41,  17.  Vbl.  n. 
-amooonk,  thirst,  Ex.  17,3;  Judg.  15,  18; 
k6nkutta>fia>onk,  Neh.  9,  15. 

[Narr.  nic-cdwkatone,  I  am  thirsty.] 
kuhpeau,  v.  i.  he  comes  to  land,  lands 
(from  a  boat);  pi.  kuhpeog,  Acts  27,  43, 
44.  From  kuppi. 

kuhpinaii,  kuhpunaii,  v.  t.  an.  he 
draws  (him)  out  [of  the  water  (?)],  Ps. 

18,  ]6:  - hashabpoli  (an.),  he  draws 

the  net,  John  21,  11.  [ nuk-kuhpunuk - 

up,  ‘he  drew  me  out’  (of  the  waters), 
*  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  18,  16;  kuhpun-up  asha- 
poh,  ‘he  drew  the  net’,  Mass.  Ps.,  John 
21,  11.] 

kuhpohke,  n.  [kuppi-ohke,  protected  or 
inclosed  place]  the  landing  place,  the 
shore;  kuhpohke-it ,  on  the  shore,  Matt- 
13,  2.  Cf.  kobhamuk. 

*kuhpohhonk,  n.  a  ladle  or  spoon  (?),  C. 
kuhpohkomuk.  See  kuppohkomuk. 
kuhpoohhamowonk,  a  haven,  Acts  27, 
12.  See  kobhamuk ;  kuppohham. 
kuhpunaii.  See  kuhpinaii. 
kuhquttum,  v.  t.  he  designates,  appoints 
(marks  out);  nuk-kuhquttum  ayeuonk,  I 
appoint  a  place,  2  Sam.  7, 10.  Adv.  and 
adj.  kuhqultumme,  of  appointment,  des¬ 
ignated,  Jer.  8,  7.  Cf.  quttuhham,  he 
measures. 

kuhtconog,  —  kehtmnog,  a  ship. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


43 


kukkehtaii,  kukkeihtaii,  v.  t.  an.  he 

gives  attention  to,  hearkens  to,  observes 
(him).  From  kuhkham,  he  inarks(?). 
Imperat.  2d  sing,  kukkeitash,  Ps.  45,  10 
[ahchusutash,  Mass.  Ps.  ] ;  (2d-j-lst  sing. ) 
kukkehlah,  hearken  to  me,  Nnm.  23,  18; 
2d  pi.  noli  kukkeitok,  to  whom,  hearken 
ye,  Deut.  18,  15. 

[Narr.  kihkUa,  hearken  thou  to  me. 
Abn.  ne-kiklam,  je  suis  attentif,  j’ecoute; 
imperat.  lata,  kekSittahmi,  je  t’ecoute, 
je  t’obeis.] 

kukkonashquae  (?),  adv.  and  adj.: - 

missonkquaminneash,  ‘full  ears  of  corn 
in  the  husk’,  2  K.  4,  42. 
kukkow.  See  kiyunk. 

*kumma,  adv.  lately,  C.  See  kuttumma. 
kummcoto.  See  kommcoto,  he  steals. 
*kunam  (Narr.),  a  spoon;  pi.  -mduog,  R. 

AY.;  kunndm,  quonnam,  0.  See  kendm. 
kunkohteadteae,  adv.  and  adj.  of  dry¬ 
ness,  dry:  - ohke,  dry  (i.  e.  parched 

by  drought)  land,  Jer.  50,  12.  See 
kohnkan,  (there  is)  drought. 
*kunnatequanick,  n.  a  window,  C.  See 
kenogkeneg. 

*kunndsnep  (Narr.),  n.  a  killock  or 
anchor,  R.  AY.  See  kenuhquab. 
kuppadt,  kuppad,  n.  ice,  Job  6,  16;  38, 
29.  From  kuppi-ohteau ;  lit.  ‘when  it 
is  covered  ’  or  ‘  closed  up.  ’ 

[Peq.  kuppat,  Stiles.  Narr.  capdt, 
R.  AAT.  Del.  ¥  patten,  it  (e.  g.  the  river) 
is  frozen  up,  Zeisb.] 

Ykuppaquat  (Narr. ),  ‘it  is  overcast’,  i.  e. 

when  it  is  cloudy,  =  kuppohquodt. 
kuppi,  (1)  (it  is)  close,  shut  in,  inclosed. 
(2)  thick,  close  together.  (3)  as  n.  a 
thicket  (a  place  where  trees  grow  close 
together),  a  ‘wood’,  Eccl.  2,  6;  ‘grove’, 

1  K.  16,  33;  2  K.  21,  3;  kuppahtu,,  in 
covert,  Job  38,  40;  ‘in  thickets’,  Jer.  4, 
29;  Is.  9,  18;  pi.  kuppiyeuash,  ‘groves’, 

2  Chr.  31,  1.  (Sansk.  kumb  or  kub, 
tegere;  Greek  Kvitco,  6kstcoo-,  Engl, 
keep,  coop.) 

[Narr.  cuppi-machdug,  thick  wood,  a 
swamp,  R.  AY.] 

kuppogki,  (it  is)  thick:  kuhpogku  poh- 
kenai,  (there  is)  thick  darkness,  Deut. 
4, 11;  pasuk  menutcheganit  unnukkuhque 
kuppogki,  (it  is)  a  hand’s  breadth  thick, 
2  Chr.  4,  5;  suppos.  ne  kohpogok,  the 
thickness  of  it  ( gohpogok ,  Ezek.  41,  9). 
Adv.  kuppogke,  Ezek.  41,  26. 


kuppogki — con  t  i  n  ued . 

[Abn.  kepaghe,  (hois)  epais,  en  plat; 
suppos.  kepaghek.  Del.  kopachkan;  an. 
kopachkisso,  Zeisb.  ] 

kuppohham,  kuppuhham,  v.  t.  he 

stops,  stays,  closes  (it),  2  Chr.  32,  30; 
pi.  2  K.  3,  25;  Heb.  11,  33;  suppos.  kob- 
hog,  when  he  stops  (it):  noli  kobhog,  he 
who  stops  (it),  Job  38,  37;  pi.  neg  kob- 
hogeg,  2  Chr.  32,  4;  pass.  (man.  subj.) 
kobhamuk,  when  it  is  closed,  when  it 
closes,  Josh.  2,  5;  Titus  1,  11;  with  an. 
obj.  kuppohhau,  kuppuhhou,  he  stops 
(him).  Vbl.  n.-  kuppolihamaoonk,  -m6- 
V'onk,  a  stopping  (place),  a  ‘haven’, 
Acts  27, 12.  From  kuppi  com  ( ohham ), 
he  goes.  [ nuk-kupham ,  I  shut,  C.] 

[Narr.  kuplidmmin,  to  shut  the  door; 
kupliash,  shut  the  door,  R.  AY.  Abn. 
ne-kephdmen,  je  le  bouche  (un  trou). 
Del.  kpa-lii,  shut  the  door;  kpa-hoon,  a 
door,  Zeisb.  Aroc.] 

kuppohkomuk  [kuppi-komuk\ ,  n.  (1)  a 
place  inclosed,  shut  in;  (2)  a  place 
which  is  thick-set,  where  trees  are  close 
together,  Deut.  16,  21. 

[Narr.  cappacommock,  “which  sig¬ 
nifies  a  refuge  or  hiding-place,  as  I  con¬ 
ceive.”  R.  AY.] 

kuppohosu,  kuppuhhausu,  v.  adj.  he 
is  stopped,  stayed,  shut  in,  1  Sam.  23,  7 ; 
Rom.  3, 19;  and  v.  i.  he  stops  or  closes. 
Cf.  kogkopsau,  (he  is)  deaf. 

[Narr.  n’cupsa,  I  am  deaf.  Abn.  ke- 
bahaiisS,  il  bouche  cela;  gaglxepse,  il  est 
sourd.  Del.  kpahasu,  Zeisb.] 
kuppohquodt,  (when  it  is)  cloudy 
weather,  when  the  sky  is  overcast. 
Adv.  and  adj.  -quodtde,  -qvodte  (?), 
cloudy,  Ezek.  30,  3. 

[Narr.  kiippaquat. ] 
kuppuhham.  See  kuppohham. 
kuppuhhausu.  See  kuppohosu. 
kuppuhhou,  n.  a  door,  Prov.  26, 14.  See 
kuppohham. 

[Del.  kpa-lioon,  Zeisb.  AToc.  8.] 
kupputtcon  [ = k u p p  i - w u ttcon,  closed 
mouth],  v.  i.  he  is  dumb,  speechless: 
pish  kukkupputtcon,  thou  shalt  be  dumb, 
Luke  1,  20;  pret.  kupputtcon-up,  he  was 
speechless,  Luke  1.  22. 
kupshagkineasuonk,  vbl.  n.  imprison¬ 
ment;  pi.  -ongash,  Heb.  11,  36. 
*kupyas.  See  kopiauss;  cf.  mohmoskuh- 
I  teas. 


44 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BUI.I.KTIN  52 


kushki,  (it  is)  rough  (it  scratches,  is 
harsh):  -  hogkooonk,  a  rough  gar¬ 
ment,  Zech.  13,  4;  - mayash,  rough 

ways,  Luke  3,  5;  with  an.  subj.  (v.  adj.) 
kushkesu,  he  is  rough. 

[Cree,  kowissu,  he  is  rough;  kaskaska- 
hum,  he  scrapes  it.  Abn.  kdkhlgan, 
la  gratte,  instrument  a  gratter  les 
peaux.] 

kuspinum.  See  kishpinum. 

kussa-,  kusso-,  in  comp,  words,  hot, 
warm.  See  mdhkussa. 
kusse-,  kes-,  (augm. )  in  comp,  words, 
very  much,  fully,  completely.  See 
kesantam. 

[Abn.  kesi  (partic. )  tres.] 
kusseh,  interj.  lo,  behold,  El.  Gr.  22. 

[Del.  sche,  schela,  see  there!  Zeisb.] 
kussehtanip[pe],  -tanup,  n.  a  stream, 
a  current,  Fs.  124,  4;  Is.  30,  28;  pi. 
-peash,  Is.  34,  9.  For  kussehtan-nippe, 
flowing  water,  Is.  30, 25.  Hence  (adv. ) 
kussehtanne  sepuese,  the  stream  of  a 
brook,  Job  6,  15;  anuicutchuwane  kus- 
sehtcmup,  an  overflowing  stream,  Is. 
30,  28. 

kussitchuan,  -uwan  [kusse-utchuan], 
v.  unipers.  it  flows  in  a  rapid  stream  or 
current,  it  continues  flowing;  as  n.  a 
rapid  stream,  a  current,  Ps.  46,  4;  78, 
16,  20;  pi.  -nash,  Cant.  4,  15. 

[Abn.  kesi  (partic.)  tres;  kesi  re,  il 
va  tres  vite;  kesitsSann,  kesitahn,  elle 
(la  riviere)  est  rapide.] 
kussitteau,  -tau,  v.  i.  it  is  hot;  as  n. 
heat  (of  the  sun,  or  natural  heat),  Job 
24,  19;  30,  30;  Is.  49,  10;  suppos.  kdsit- 
tag,  kosittag,  when  it  is  hot,  in  the  heat 
of  the  day,  Gen.  18,  1;  1  Sam.  11,  11. 
For  kuss-ohteau  ( pajeh  kussohtd-ut,  ‘till 
the  sun  be  hot’,  Neh.  7,  3);  suppos.  kos- 
ohtag,  Ex.  16,  21.  (With  -sh,  of  invol. 
action  or  of  derogation,  kissittashau,  he 
sweats,  C.) 

[Narr.  kussuttah,  it  is  hot;  kdusitteks, 
hot  weather;  nick-qussittdunum,  I  sweat. 
Abn.  keside,  vel  kesabede,  cela  est  chaud. 
Del.  ks chitiek,  warm,  hot,  Zeisb.  Gr.  42; 
kschitteii,  warm ,  hot  (it  is);  v.  adj.,  ibid. 
163.] 

kusso-.  See  kussct-. 
kussohkoi,  n.  a  summit,  point  of  rock 
or  earth,  a  crag,  ‘high  hill’,  Ezek.  6, 
13;  kussohkoi-ompsk,  ‘a  sharp  rock’, 


kussohkoi — continued. 

1  Sam.  14,  4;  kussohk&iyeue  ayeuonganit, 
‘in  the  top  of  high  places’,  the  high¬ 
est  place,  Prov.  8,  2;  kussohkdiyeue  wad- 
chu-ut,  ‘into  a  high  mountain’,  Is.  40, 9 
( kxmulikoe  wadchu,  high  hill,  Mass.  Ps., 
Ps.  104, 18).  Cf.  tohkmtauaog  kussampsk- 
k&i-yeu-ut,  ‘they  climb  upon  the  rocks’, 
Jer.  4,  29. 

kussompskussum,  v.  t.  he  heats  or 
makes  hot  (an  oven,  furnace,  etc.); 
infinit.  -umunat,  Dan.  3,  19;  suppos. 
kussampskussuk,  when  he  heats  (it), 
Hos.  7,  4.  F rom  kussa,  ompsk  ( a  stone ) , 
with  the  formative  of  verbs  denoting 
action  of  fire  (-’ ssurn ):  he  makes  the 
stones  hot  (for  cooking  in  the  Indian 
manner). 

[Abn.  kesapskede,  pierre  chaude.] 
kussopitteau,  v.  i.  it  is  very  hot,  heated 
(by  fire,  or  beyond  natural  heat);  sup¬ 
pos.  kussopitlag,  kossopittag,  when  it  is 
very  hot;  as  n.  great  heat,  Deut.  29,  24; 

2  Pet.  3,  10;  Job  6,  17.  Adv.  and  adj. 
-pittae,  -petde,  hot  (by  the  action  of  fire,. 

etc.),  1  Sam.  21,  6;  Ps.  6,  1:  - ague, 

for  ‘fever’,  Deut.  28,  2.  (Ybl.  n.  kis- 
sopetteahdonk,  fervency,  heat,  C. ) 

kussoppussu,  -pissu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is. 
hot;  pi.  -suog,  Hos.  7,  7;  suppos.  kusso- 
posuk,  when  he  is  hot:  nepauz  kusso- 
pasuk,  when  the  sun  is  hot  (?),  1  Sam. 
11,  9  ( nuk-kissdpis ,  I  am  hot,  C. ).  Vbl. 
n.  kussoppissvonk,  heating,  heat,  inflam¬ 
mation,  Deut.  28,  2.  From  kussa  and 
appcosu. 

*kussunnashaonk,  n.  ‘fever’,  Mass.  IV., 
John  4,  52  ( wesausliaonk ,  El.), 
kutamungineaeau,  v.  t.  an.  he  pities 
(him),  Joel  2,  18.  Cf.  kitteamonteanu- 
mau. 

kutche,  kcoche  [k  cache,  k’wulche ]  sig¬ 
nifies,  primarily,  it  proceeds  or  makes 
progress  from;  hence,  it  begins,  has  its 
origin  or  source;  but  while  ncoche  is 
used  with  reference  to  a  beginning  or 
starting  point,  present  or  past,  kcoche 
or  kutche  connotes  progression  or  the 
going  on  from  a  beginning  or  origin  in 
the  past  to  the  present  or  future,  or  the 
relation  of  a  cause  to  its  effect  in  the 
•  present  or  future.  Eliot  does  not  ap¬ 
pear  to  have  made  this  distinction  in 
all  cases;  e.  g.  kitchu,  he  began  (to  curse,. 


trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


45 


kutche,  kcoche — continued. 

etc.),  Matt.  26,  74;  but  ncoche  in  the 
corresponding  verse,  Mark  14,  71.  Ne 
umtche  Tcutche,  ‘  then  began  ’ ,  i.  e.  there¬ 
from  went  on,  Gen.  4,26;  net  .  .  .  kcoch, 
therefrom  (will  he  gather  you  together), 
Deut.  30,  4;  yen  kcoche  omohkinunun, 
for  this  cause  I  raised  thee  up,  Ex.  9, 
16;  kwche-kekondn,kcoche-mainonchanan,  \ 
kcochu  wutohkindan,  kcoche-kinnecin,  ‘in 
him  [from  him]  we  live,  we  move,  we 
have  our  being  .  .  .  we  are  his  off¬ 
spring’,  Acts  17,  28.  ( kutche ,  begun; 

kcoche,  more,  C. )  Cf.  k’ ;  kachemco  j 
(suppos.  kahche-mcouk) ;  kehche;  keht-.  I 
[Narr.  nen  kilche,  I  begin,  or  nuk- 
kitcheussem.  Abn.  kette,  in  antecessum, 
avant,  auparavant.  Micm.  kick  et  kigi 
\_=kitche~\,  servent  a  former  des  terns 
anterieurs;  kick  repond  aussi  a  notre 
oui,  ou  deja,  pour  le  temps  passe,  Maill. 
Cree  keeche-tow,  he  begins  it;  kutche 
(conj.  causal),  that,  to  the  end  that. 
Chip,  klja,  in  advance,  beforehand; 
kitchi  [after,  in  time],  Bar.] 
*kutchinnu  (Narr.),  a  middle-aged  man, 
R.  W.  See  kehchissu.  Eliot  has  keih- 
chenuog,  ‘the  aged  men’,  i.  e.  those  who 
are  growing  (- innuog )  old,  Tit.  2,  2. 
kutchiog,  pi.  old  men,  Ps.  148,  2;  keh- 
cheiog,  Esth.  3,  13.  See  kehche. 
*kutchishin,  v.  i.  (inan.  subj.)  it  begins, 
Man.  Pom.  88;  opposed  to  wohkukquo- 
shin,  it  ends. 

kutchisqua.  See  kehchisqua. 
kutchissik,  kadshik  [suppos.  of  kutchis- 
sin  or  - ishin ],  when  it  begins;  as  n.  the 
beginning  (of  that  which  continues  to 
be  or  to  act):  weske  kutchissik,  in  the 
(very,  or  new)  beginning,  Gen.  1,  1; 
wutche  kutchissik  onk  yean  wehqshik,  from  j 
the  beginning  to  the  end,  Eccl.  3,  11; 
kadshik  muttaok,  the  beginning  of  the 
world,  Is.  64,  4.  Cf.  kehchissu. 
kutchissumaii,  v.  t.  an.  and  refl.  he 
washes  himself  or  another,  2  Sam.  12, 
20;  John  9,  7;  nuk-kutchessum,  I  wash 
myself,  John  9,  11  ( nuk-kitimm ,  I 
wash,  C. );  pi.  -maog  wut-hashabpcooh 
(an.),  they  wash  their  nets,  Luke 5,  2; 
imperat.  2d  sing,  -mush,  wash  thyself, 

2  K.  5,  10;  suppos.  kutchessumog  nulihog 
nippe,  if  I  wash  myself  with  water, 
Job 9,  30.  Ybl.  n.  kutchissumdonk,  wash- 


kutchissumaii  — continued, 
ing  one’s  self  or  another,  Eph.  5,  26; 
Tit.  3,  5.  With  inan.  obj.  kutchissittau, 
kitshittau,  he  washes  (it),  Gen.  49,  11; 
1  K.  22,  38;  imperat.  2d  sing,  lcutchis- 
sittaush,  2  Sam.  11,  8;  pish  kuk-kitshit- 
tau-un,  thou  shalt  wash  it,  Lev.  6,  27. 
Vbl.  n.  kutchissittoonk,  Neh.  4,  23. 

[Abn.  ne-kes'tgSd,  je  me  lave  le  visage; 

ne-ke-siretsa,  -  les  mains;  ne-keseseg- 

lienqn, - (v.  g.  une  chemise).  Del. 

kschiechsu,  v.  adj.  clean;  kschiechem, 
wash  him;  kschiechtool,  wash  it,  Zeisb.] 
kutham.  See  kuttahham. 

*[kutham,]  v.  t.  he  hollows  out,  makes 
a  hole  (?) ;  nuk- kutham,  I  make  a  hole,  C. 

[Abn.  keg8inci8a  8ahrketa8an  (ou) 
i8n8aiirkett8n,  avec  quoi  creuseras-tu?] 
*kutquauss  (Peq. ),  a  partridge,  Stiles. 

See  pahpahkshas;  *paupock. 
kuts,  kuttis,  n.  the  cormorant,  Lev.  11, 
7;  Is.  34,  11;  kuttuhsu-og  (pi.),  Deut. 
14,  17. 

[Narr.  (pi.)  kitsuog.'] 
kutshamun.  See  ukkutshaumun. 
kuttahham,  kutham,  v.  t.  he  digs  (it), 
he  digs  (it)  up  or  out,  or  digs  into  (it), 
Prov.  16, 27;  Job  24, 16  (pi. ) :  uk-kuthdm- 
un,  he  digged  it  (a  pit,  Ps.  7,  15). 
kuttaihe,  (it  is)  thine,  belongs  to  thee; 
kultahein  (inch  pi.)  it  is  ours,  belongs 
to  us.  See  wuttaiheau. 
kuttinne,  thou  thyself,  tu  ipse,  the  em¬ 
phasized  pronoun  of  the  2d  pers.  sing. 
See  vmttinne. 

kuttinsh,  lst+2d  sing.  I  say  to  thee, 
Matt.  5,  26.  See  wuttinuh. 
kuttis.  See  kuts. 

kuttco,  v.  i.  he  speaks,  utters  speech, 
1  Iv.  8,  12;  Job  3,  2:  kuttco  kah  nanvau, 
he  spake  and  said.  Freq.  [Icekuitco] ; 
suppos.  pi.  kdkuttaog,  kdkettcog;  negat. 
mat  kdkuttoog,  mo-kdkuttcog,  when  they 
speak  not,  the  speechless,  the  dumb, 
Ex.  4,  11;  Ps.  38, 13.  With  kJ  progres¬ 
sive,  ketcokau,  he  goes  on  speaking,  he 
talks;  and  freq.  keketookau,  he  converses, 
narrates.  See  ketcokau.  Vbl.  n.  kuttco- 
wonk,  speech,  utterance  (‘the  Word’, 
John  1,  1);  ph  -ongash:  kuk-kuttcowon- 
gash,  thy  words,  thy  speech,  Job  4,  4; 
Is.  29,  4;  ketcolikaj  kuttcowonk,  ‘let  him 
speak  a  word’,  Gen.  44,  18  ( kuttco - 
onk,  C. ).  Cf.  kehketcohkdonk,  continued 


46 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


kuttco — continued. 

speech,  talk,  narration;  hettanvonk  (see 
hennau),  unnontancaonk,  language,  mu¬ 
tual  speech.  (Sansk.  gad  (dicere,  loqui) 
and  kath  (loqui) ;  re  pet.  gadgada  (lallans, 
balbutiens. ) 

[Abn.  ketSangan,  parole.  Chip,  ikito, 
he  says;  glgito,  he  speaks,  Ear.  ( ekidoo , 
J. ).  Cree  ketoo,  he  speaks;  suppos. 
ketool.  ] 

kuttumma,  kit-,  adv.  very  lately,  El. 
Gr.  21  ( kumma ,  C. ). 

[Narr.  kittummdy,  even  now;  kittum- 
ydi  tokean,  as  soon  as  I  wake.] 


kuttumma,  kit-,  conj.  unless,  El.  Gr. 
22;  John  3,  3,  5;  Acts  8,  31  ( kittumma , 
C.).  [=  gut  matta  (but  not),  without, 

i.  e.  unless  there  be,  Job  6,  6.] 
kuttumungee(?),  low,  poor,  pitiable  (cf. 
kitteamonieanumau):  kuttumungee  woske- 
tomp,  ‘a  mean  man’,  Is.  31,  8;  kut- 
tumungkosketomp-aog  (pi.),  ‘men  of  low 
degree’,  Ps.  62,  9. 

[Chip,  kitimagad,  it  is  poor,  mean 
(of  a  house,  e.  g. );  an.  kitimagw,  he 
is  poor,  Bar.  Del.  klemaxu,  he  is  poor, 
miserable,  Zeisb.] 
k’wutche.  S  eekutche. 


M 


m’  (or,  as  written  by  Eliot,  m  followed 
by  a  short  vowel)  is  an  indeterminate 
and  impersonal  prefix  which  may  be 
translated  by  ‘some,’  ‘any,’  or  occa¬ 
sionally  by  ‘a,’  ‘an,’  or  ‘the.’  Du- 
ponceau  (notes  to  Eliot’s  Gr.  xiv) 
mistook  this  prefix  for  ‘a  definite  arti¬ 
cle’,  as  Howse  (p.  245)  has  shown. 
It  is  found  with  substantives  signify¬ 
ing  the  body  and  its  parts,  with  the 
names  of  a  few  objects  which  were 
regarded  as  specially  belonging  to  the 
person,  and  with  some  concrete  and 
material  nouns,  e.  g.  m’askeht,  grass 
(from  askehteau,  it  is  green ) ;  m’ay,  path, 
way  (from  du,  he  goes);  m’in,  a  fruit 
(from  -in,  formative  of  verbs  of  grow¬ 
ing),  etc.  In  all  these  it  retains  its 
primary  signification  as  a  negative  or 
its  secondary  as  a  preteritive  particle 
(see  mo).  It  negates  the  personal  re¬ 
lation  or  appropriation  which  the  pro¬ 
nominal  prefixes  affirm,  e.  g.  nut-tah 
(n’lah),  my  heart;  kuttah  ( k’tah ),  thy 
heart;  m&Lah  ( m’iah ),  heart,  not  mine 
or  thine,  but  some  or  any  heart.  It  has 
in  no  case  a  definite  or  determinate 
force,  but  always  the  opposite. 

mach.emohtae,  lasting,  enduringly.  See 
mivhemohleau. 

*mach.equoce  (Narr.),  n.  a  girdle  of 
wampum,  R.  W. 

[Abn.  sk§am8,  collier  de  porce- 
laine(?).] 

machipsqueht-uash,  n.  pi.  ‘rough 
places’,  Is.  40,  4. 


machipsqueht-uash — continued. 

[Narr.  machlpscat,  a  stone  (stony?) 
path.] 

machish.  See  mahche;  majish. 
machuk,  suppos.  of  matche,  bad. 
maggookinont,  pi.  -oncheg,  ‘the  spoil¬ 
ers’,  Jer.  51,  48;  suppos.  of  mukkmk- 
inau. 

magkkinnum,  =  mukkinnum,  he  col¬ 
lects  or  gathers. 

magoadtik,  (that  which  is)  precious, 
2  Chr.  9,  1 ;  suppos.  of  mogoadtue. 
rnagco,  magou,  v.  t.  (1)  he  offers  or 
presents  (it),  he  gives  (it),  Esth.  2, 
18;  Ps.  147,  16  ( mdkun -,  Mass.  Ps. ): 
num-mag,  I  present  (it);  imperat.  2d 
sing,  magish;  2d  pi.  magaok;  um-mag-vn, 
he  offers  it.  (2)  he  gives  in  exchange, 
he  sells;  pi.  magooog,  they  sell,  Ex.  21, 
35;  suppos.  noli  maguk,  he  who  sells, 
the  seller,  Is.  24,  2;  freq.  mahmagno; 
pret.  mahmagup,  he  sold  often,  ‘was  a 
seller  of’,  Acts  16,  14. 

[Narr.  mduks,  give  thou;  maugoke, 
give  ye.  Abn.  ne-meghen,  je  donne. 
Cree  maygu,  he  gives;  mdmdygu,  he 
gives  with  iteration;  mdygaysku,  he 
gives  very  often,  habitually.  Chip. 
megewain,  he  gives  it,  J.  Del.  meken, 
he  gives  away,  parts  with  (it),  Zeisb. 
Gr.  144.] 

magmonk,  vbl.  n.  a  giving,  gift,  offering, 
Ex.  23,  8;  Gen.  33,  12:  magco  magoo- 
ongaxh,  he  gives  gifts,  Esth.  2,  18. 

[Quir.  maugaukq' ,  his  gift,  Pier.  5l.] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


47 


mahche  (nearly  related  to  if  not  identical 
with  mahtsheau,  it  passes  away,  is  gone), 

(1)  after,  in  time,  Luke  6,  1;  mahche 
ijuinnuppekompauean,  after  thou  art 
(mayest  be)  converted,  Luke  22,  32. 

(2)  it  serves  as  the  auxiliary  of  the  per¬ 
fect  and  pasf  perfect  tenses,  and,  com¬ 
bining  with  the  verb,  receives  the  pro- 
nom.  prefix:  um-mahche  ussen,  he  hath 
done  it,  Is.  44,  23;  ne  mahche,  that  which 
hath  been,  Eccl.  3,  15;  mahche  wunna- 
munuh,  (he)  had  blessed  them,  Gen. 
24,  I.  Cotton,  strangely  enough,  asso¬ 
ciates  this  word  with  “  ahtduunat,  to 
have,  to  be  had,”  and  gives  “num- 
mahche,  I  have  or  had;  kum-mahche, 
thou  hast,  thou  hadst,”  etc.  Cf.  amaeu, 
he  departs;  Narr.  mcLw. 

[Xarr.  mauch  or  mesh:  tashin  mesh, 
com-maiig,  how  much  have  you  given? 
Cree  ghee  (auxil.),  have.  Chip,  ke  or 
ge,  J. ;  ki-  (suppos.  ka- ) ,  sign  of  the  per¬ 
fect  and  pluperfect,  Bar. ;  masht,  yet 
[i.  e.  until  now];  ka  masht,  not  yet. 
Del.  ma-tschi,  already,  Zeisb.  Voc.] 

mahchekussum,  -kissumoomoo,  v.  t. 
(fire)  consumes,  burns  (it)  up,  1  K.  18, 
38;  2  Chr.  7,  1;  with  an.  obj.  mah- 
chekuswau,  (fire)  consumes  (him),  Job 
1,  16;  um-mahchekusw-oh,  it  consumed 
him,  2  K.  1, 10;  with  an.  subj.  (v.  adj.) 
mahchikkussu,  he  is  consumed  (by  fire 
or  heat);  pi.  -ussuog,  Deut.  32,  24. 
From  mahche,  kussa. 

mahchepcD,  v.  i.  (1)  he  has  eaten,  has  done 
eating;  (2)  he  makes  an  end  of  eating, 
eats  (it)  up,  Ex.  13,  32;  infinit.  -pun- 
neat,  Luke  17,  9;  imperat.  2d  sing,  mah- 
chipwush,  eat  it  up,  Rev.  10,  9  ( num - 
mahchip,  I  devour,  C. ).  With  an.  obj. 
mahchipwau  [ mahcheppooau\ ,  he  de¬ 
vours  (him),  i.  e.  eats  him  up,  makes 
an  end  of  him,  Ezek.  19,  6.  From 
mahche  and  -uppoo,  formative  of  verbs 
of  eating. 

[Narr.  mauchepimU,  when  he  hath 
eaten;  mauchepiveean,  after  I  (shall) 
have  eaten.] 

mahchi.  See  mohchi,  (it  is)  empty. 

mahchinau,  v.  i.  he  is  sick,  Gen.  48,  1; 
2  Sam.  13,  1;  num-mahchinam  ( nen 
mcochinam,  Cant.  5,  8),  I  am,  or  was, 
sick,  Matt.  25,  36  ( num-mahcheem ,  C. ); 


mahchinau — continued, 
suppos.  mahchinadl,  Lev.  15,  33;  pi. 
-indcheg,  the  sick,  Matt.  9,  12.  Vbl.  n. 
mahchindonk,  sickness,  1  K.  8,  37. 

[Narr.  num-mauchnem,  I  am  sick; 
maucliinaui  (pres,  defin.),  he  is  sick 
( mohchinndi ,  C. ).] 

mahchishq,  n.  an  empty  vessel  ( mohchi - 
wishq);  pi.  -quash,  Judg.  7, 16;  2  K.  4,  3. 
See  wishq. 

mahchumoo,  -ummu,  v.  i.  (inan.  subj.) 
it  is  waste,  barren,  deserted,  Nah.  2, 
10;  Ezek.  29,  9  ( ma  chi  moo ,  Is.  19,  5). 
Adv.  and  adj.  mahchumcoe,  mohchumme , 
of  waste,  of  barrenness,  waste,  barren, 
Is.  52,  9;  61,  4;  Zeph.  1,  15.  Vbl.  n. 
-mmcoonk,  a  waste,  desolation,  Jer.  49, 
13.  See  rnehcheeu;  mohchi. 
mahchumwehtau,  v.  caus.  inan.  he 
wastes  (it),  makes  (it)  waste;  pi.  -ehtuog, 
Jer.  2, 15:  num-mahchumweht-oh,  1  make 
thee  waste,  Ezek.  5,  14.  Vbl.  n.  mah- 
chumwehtdonk,  wasting,  a  making  waste, 
Is.  59,  7. 

mahmuttattag.  See  molimuttahtag. 
mahshag'quodt,  n.  (a  time  or  season  of) 
famine,  Gen.  12,  10;  26,  1.  From  maht¬ 
sheau.  Adv.  mahshogque,  Ps.  17,  19. 
mahshetahshik,  suppos.  of  mishetasldn, 
there  is  a  tempest,  a  great  wind, 
mahtantam,  mohtantam,  v.  i.  he  is 
old,  implying  decrepitude,  senility, 
and  decay.  Cf.  kehchism.  From  maht- 
( mahche )  and  -antam,  the  formative  of 
verbs  of  mental  activity,  he  is  past- 
minded  or  failing-minded:  num-mah- 
tantam,  I  am  old,  Ps.  37,  25;  suppos. 
mahtauritog,  when  she  is  old,  Prov.  23, 
22;  ‘full  of  days’,  Jer.  6,  11;  ‘stooping 
for  age’,  2  Chr.  36,  17.  Vbl.  n.  mah- 
tantamoonk,  (infirm)  old  age. 

[Narr.  mattatmtam,  ‘very  old  and  de¬ 
crepit.  ’  ] 

mahtohqs.  See  matokqs,  a  cloud, 
mahtco,  v.  i.  he  ceases,  is  done,  makes 
an  end  (of  speaking);  suppos.  asq  rnaht- 
wog,  ‘before  he  had  done  speaking’, 
Gen.  24,  15;  asq  mahtooaon,  before  I  had 
done  speaking,  v.  45  [ num-mahteaim  (?), 
I' cease,  C'.]. 

mahtshanco,  mohtshanco,  v.  i.  it  grows 
less,  gradually  fails  or  wastes  away,. 
1  K.  17,  14,  16. 


48 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


mahtshanoo,  mohtshanoo — continued. 

[Del.  schauwutteu,  it  in  faded,  Zeisb. 
Gr.  164.] 

mahtsheau,  v.  i.  (inan.  subj.)  it  passes 
away,  fails,  perishes,  comes  to  an  end  ! 
(as  the  grass  or  a  flower),  James  1,  10, 
11;  (man’s  life,)  Job  14,  10;  (his 
strength)  decays,  Neh.  4,  10;  suppos. 
ne  mahlshunk,  ‘that  which  is  past’, 
Eccl.  3,  15;  nippe  mahlshunk,  when  the  : 
water  fails,  Job  14,  11.  Adv.  and  adj. 
mahtshde,  John  6,  27.  See  mahche; 
*michokat. 

mahtug-.  See  mehtug. 
mahtupahteau.  See  molituppeau. 
ma'i.  See  may. 

majish,  adv.  at  the  last:  - ne  kesukok, 

in  the  last  day,  John  6,  39,  40,  44;  7,  37; 
ogguhsemese  majish,  ‘yet  a  little  while’, 
John  13,  33  ( majjisheyeue ,  ‘lately’,  C. ). 
Intens.  maumajish,  maumachish,  at  the 
very  last,  last  of  all — a  sign  of  the  sec¬ 
ond  future,  when  it  shall  have  been. 
From  mahche,  with  which  cf.  pish. 
mamahche  (augm.  of  mahche),  a  sign  of 
the  pluperfect:  - — —  waehkomop,  he  had 
called  (them)  together,  Acts  10,  24. 
mamahche  kesuk,  the  air,  the  atmos¬ 
phere,  1  Cor.  9,  26;  Rev.  9,  2;  Prov.  30, 
19.  [For  mamehcheu  (intens.  of  meh- 
clieeu),  it  is  empty,  void(?).] 
*mamaskishau-i  (Narr. ),  v.  i.  he  has  the 
(small-?)  pox  [redness(?)].  Vbl.  n  .ma- 
misk-ishadonck,  the  [small-]  pox,  R.  W. 
mamatchenau,  intens.  of  matchenau. 
mamatcheii.  See  matched. 
mameechumit,  n.  the  mole,  Lev.  11,30. 
From  ma-meechu,  intens.  of  meechu,  he 
eats(?). 

mameesashques,  n.  the  swallow,  Is.  38, 
14  ( wamesashquish ,  ‘swallow’,  Prov.  26, 

2,  but  wameshashqu'esu,  ‘sparrow’,  Ps.  I 
102,  7,  and  mameshashquish,  ‘spar¬ 
row’,  Ps.  84,  3,  with  papaskhas,  ‘swal¬ 
low’,  ibid.);  masheshasques,  swallow, 
Jer.  8, 7.  Cf.  pahpahkshas  ( ‘ partridge’, 
Jer.  17,  11). 

mamonauantam.  See  momoncnvantam. 
xnamonchu,  v.  i.  (freq.  of  rnonchu,  q.  v. ) 
he  moves,  habitually  or  repeatedly; 
imperat.  mamonchish,  move,  ‘stir  up 
thyself’,  Ps.  35,  23;  suppos.  noli  ma- 
moncliit,  he  who  moves,  Ezek.  47,  9. 
With  inan.  subj.  matnonchemw,  pi. 


mamonchu — continued. 

-emcoash,  (the  waters)  move,  or  ‘are 
moved’,  Jer.  46,  8. 

mamontunnum.  See  momonlunnum. 
mamontam,  [v.  i.  he  is]  ‘a  wizard,’  2 
K.  21,  6;  pi.  -mog.  Vbl.  n.  mamont- 
amdonk,  pi.  -mdcoongash,  enchantments, 
2  K.  17,  17.  Cf.  monetu. 
mamontunuk,  when  he  moves  (it);  sup¬ 
pos.  of  momdntunnum,  q.  v. 
mamossompsquehtu,  n.  [in?]  ‘gravel’, 
Is.  48,  19.  See  moosompsq,  a  smooth 
stone,  pebble. 

mamunappeht,  n.  a  spider,  Prov.  30,  1. 
Adv.  and  adi.  mamunapitleae  hasliabp,a 
spider’s  web,  Job  8,  14. 

[Abn.  memessrahikke.  Chip,  assabi- 
kesht  (Bar.),  i.  «.  net  maker.]  • 
mamusse,  adv.  (in)  all,  (of)  the  whole, 
wholly,  Cant.  4,  7;  Matt.  22,  37:  md- 
musse  ohke,  the  whole  earth,  Is.  4,  20 
( mamusseyeue ,  wholly,  entirely,  C. ). 
From  missi,  rnussi,  it  is  great;  by  augm. 
reduplication,  ma-mussi.  Cf.  rnussisse. 
See  mussi. 

[Narr.  missesu  (an. )  the  whole  of  him. 
Abn.  messiSi,  tout.] 

mamussu,  v.  i.  he  commits  adultery, 
Matt.  5,  32;  suppos.  noh  mamussit,  he 
who  commits  adultery,  Lev.  20,  10; 
imperat.  negat.  (or  prohib. )  2d  sing. 
mamussekon,  thou  shalt  not  (do  not) 
commit  adultery,  Ex.  20, 14;  Deut.  5, 18. 
Vbl.  n.  mamussuonk,  adultery.  N.  agent. 
mamussuaen,  indef.  -cumin,  an  adulterer, 
Is.  57,  3  ( manishquaausuen ,  an  adulter¬ 
ess,  Lev.  20,  10.  See  manisquadsu). 

[Narr.  mammadsu,  (he  is)  an  adul- 
turer;  suppos.  pi.  mammausachick,  adul¬ 
terers.] 

mamuttattag.  See  mohmuttahtag. 
■"manisfmmin  (Narr.),  to  cut  ormow(?). 
manisquaosu,  v.  i.  she  is  an  adulteress 
or  a  harlot,  ‘plays  the  harlot’,  Ezek. 
23,  3,  5;  pi.  -mog;  kum-mansquds,  thou 
committest  fornication,  Ezek.  16,  26. 
N.  agent,  manishquaausuen,  Lev.  20, 10. 
[Is  here  Chip,  (prefix)  and  Del.  mdn, 
mdna,  “bad”?] 

manit,  manitto,  (usually  translated) 
God;  but  Eliot  more  often  transferred 
the  names  ‘God’  and  ‘Jehovah’  to  the 
Indian  text.  He  has,  however,  Manii 
wame  masugkenuk,  ‘God  Almighty’, 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


49 


manit,  manitto — continued. 

Ex.  6,  3;  and  in  the  7th  v.  neen  Jehovah 
kum-Manitlcomuw,  ‘I  am  the  Lord  your 
God’  (lit.  ‘I  the  Lord  am  your  God’), 
and  neen  kum-Manittcomirco,  ‘I  will  be 
to  you  a  God’  (lit.  I  am  your  God), 
ibid.;  nen  Manitto,  ‘I  am  God’,  Is.  43, 
12;  pi.  manittcoog,  1  K.  20,  23;  2  K.  18, 
33;  with  keht-,  Keihtannit,  ‘the  Lord 
God’,  Gen.  24,  7,  i.  e.  the  great  manit. 
From  aneu  or  cvn-u,  he  exceeds,  is  .be¬ 
yond,  superior  to,  or  more  than  ( anue ) 
another  person  or  thing;  suppos.  anil, 
when  he  is  superior  to  or  more  than, 
etc.  (cf.  Anin;  suppos.  aneiik,  that 
which  exceeds,  hence  that  which  rots 
or  becomes  corrupt);  with  the  inde- 
terminateand  impersonal  prefix,  ni’anit, 
he  who  (or  that  which)  exceeds  or 
passes  beyond  the  common  or  normal, 
the  preternatural  or  extraordinary. 
manitto  is  the  verb  subst.  form,  he  or  it 
is  manit:  They  “cry  out  ManiitAo ,  that  is, 
It  is  a  god,”  “at  the  apprehension  of 
any  excellency  in  men,  women,  birds,” 
etc.,  It.  W.  111.  Possessive  form,  num- 
manittoom,  my  god;  kum-manittmm-uw, 
your  gods,  etc.,  the  suffix  com  denoting 
that  “the  person  doth  challenge  an  in¬ 
terest  in  the  thing”,  El.  Gr.  12. 

[Narr.  manit;  pi.  manittowock.  Peep 
mundlu,  Stiles.  Chip,  mon-e-do,  mun- 
e-clo;  Kitchi  Manilo,  Great  Spirit,  Lord 
God  (Bar.);  kesha-munedoo,  J.  Del. 
manetto,  god,  spirit,  angel,  Camp. ;  ma¬ 
nitto,  get-annitto,  Zeisb.  Muh.  mannito, 
‘  a  spirit  or  spectre  ’ ,  Edw.  ] 
manitowompae,  adj.  and  adv.  [god- 
man-ly,]  pious,  religious.  Used  with 
pornantamoonk  (living,  life),  as  the  title 
of  Eliot’s  translation  (1665)  of  “The 
Practice  of  Piety”,  holy  living, 
manittowomp  \_majiittoe-omp'],  man  of 
God,  godly  man,  2  K.  4,  7,  9. 
*mannotaubana  (Narr.),  ‘embroydered 
mats  which  the  women  make’  to  line 
thewigwam,  ‘hangings’,  R.  W.  47.  Cf. 
manaot. 

manontam,  munn-,  v.  t.  he  smells  (it), 
Gen.  27,  27;  Job  39,  25  ( menontam ,  he 
smells;  num-minontam,  I  smell;  mun- 
nauntamcoonk,  [the  sense  of]  smell,  C.). 
See  -mungquot. 

B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 


manontam,  munn - continued. 

[Abn.  ne-meraiV damen,  je  le  flaire; 
(3d  pers. )  amer-.  Del.  mellaam,  to 
smell,  Zeisb.] 

mancoham,  v.  t.  he  ransoms  or  redeems 
(it)  by  payment,  he  buys  (it);  suppos. 
mancohuk  ohteuk,  if  he  redeems  the 
field,  Lev.  27,  19;  kod-mancoliuk  week, 
if  he  will  (desires  to)  redeem  this 
house,  ibid.;  with  an.  obj.  mancowhaii, 
he  ransoms  (him),  Lev.  25,  49;  suppos. 
mancowhonl,  Lev.  27, 13.  Ybl.  n.  manco- 
irhaonk,  a  ransom,  Ex.  21,  30;  Matt.  20, 
28.  Cf.  wunnooham,  he  values,  fixes  the 
valuation  of  (with  an.  obj.  wunnao- 
whau),  and  wunnaowau,  he  makes  a 
treaty  or  covenant  with. 

[Narr.  kum-manohamin,  have  you 
bought  it?;  kurn-manohamAush,  I  will 
buy  of  you.  Abn.  ne-man8han,  j’a- 
chete  (v.  g.  un  esclave);  ne-man8li8- 
maSaii,  j’achete  de  lui;  ne-man8h8si, 
je  m’achcte;  ne-man8h8mansi,  jetraite.] 
manconau,  n.  a  cheek;  nan-noonoo-ut,  on 
my  cheek,  Job  16,  10;  kon-nconau-ash, 
thy  cheeks,  Cant.  1,  10  ( kononut,  on 
thy  cheek,  Luke  6,  29,  —kon-noonau-t, 
Matt.  5,  29);  wannoonau,  his  cheek, 
Lam.  3,  30  ( wonnunov ,  C. ).  Perhaps 
from  uoonim,  it  sucks;  perhaps  from 
anconau,  it  speaks. 

[Abn.  man8e,  joue;  nanSe,  ma  joue; 
(3d  p.)  8an8e.~\ 

manconsk,  n.  clay,  Jer.  18,  6;  ‘mortar’, 
Nah.  3, 14;  pi.  -skog,  ‘  bricks’,  Gen.  11, 3; 
adj.  manonske,  Job  13,  12. 
manrot  [ =m,ncot ],  n.  a  basket,  Gen.  40, 
17;  Judg.  6,  19;  Jer.  24,  2;  bag,  Luke 
12,  6,  33;  kencot  [ k’noot ],  thy  basket, 
Deut.  28,  5;  pi.  -t'ash.  “Instead  of 
shelves,  they  have  several  baskets, 
wherein  they  put  all  their  household 
stuff;  they  have  some  great  bags  or 
sacks  made  of  hemp  which  will  hold 
five  or  six  bushels.” — R.  W.  50.  “iYo- 
tassen  or  bags,  which  they  plait  from 
hemp  which  grows  wild.” — Megapolen- 
sis.  From  noot-in,  he  lifts  or  takes  up  (a 
burden). 

[Narr.  munnbte,  a  basket.  Peq.  mun- 
nbtgh,  Stiles.  Abn.  menSle,  sac;  mam- 
ai'i8t8,  une  charge.] 


4 


50 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25- 


mansk,  manshk,  n.  a  fort,  I*.  25,  12; 
Micah  7, 12;  menuhke  manskash,  ‘strong¬ 
holds’,  Lam.  2,  5. 

[Narr.  aum&nsk,  a  fort,  R.  AY.  Del. 
mte-nachk,  a  fence,  a  fort,  Zeisb. ;  Men- 
achkink  (the  Delaware  name  of  Pitts¬ 
burg),  ‘at  the  fort’,  Hkw.] 
manumuhkemrouk,  suppos.  of  munu- 
muhkemoo,  it  rushes,  Is.  17,  12,  13. 
manunnappu,  v.  i.  he  remains  quiet 
or  patient,  he  sits  patiently:  tuhkcoog 
manunappuog,  the  waves  are  still,  are 
quiet,  Ps.  107,  29,  30. 

manunne,  (it  is)  slow,  soft.,  gentle;  adv. 
slowly,  patiently,  softly  ( maninne , 
gently,  C. ):  neen  manunne  nuttcon  kali 
manunne  neenan,  I  a,n  slow  of  speech  ! 
and  slow  of  tongue,  Ex.  4,  10.  Adj. 
manunniyeu.  X.  agent,  -yeuenin,  one  | 
who  is  slow  or  patient,  a  patient  one, 
Eccl.  7,  8.  Ybl.  n.  -yeuonk,  patience, 
Heb.  6,  12. 

[Abn.  menni,  bellement.] 
manunnoliteau,  v.  i.  he  is  quiet  (i.  e. 
has  quietness),  is  undisturbed,  Prov. 

1,  33. 

xnanunnussu,  -nissu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is 
(i.  e.  acts)  patient,  gentle,  slow;  im- 
perat.  2d  pi.  manunnussek,  -nissegk,  be  i 
patient,  Rom.  12,  12;  1  Thess.  5,  14. 
Ybl.  n.  -nusmonk,  (the  exercise  of)  j 
patience,  Luke  8,  15;  Rom.  5,  4. 

[Narr.  mauunshesh  ( for  manumhesh  ? ) ,  ! 
go  thou  gently,  slowly.] 

*manunushae  nippe,  ‘still  water’,  Mass. 
Ps.,  Ps.  23,  2. 

*manusqussed-ash  (  Narr. ),  n.  pi.  beans, 
R.  AY. ;  kehtohteae  mdnasquisseet,  an  In¬ 
dian  bean,  C.  Cf.  tuppuhquam-axh. 

[Peq.  mushqumedes,  beans,  Stiles. 
Chip.  (St  Marys)  miskode'dmin;  (Gr. 
Trav. )  nish-ko-de-ce-min,  Sch.  Menom.  i 
mansh-ko-che-ahock.  Shawn,  m’skochee- 
tlxah.  Chey.  monisk,  pi.  moniski,  Hay-  ! 
den,  295.  (Abn.  meskSdttar,  gros 
comme  feves  de  terre. )  Del.  (pi. )  ma- 
lachxiquall,  Zeisb.] 

*maquamittiniyew,  (from)  the  west, 
Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  107, 3.  Cf.  puhtadluniyeu,  j 
(from)  the  west,  ibid.,  75,  6. 
*masauuock  (Narr.),  flax,  R.  AAr.  See 

massonog. 

masegik,  suppos.  of  missegen  (missekiu) , 
it  bears  or  produces  much. 


masheshashques  (?),  n.  the  swallow, 
Jer.  8,  7.  See  mameesaehques. 
mashq.  See  rnosq. 

mashquanon,  n.  a  hawk,  Job  39,  26. 
Cf.  owuhshaog;  quanunon.  » 

[Del.  meechgalanne,  hawk,  Zeisb.  (i.  e. 
broad-tail ) .  ] 

maskeht.  See  moskeht,  grass, 
maskehtu.  See  moskehtu. 
maskoacheg,  suppos.  pi.  they  who  boast 
boasters,  Ps.  49,  6;  Rom.  1,  30.  See' 
muskoau. 

maskog,  suppos.  of  miskom,'q.  v. 
mascotamaiiut,  suppos.  of  muscotamad,. 

he  pierces  (him).  See  muswail. 
masq,  mashq.  See  rnosq. 
massonog,  n.  ‘nettles’,  Prov.  24,  31;  Is. 
34,  13;  but  ‘nettles’  is  transferred  in. 
Job  30,  7,  Hos.  9,  6,  and  Zeph.  2,  9. 
Comparing  (Narr.)  masaunock,  ‘flax’, 
R.  AY.,  the  name  may  probably  be  as¬ 
signed  to  Urtica  canadensis,  the  Canada 
nettle  or  ‘Albany  hemp’,  the  fibrous 
stalk  of  which  was  used  by  the  Indians 
for  baskets,  mats,  and  nets.  From 
miussco,  itpricks.  S eemusoolam;  muswaii. 

[Chip,  mus-zan,  muhzon,  nettle;  geche 
muhzon  (great  nettle),  thistle,  Sch.  ir; 
masdn,  nettle,  Bar.;  mahzahn,  thistle, 
Sum.] 

*massowyan  (Peq.),  a  blackbird  [?], 
Stiles. 

masugkeauk,  (he  who  is)  mighty,  pow¬ 
erful,  very  great,  Luke  22,  26:  Manit 
name  masugkenuk,  God  Almighty,  Ex. 
6,  3;  suppos.  of  missugken. 
masugkenutche,  (participial)  adj.  chief 
(‘eldest’,  Gen.  24,  2). 
mat.  See  matta. 

*matasquas,  n.  a  mat  [bat?],  C. 
matchaog,  ‘adv.  of  denying’,  no,  El. 
Gr.  21:  ohtoou  matchaog,  he  has  noth¬ 
ing,  Prov.  13,  7,  =  ohtoou  mo  teag,  v.  4. 
See  matta. 

matche,  (it  is)  bad;  as  adj.  and  adv. 
bad,  badly:  matche  meenan,  ‘a  naughty 
tongue’,  Prov.  17,  4;  matche  anconaenin, 
a  wicked  messenger,  Prov.  13,  17;  sup¬ 
pos.  machuk  (as  n. ),  that  which  is  bad, 
evil,  Prov.  17,  13:  na  machuk  ohteau, 
there  is  an  evil,  Eccl.  6,  1  [ matchel ,. 
‘adv.  of  quality’,  El.  Gr.  18].  Intens. 
of  matta.  (Cf.  Engl,  not,  nought,., 
naughty. ) 


trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


51 


matche — continued. 

[Narr.  match  it,  ‘  naught,  or  evil.  ’  Abn. 
matsigheniS,  cela  est  mal,  cela  n’est  pas 
bien.  Del.  medhik,  (inan.)  bad,  evil; 
machtit,  bad  (it  is),  Zeisb.] 
matcheku,  v.  i.  he  is  poor  (lit.  he  grows 
badly  or  becomes  poor,  Prov.  10,  4); 
Deut.  15,  4;  2  Sam.  12, 1;  pi.  -uog,  Prov. 
10,  15;  Matt.  26,  11  ( matchekde ,  poor; 
noli  matchekoo,  he  is  poor,  C. ).  Ybl.  n. 
matchekuonk,  poverty,  Prov.  13, 18.  N. 
agent,  matchekuen  ( indef.  -enin),  a  poor 
man,  Ex.  23,  3. 

[Narr.  num-mdcheke,  I  am  poor.] 
matchemuhgquot,  n.  a  bad  smell,  Ps. 
38,  5;  Ex.  7,  18.  For  matchemungquoh- 
teau,  it  smells  .badly;  from  matche,  with 
formative  of  verbs  of  smelling  ( machu - 
monquat,  ‘a  stink’,  C. ). 

[Narr.  machemdqut,  it  stinks.  Abn. 
matsimangiat,  cela  sent  mauvais.  Del. 
machtschimaquot,  Zeisb.] 
matehemuiikqussu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  smells 
badly.  Ybl.  n.  -qussuonk,  making  a  bad 
smell,  Joel  2,  20  ( num-matchimunkqus , 
I  stink,  C. ). 

[Narr.  machemdqussu,  ‘a  vile  or  stink¬ 
ing  person  ’ ,  It.  W.  Abn.  matsimangSsS, 
il  sent  mauvais.] 

matchenaneteau,  v.  i.  he  curses;  pi. 
-eaog,  Ps.  62,  4.  Ybl.  n.  matchendne- 
tedonk,  cursing,  Ps.  59,  12. 
matchenantam,  v.  i.  (and  t.  inan.)  he 
thinks  evil,  is  evilly-minded  ( matche - 
antam );  imperat.  2d  pi.  -antamook, 
Matt.  9,  4.  Of.  mishanantam. 
matchenaii  (intens.  mamatchenau) ,  v.  t. 
an.  he  curses  (him);  suppos.  noh  ma- 
matchenont,  he  who  curses,  when  he 
curses,  Ex.  21,  17.  See  matched;  mat- 
tdnumau. 

matchesu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  an  evil  doer, 
he  does  evil,  is  (activehr)  bad.  Vbl. 
n.  matcheseonk,  wickedness,  evil  doing, 
Prov.  14,  17;  10,  16.  N.  agent,  matche- 
seaen  (indef.  -aenin),  an  evil  doer,  Prov. 
13,  6,  21;  pi.  -aenuog,  Prov.  14,  19. 

[Cree,  mutchissu,  he  is  wicked.  Del. 
rnaltauchsuwi,  sinful,  Zeisb.  Gr.  104; 
machtissu,  he  is  bad,  Zeisb.  Voc.  21.] 
matchetou,  v.  i.  he  is  bad  [inherently 
or  by  nature,  matche-ohtau'] ,  Prov.  13, 
5,  22;  pi.  -tmwog,  Prov.  14, 19.  Vbl.  n. 
matchetdonk,  -toivonk,  badness  [of  heart 


matchetou — continued. 

or  purpose  (inactive)],  Prov.  8,  7;  Eccl. 
3,  16. 

[Cree  mathdtissu,  he  is  bad.  ] 
[matcheu,  matcheyeu,]  intens.  ma- 
matcheii,  -eyeu,  v.  i.  he  curses  or 
swears  profanely:  kitchu  mamatcheyeu, 
‘he  began  to  curse’,  Matt.  26,  74;  im¬ 
perat.  2d  pi.  ahque  mamatcheuncok,  curse 
not,  Rom.  12,  14. 

matikenoo,  matukkenoo,  v.  i.  he  is  great 
(primarily  in  stature),  pi.  -ncoog,  Deut. 
9,  2;  suppos.  noh  matikenuk,  pi.  -keg, 
Rev.  19,  18;  great  men,  2  Sam.  7,  9; 
Job  32,  9;  matikkenitcheg ,  1  Sam.  30,2. 
matohteaeyeue:  en  matohteaeyeue  oona- 
uhkoiyeu-ut,  ‘into  a  rough  valley’,  Deut. 
21,  4. 

matokqs,  mahtohqs,  n.  a  cloud. 

[Note. — This  definition  was  not  completed.]' 

matta,  mat,  adv.  no,  not;  compounded 
with  teag  (thing,  res ) :  matta  teag,  matteag: 
matchaog,  nothing,  rien,  Luke  22,  35; 
Prov.  13,  7.  Apparehtly  a  contraction 
of  mohteau  {mo  privative  and  ohteau), 
it  is  not;  cf.  mo,  monteag.  In  some 
dialects  the  particle  undergoes  further 
contraction,  as  in  Del.  Id,  ‘a  lazy  no’ 
(Hkw.),asin  the  French  ‘point’  for  ‘ne 
point’.  In  composition,  mat,  asaprefix, 
has  a  privative  and  sometimes  a  direct 
negative  force,  sometimes  is  the  equiv¬ 
alent  of  matche,  bad. 

[Narr.  machdug,  no,  not  {machage), 
nothing,  not  so,  R.  W. ;  mattuks,  no, 
Stiles.  Abn.  mahda,  non.  Micm.  mS, 
point;  m8k8ich,  rien,  ne  pas;  maSen, 
personnes.  Cree  nummd,  no,  not;. 
nummanta  (strong  neg. ),  no;  numma- 
nisse  (soft  neg.),  no.  Del.  makhla,lah, 
Zeisb.;  matta,  no;  td,  a  lazy  no;  lagu, 
no,  not;  alia,  ta,  no,  no,  Hkw.  Powh. 
mattagh,  Smith.] 

*mattaasu  (Narr.),  not  far  off,  near  by, 
‘a  little  way’,  R.  W.  76:  mattdsu  note- 
shem,  ‘  I  came  from  hard  by  ’ ,  ibid.  28. 
*mattagehan  (Narr.),  there  is  a  cross 
(i.  e.  a  head)  wind;  suppos.  mattdge- 
hatch,  when  the  wind  is  cross.  See 
*wunnagehan. 

mattamog,  mattamag  (?),  suppos.  as 
n.  one  who  is  foolish,  a  fool,  Eccl.  6,  8; 
7,  9;  Ps.  14,  1;  pi.  -\-wog,  Eccl.  7,  4,  5. 
Adv.  and  adj.  mattamogque,  -magwe,. 


52 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bui.i.f.tin  25 


mattamog,  mattamag — continued. 
foolish(ly),  Prov.  17,  25.  Yb.  adj. 
mattmnagqueussu,  -magwesu,  he  does 
foolishly,  is  foolish  (actively).  Vbl.  n.  > 
mattamagcoonk,  folly  (abstractly),  Prov. 
15,  14;  1  Cor.  3,  19;  matiamagweseonk, 
-queumeonk,  foolish  doing,  folly  acted, 
Prov.  14,  17,  18;  1  Cor.  1,  18. 
mattanittuonk,  vbl.  n.  pass,  being 
cursed,  a  curse,  Gen.  27,  12,  13;  Neh. 
10,29;  Prov.  26,  2  (maUannuttuonk,  C. ). 
From  mattdnumau. 

:<mattannauke  (Xarr.),  pi.  -ouknnaxh,  ‘a 
fine  sort  of  mats  to  sleep  on’,  R.  W. 

[Abn.  ana'kahn,  natte,  peau,  etc.;  sur 
quoi  on  s’assoi;  nedandke,  j’ai  une 
natte  sur  quoi,  etc.,  Rasies.  Del.  a  na 
can,  mat,  Zeisb.] 

mattannit,  n.  the  bad  spirit,  the  devil; 
pi.  -toog,  El.  Gr.  9  ( tcoog ,  James  2, 
19);  mat-land ,  Gookin.  From  mat 
( =  matche)  and  rn’anit. 

[Muh.  rnlando u,  Edw.  Chip,  mahje- 
munedoo,  J.  ( met  die  mon  e  do,  Seh.  n,  i 
458).  Abn.  kelsini8esk8,  dieu,  le  grand 
genie;  matsiniSeskS,  diable.  Del.  mal- 
sclii  (or  macldschi)  mannitto  or  mach- 
tando,  Hkw.] 

mattantam,  v.  i.  and  t.  inan.  he  grudges 
(it),  is  unwilling.  From  matta  and 
-antam,  he  is  not-minded;  adv.  mat- 
tantamwe,  ‘grudgingly’,  2  Cor.  9,  7. 
mattanum  (?):  num-mattanum,  I  am  un¬ 
worthy  (‘to  unloose’,  etc.,  Mark  1,  7); 
elsewhere,  nut-tape num. 
mattanumaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  curses  (him), 
speaks  evil  to  (him);  imperat.  2d  ph, 
mattanumook,  curse  ye  (Meroz),  Judg. 

5,  23;  3d  sing,  matl&numaj,  let  him  be 
cursed,  Deut.  27,  14;  matanumwe  unnu- 
nach,  let  (him)  be  as  cursed,  Jer.  20, 15; 

- uttamunach,  let  (it)  be  cursed.  Cf. 

matche;  matchenau. 

*mattapeu  (Narr. ),  ‘a  woman  keeping 
alone  in  her  monthly  sickness’,  R.  \\ . 
[=  mat-ape  it,  ‘she  is  not  at  home’,  R. 
W.,  or  mattappu,  she  sits  apart)?).] 
mattappasquas,  n.  a  bat,  Lev.  11,  19; 
mattabashqu&s,  Is.  2,  20;  matabpusques, 
Deut.  14,  18.  See  mishaboliquas. 
*mattappu,  v.  i.  he  sits  down;  pish  mat- 
tappuog,  they  shall  sit,  Ind.  Laws,  xvi, 
xii.  Cf.  nummalappineat. 

[Narr.  m&ttapsh  ydteg,  sit  by  the  fire.] 


matteag,  nothing.  See  matta. 
mattompog,  suppos.  as  n.  war:  quag- 
quashwunnumcok  mattompog,  prepare  ye 
war,  Joel  3,  9;  wekontogig  mattompog, 
they  who  delight  in  war,  Ps.  68,  30. 
Adv.  and  adj.  mattompagme  kesukod,  day 
of  war  or  battle,  Job  38,  23. 

[Abn.  matlanbekS,  la  guerre;  rnatlah- 
beg8i-arenahbak,  les  guerriers.  Micm. 
rnatluk,  ‘to  beat’;  mdttole,  ‘I  beat  thee’; 
mdtunaga,  ‘I  fight’,  Rand.  Del.  mach- 
tapeek,  bad  time,  war  time  ( machtapan , 
bad  morning  weather),  Zeisb.] 
mattuhquab,  n.  skin  (of  a  human  being), 
Lev.  13,  34-38;  Ezek.  37,  8;  naltuh- 
quab,  my  skin;  ivadluhquab,  his  skin. 
For  m' adt-uhqu&e  and  appu,  that  which 
is  (permanently)  upon  the  outside. 
*[mattuhteau,  v.  i.  he  quarrels;]  num- 
malluhteam,  I  quarrel,  C. 
matug.  See  me.htug ,  a  tree, 
matukkenco.  See  matikenm. 
*[matwakau,  v.  i.  he  dances;]  ahque 
matwdkesh,  don’t  dance,  C.  Vbl.  n. 
mattwakkdonk,  dancing,  C. 
matwaii,  (he  is)  an  enemy,  Ex.  15,  9; 
Is.  59,  19;  pi.  rnatwaog. 

[Narr.  matwadog,  ‘soldiers.’] 
*matwauonck  (Narr.),  vbl.  n.  a  battle, 
mail,  v.  i.  he  cries,  weeps,  2  Sam.  13, 19; 
pi.  maiiog,  v.  36;  suppos.  noh  mauilg,  he 
who  weeps,  Ps.  126,  6;  suppos.  pass. 
maumuk,  when  there  is  weeping,  Eccl. 
3,4;  suppos.pl.  (particip. )  neg  maugig, 
they  who  weep,  1  Cor.  7,  30  (neg  mogig, 
Matt.  5, 4) ;  freq.  rnauemaii  ( he  mourns). 
Adj.  and  adv.  mauwe,  Num.  25,  6  ( maue , 
2  Sam.  3, 16).  Vbl.  n.  mauonk,  weeping. 

[Narr.  mduo,  ‘to  cry  and  bewail.’ 
Abn.  maii8e,  il  pleure  k  cause,  etc. ;  ne- 
maSighe,  je  pleure.  Chip,  ke-mahwe 
(pret. ),  he  wept,  John  11,  35;  suppos. 
mdhvrid,  when  she  wept,  John  20,  11 
(J.).] 

*mauchauhom  [he  has  gone],  ‘the dead 
man’;  pi.  mauchauhomwog,  the  dead, 
R.  W.  For  mahehe-aom. 

*mauchepwut  (Narr.),  when  he  hath 
eaten;  mauchepweean,  after  I  (shall) 
have  eaten,  R.  IV.;  suppos.  of  mahehe- 
pco,  he  has  eaten. 

rnauemaii,  v.  t.  an.  (freq.  of  mail)  he 
mourns  for  (him),  Gen.  37,  34;  pi. 
-maog,  they  mourn,  Num.  20,  29;  ini- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


53 


mauemaii — continued. 

perat.  prohib.  mauemuhkon,  mourn  thou 
not,  Ezek.  24, 17.  Vbl.  n.  mauenicoonk, 
mourning,  Zech.  12,  11. 

[Abn.  ne-maSiman,  je  le  pleure.] 
maumachi  (?)  is  put  for  ‘household 
stuff’,  property,  Gen.  31,  37,  but  more 
often  in  the  plural,  maumachiash,  goods, 
effects,  movables,  Nah.  2,  9:  teciguash 
asuhmaumachiaslt,  ‘moneyor  stuff ’,  Ex. 
22,  7.  The  primary  meaning  is  perhaps 
‘things  taken.’  Cf.  mciumunni,  it  is 
taken  (as  spoil,  1  Sam.  4,  17,  19). 

[Narr.  maumachiuash,  goods;  au- 
quiegs,  household  stuff,  R.  W.] 
maumachish.  (intens.  of  machish,  ma- 
jish),  at  the  very  last,  Gen.  49,  19;  2 
Tim.  3,1;  Prow  5,  11:  nen  maumachish, 

I  (am)  the  last,  Is.  41,  4  ( momachixheue , 
lastly,  finally,  C.  and  Danf. ;  ut  md- 
mdiish  ne  kesukok,  at  the  last  day,  Jno. 

C. ).  See  rnajish. 

maumunni,  -na'i,  v.  i.  (pres.  def. )  it  is 
taken  (away),  1  Sam.  4,  17,  19;  Prov. 

4,  16.  Cf.  am&eit,  he  departs  (Narr. 
rndw,  he  is  gone,  i.  e.  is  dead);  nemun- 
nuvi,  he  takes  it;  'arndunum,  he  takes 
(it)  away. 

maumuttam,  v.  i.  (and  t.  inan.?)  he 
mourns:  -  wutch,  he  mourns  for 

s  l 

(him),  2  Sam.  19,  1;  num-momuttam,  I 
lament,  C.  Cf.  mau,  mauemaii. 

■.  [Abn.  ne-maSlddmen,  je  pleure  quel- 
que  chose.] 

*maunetu  (Narr.),  a  conjurer,  R.  W. 

=  monetu,  El. 

*maunuwau.  See  rnhnoowau,  he  hisses, C. 
*maut  (Narr. ),  denotes  completed  action 
or  cessation  of  activity.  See  muhche. 
*mautabon  (Narr.),  ‘it  is  day.’  See 
mohtompan,  morning, 
may,  ma'i,  n.  way,  path:  aijirn  may,  he 
made  a  way,  Ps.  78,  50;  neen  may,  I 
am  the  way,  John  14,  6;  with  locative 
or  directive  affix,  mayut,  in,  to,  or  by 
the  way;  kishke  may,  by  the  wayside; 
mdikontu,  in  (or  among)  ways,  Is.  42, 
16;  num-mutlummashum  may,  1 1  run  in 
the  way’  (of  thy  commandments),  Ps. 
119,  32,  =num-multummaomashontam 
may,  Mass.  Ps.).  From  a-u,  he  goes  to 
(ad-it),  with  the  impersonal  prefix  (?).  j 
See  m’ . 

[Narr.  mdyi;  mayuo,  is  there  a  way?  I 


may,  mai — continued. 
mat  mayanunno ,  there  is  no  way,  R.  W. 
(Cf.  suppos.  negat.  rnatta  mdanog  and 
mo  adt  mancok,  where  there  was  no 
way,  Ps.  107,  4,  40.)  Quir.  maouk,  in 
the  way  (to),  Pier.  29.] 

*mecautea  (Narr.),  a  fighter.  See  me- 
konaii. 

meechu,  meech,  v.  t.  inan.  he  eats  (that 
which  is  inanimate,  primarily  vegetal 
food;  but  sometimes  weyaus,  flesh,  is 
the  object  of  the  verb;  cf.  moowliau, 
he  eats  what  is  alive):  num-meech,  I 
eat;  ummeechin,  he  eats  it,  Gen.  3,  2; 
Is.  7,  22;  suppos.  noli  meechik,  meecliuk, 
he  who  eats  (it),  John  6,  58,  51;  pass, 
inan.  meechumoo,  meechurnmu,  it  is  eaten, 
whence meechum,  ‘  victuals’,  Gen.  14, 1 1. 
Vbl.  n.  meechummuonk,  fruit,  vegetal 
food,  Gen.  3,  3;  Amos  8,  2.  See  meelsu. 

[Narr.  rneitch,  eat  thou;  ieaqua  kum- 
meich,  what  wilt  thou  eat?  Abn.  ne- 
mitsi,  je  mange  cela;  ne-milsesi,  je  mange 
(v.  i.);  ne-m8han,  je  mange  (an.obj.). 
Micm.  migichi,  je  mange.  Cree  meeclui, 
he  eats  (it);  freq.  mdmeechu.  Chip,  me- 
jim  mahjeyon,  food  to  eat,  John  4,  32; 
mahjid  weyos,  (he  who)  eats  flesh,  John 
6,  56;  ne-mejem-hn,  my  meat,  John  4, 
34,  J.;  nin  midjin,  I  eat  (it),  Bar.] 
meepit.  See  mepit. 

*meesk,  n.  elbow,  C.  See  ishquanogkod. 

[Abn.  neskian,  mon  coude;  3d  pi. 
8sk8nnar.  Del.  wi  squon,  (his)  elbow, 
Zeisb.  ] 

meesunk,  meis-,  meyaus-,  n.  coll,  the 
hair  (of  the  head),  Is.  50,  6;  Ezek.  39, 
17:  um-meesunk,  her  hair,  John  12,  3; 
pasuk  meyausunk,  one  hair,  Matt.  5, 
36.  (Cf.  weshdgan,  hair  on  the  body 
or  limbs,  the  hair  of  animals,  and  qu- 
nonuhquoau,  he  has  long  hair.)  This 
word  has  the  form  of  a  noun  collective, 
and  is  perhaps  from  mcosu,  he  cuts  close 
or  shaves  off,  primarily  he  smooths, 
signifying  that  which  is  cut  off,  in  dis¬ 
tinction  from  the  long  or  scalp  lock, 
qunonu  kqubonk. 

[Abn.  ne-m8sah,  je  le  tonds;  ne-m8si, 
je  me  tonds,  je  me  rase  les  cheveux; 
mas8k8ann,  chevelure  d’ennemis;  ne- 
massek8e,  je  leve  la  chevelure.  Menom. 
maish,  head;  may-nay-nunn,  hair,  Sch. 
n,  470.  Del.  mi  lacli,  hair;  miech  hee 


54 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


meesunk,  etc. — continued. 

ken  [cf.  ireshagan,  El.],  hair  or  wool, 
Zeisb.] 

meetsu,  metsu,  v.  i.  he  eats,  he  takes 
food,  1  K.  19,  6.  Active  intrans.  form 
(or  verb  adj.  an.)  of  meech-u,  as  if 
meech-esu.  Imperat.  meetsish,  eat  thou; 
pi.  meetsek;  suppos.  noh  meetsit,  he  who 
eats,  ‘the  eater’,  Is.  55,  10.  Ybl.  n. 
meetsuonk,  food  (‘meat’,  Matt.  6,  25). 
Cf.  meechu,  moowhau  (v.  t.  an.). 

[Narr.  ascumetesimmis  ( =  asq  kum- 
metesvmmis),  have  you  not  yet  eaten? 
kom-metesvmmin,  your  eating  (infinit.  2d 
sing.).  Abn. ne-mitsesi,  je  mange.  Micm. 
migichi,  je  mange.  Cree  mechesoo,  he 
eats;  michesoosu,  he  eats  a  little.  Chip. 
wesin,  he  eats.  Menom.  mee-tee-shin. 
Del.  mitsu,  Zeisb.] 

meetwe,  metwe(?),  n.  a  ‘poplar’,  Gen. 
30,  37;  Hos.  4, 13. 

*meeiin,  meun(?)  (Peq.,  Groton,  1762), 
n.  the  sun,  Stiles. 

meh.ch.eeu,  mehcheyeu,  (v.  i.  she  is) 
barren,  Gen.  25,  21;  11,  30;  Luke  1,  7 
( mehchiyeue ,  barren;  mohchiyeue,  empty, 
C. ).  Ybl.  n.  mehchbjeuonk,  barrenness, 
sterility,  2  K.  2,  21.  See  rnahchumco; 
mohchi. 

mehmehshanom  (?),  v.  i.  he  pants:  num- 
mehrnehshanom-up  (pret. )  I  panted,  Ps. 
119,  131.  Cf.  sauuhkissu. 

[Abn.  mamantst  re  nere8angan,  le 
cceur  me  bat.] 

mehquantam,  -oantam,  v.  t.  he  re¬ 
members  (it);  num-,  I  remember,  Gen. 
41,  9;  imperat.  2d  sing,  mehquantash, 
Ex.  20,  8;  Deut.  5,  15;  suppos.  meh- 
quontog,  when  he  remembers,  2  Cor.  7, 
15.  Ybl.  n.  mehquantamaoonk,  remem¬ 
brance  (of  inan.  obj.),  a  memorial, 
Eccl.  1,  11;  Neh.  2,  20  ( wunnegen  meh- 
quontamuonk,  ‘a  good  memory’,  C., 
should  be  umnne  mehquontamooonk) . 
With  an.  obj.  mehqudnumau,  he  remem¬ 
bers  (him),  Gen.  19,  29;  with  affixes, 
kum-mehqudnumoush,  I  remember  thee, 
Ps.  77,  3;  imperat.  num-mehqudnum-eh, 
remember  thou  me.  Vbl.  n.  mehqudn- 
umdonk,  memory,  remembrance  (of  an. 
obj.),  Job  18,  17;  Prov.  10,  7.  From 
ahquantam  [ ahque-antam ],  he  refrains 
from  thinking  of,  with  negat.  prefix; 
mo-ahquantam,  he  does  not  refrain,  etc. 


mehquantam,  -oantam — continued. 

[Narr.  Jcum-mequdimam-e,  dost  thou 
remember  me?  Abn.  ne-mi  kSitehau'- 
damen,  j’ai  la  memoire  de  cela,  je  m’en 
souviens;  (with  an.  obj.)  ne-mik8iiihan- 
man,  ne-mi k8ereman.  ] 
mehquau,  mequau,  n.  the  thigh,  Ezek. 
24,  4;  agwe  neequa-ut ,  under  my  thigh, 
Gen.  47,  29;  ivehquau,  his  thigh.  Cf. 
mobpee,  hip,  upper  part  of  the  thigh; 
mohpegh ,  shoulder. 

mehtauog,  n.  the  ear;  pi.  -ogivash,  El.  Gr. 
10,  -ogquash,  Rom.  11,  8;  nehtauog,  my 
ear;  2dpers.  kbit- ;  3dpers.  weht-.  From 
waliteou,  he  understands,  knows  (?) ; 
suppos.  ivautog,  he  who  knows,  under¬ 
stands,  the  knower(?),  or  perhaps  from 
the  causative  form,  it  makes  (him)  un¬ 
derstand.  Cf.  nootamunat,  to  hear. 

[Narr.  vmttowwog,  pi.  -guash.  Abn. 
metaSakS;  3d  pers.  SiaSakS;  pi.  -ag8r. 
Peq.  kultuwannege,  your  ear,  or  ‘what 
you  hear  by’,  Stiles.  Muh.  lowohque, 
ear,  Edw.  Del.  (3d  pi.)  whittawak-all, 
Hkw. ;  hittaock,  ear,  Camp.  Cree  me-ta- 
wd-ki,  ear,  Harmon.] 
mehtug,  -tugq,  mahtug,  n.  ( 1 )  a  tree, 
wood;  pi.  - ugquash ,  El.  Gr.  10;  miivg- 
kcokontu,  ‘among  thick  trees’,  Ps.  74,  5; 
dimin.  mehtugques  and  mehiugquemes,  a 
small  tree,  El.  Gr.  12.  (2)  small  wood,  a 
stick,  a  twig  ( muhtookcomes ,  a  stick,  C. ) ; 
pi.  mehtugkoomesash,  twigs,  Gen.  30,  37 ; 
withes,  Judg.  16,  7,  8.  In  compound 
words,  -uhtug  or  -uhlugq,  tree,  wood ; 
-unk,  a  tree  (while  standing  or  in  the 
earth).  See  agwonk;  kishkunk;  mus- 
sooonk;  qunuhtug. 

[Narr.  mihtuck,  pi.  +  quash.  Chip. 
mitig,  pi.  -gog.  Cree  mistick,  dimin. 
mistickoos.  Del.  tachan  [ =’lugkun( ?)], 
wood  (me  ta  chan,  firewood);  mehittuk, 
a  tree,  Zeisb.] 
meisunk.  See  meesunk. 
mekaussu,  v.  i.  act.  he  strives,  contends; 

suppos.  mehkdusit,  Is.  50,  8. 
mekonaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  contends  with 
(him),  strives  against  (him);  imperat. 
2d  pi.  mekoncok,  contend  with,  do  bat¬ 
tle  with  (him),  Deut.  2,  9,  24;  suppos. 
noh  mekonont,  he  who  contends  with, 
Is.  45,  9;  mutual,  mekonittuog,  they  con¬ 
tend  one  with  the  other,  they  strive 
together,  Lev.  24,  10;  2  Sam.  14,  6. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


55 


mekonau — continued. 

[Narr.  kum-mecauteh,  you  are  a  quar¬ 
reler.  ] 

mekonteau,  v.  i.  he  contends,  makes 
war,  James  4,  2  (with  ayeuwohleau,  he 
fights). 

[Narr.  mec&untitea,  let  us  fight;  vie- 
cautea,  a  fighter.] 

menadchu,  n.  the  left  hand;  um-menad- 
chu,  his  left  hand,  Dan.  12,  7  ( menatche 
menitclieg,  the  left  hand,  C. ).  Adv.  and 

adj.  menadchee,  left,  of  the  left:  - 

vmsseet,  his  left  foot,  Rev.  10,  2;  of  inan. 
obj.  menadcheinniyeu,  (it  is)  on  the  left, 
Zech.  4,  3,  11. 

[Narr.  yo  nmunnateh ,  (there,  to)  the 
left  hand  (of  the  path  or  way).] 
menadtam,  v.  t.  he  vomits  (it)  up,  Lev. 
18,  25;  Jonah  2,  10.  Vbl.  n.  menad- 
tamcoonk,  menatamcoonk,  vomiting,  Jer. 
48,  26. 

[Narr.  n’ munnadtommin,  I  vomit,  R. 
W.  Del.  melandam,  he  vomits,  Zeisb.] 
menan,  n.  the  tongue;  pi.  menanash, 
James 3,  5,  6;  Acts 2,  3;  winan  ( weenan ), 
his  tongue.  [Related  to  annoo,  unnau, 
he  speaks,  commands  (?).] 

[Narr.  urenat  (misprint  for  weenanl). 
Abn.  mircirS;  3d  pers.  8irar8. ] 
*meninnunk,  n.  milk.  In  the  title  of 
the  Indian  translation  by  Grindal  Raw- 
son  of  Cotton’s  “Milk  for  Babes.”  In 
the  quotation  from  1  Peter  2,  2,  on 
the  title-page,  the  adv.  and  adj.  menin- 
nunnde  (of  milk,  milky)  is  substituted 
for  Eliot’s  sogkodtungane.  Participial 
■or  suppos.  inan.  from  noona.il,  he  sucks, 
with  m’  prefixed,  that  which  he  sucks 
[cf.  sogkodtunk;  or  is  it  ‘what  is  given’ 
(mem'n-)?].  See  nmnontamundt;  noon- 
undt. 

[Narr.  munndnnug,  (woman’s)  milk; 
wunnunbgan,  a  breast.  Abn.  merendkSs, 
du  lait;  nenSrd,  je  tete;  n8nanman,  je 

la  tete.] 

menogkus,  n.  the  belly,  Job  3,  11;  the 
bowels,  2  Chr.  21,  15,  18;  kenogkus,  thy 
belly;  vmnnbgkus,  his  belly,  Lev.  11,  42 
( munnogs ,  bowels,  C. ).  Cf.  wonogq,  a 
hole,  a  pit. 

[Narr.  wunndks.  Abn.  nanigan,  ( mon) 
ventre.  Del.  ivach  tey,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  12.] 
*menontam,  C.  See  manontam,  he  smells, 
menuhkequog,  n.  ‘steel’,  Jer.  15,  12 


menuhkequog — continued. 

( with  missehchuog,  ‘  iron  ’ ) ,  but  not  else¬ 
where.  It  signifies  a  very  hard  knife 
or  cutting  instrument.  Cf.  chohqubg; 
kenehqubg  (under  kenai). 
menuhketeoii,  v.  caus.  inan.  he  makes 
(it)  hard  or  strong;  pi.  -teoog,  Jer.  5,  3 
( num-menehketeo ,  I  fasten,  C.). 
menuhkeu,  -ke,  -ki,  (it  is)  strong,  firm, 
hard  (‘rnenuhke  or  menuhku,  adv. 
strongly’,  El.  Gr.  21),  Ex.  6,  1 ;  1  K. 
19,11;  Ezek.  3,  9;  suppos.  menuhkehik, 
when  it  is  hard,  Job  37,  38;  with  an. 
subj.  (v.  adj.  an.)  menuhkesu,  he  is 
strong,  Is.  40,  26.  N.  agent,  menuli- 
kesuen,  a  strong  man;  pi.  ‘mighty  men 
of  valor’,  2  Chr.  32,  21.  Vbl.  n.  menuh- 
kesuonk,  strength,  might. 

[Narr.  minikesu,  strong;  minioquesu 
[dimin.  little  strong],  weak.  Abn.  ne- 
merkcisani,  je  me  sers  de  force,  j’emploie 
la  force.  Micm.  menakh ,  je  suis  presse 
(adv.  menake );  melkei,  je  suis  dur  (adv. 
melki).\ 

menuhkinnum,  v.  t.  he  takes  a  strong 
hold  of,  holds  (it)  fast;  pi.  -umwog,  Jer. 
8,  5;  imperat.  2d  sing,  menuhkenisli, 
hold  (it)  fast,  Rev.  3,  3,  11.  From 
menuhkeu,  with  forrqative  of  verbs  of 
action  performed  by  the  hand. 

[Abn.  ne-merkenan,  je  le  tiens  forte- 
ment,  fermement;  (with  inan.  obj.)  ne- 
merkenemen.  ] 

menuhkonog,  n.  a  stronghold;  pi.  -og- 
quash,  -ogwosh,  Judg.  6,  2;  1  Sam.  23,29, 
=  menuhke  manskash,  Lam.  2,  5.  • 
menuhkoshketomp  [=  menuhke-vmke- 
tomp ],  n.  a  valiant  man,  1  Sam.  16, 18. 
menukque,  n.  the  armpit:  agwe  inenuk- 
quit,  under  the  armpit,  Ezek.  13,  18 
( ‘  to  armholes  ’ ) ;  ag  we  kenukque-it,  under 
thy  armpits,  Jer.  38,  12. 

[Abn.  neregSi,  mon  aisselle;  8reg8i 
( son  aisselle ) .  ] 

*menuks,  n.  a  brant,  C. 

[Narr.  munnucks,  pi.  -suck,  R.  W. 
Del.  manunckus  alias  (  =  bad  fowl),  ‘a 
blackbird  nearly  twice  as  large  as  a 
duck’,  etc.  Camp.;  mxreck  kaak,  ‘gray 
goose’,  ibid.] 

menutcheg,  n.  the  hand;  pi.  -egash,  El. 
Gr.  10;  nunnulcheg,  my  hand;  wun- 
nutcheg,  his  hand,  often  in  contracted 
form,  menutch,  nunnutch,  wunnutch, 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


5(5 


menutcheg — continued. 

etc. ;  putXukqunitch  (=petukqui-munniUch, 
round-hand),  the  fist,  Ex.  21, 18;  anom-  j 
anvicheg  ( andme ,  within),  the  inside  of 
the  hand,  the  palm,  the  hollow,  Lev.  14,  ; 
15,26.  See  muttinnohkdu,  the  right  hand; 
menadchu,  the  left  hand  ( menitcheg ,  C. ;  j 
nunnitchek,  my  hand,  E.  M. ). 

[Narr.  wunnicheke,  (his)  hand;  pi. 
-cheganash.  Abn.  neretsi,  ma  main;  3d 
pers.  Sretsi.  Chip,  ni-nindj,  my  hand, 
Bar.  Del.  nachk,  my  hand,  Zeisb.] 
menwee,  n.  the  navel;  kenwee,  thy  navel, 
Prow  3,  8;  Cant.  7,  2;  weenwee,  his 
navel,  Job  40, 16.  For  m’nd'e,  the  mid¬ 
dle  (?). 

[Abn.  Seri,  nombril;  nauSiSi,  milieu.] 
xnepit,  meepit,  n.  a  tooth;  pi.  -task,  El. 
Gr.  10;  -teash,  Cant.  4,  2;  neepit,  keepit, 
weepiX,  my,  thy,  his  tooth. 

[Narr.  irepit ;  pi.  -teusli.  Pea.  neebut , 
(my)  tooth,  Stiles.  Abn.  3d  pers. 
Sipit.  ] 

mequau.  See  mehquau. 
mequn,  n.  (1)  a  feather;  (2)  a  pen,  3  John 
13;  pi.  -unog:  um-mequnog,  his  feathers, 
Ps.  91,  4.  Adv.  and  adj.  mequnne, 
feathered,  Ps.  78, 27 ;  u m-mequnne,  Ezek. 
39,  17;  rnmchekequnau,  mishequnau,  (he 
is)  much  feathered,  full  of  feathers, 
Ezek.  17,  3,  7. 

[Chip,  rne'gwun.  Shawn,  melk  o  ndh. 
Del.  mi  gun,  Zeisb.  ] 

metah.  [m’tah],  n.  the  heart,  1  K.  3, 12; 
Is.  1,  5;  pi.  +  hash,  Rev.  2,  23;  nuttah, 
kuttah,  wuttah,  my  heart,  thy  heart,  his 
heart  [ nogcus ,  (my)  heart,  Wood]. 
Adj.  and  adv.  metahhuwae,  of  the  heart, 

1  Cor.  4,  5.  Cf.  nuttaihe,  it  is  mine  (be¬ 
longs  to  me) ;  wuttaihe,  it  is  his  (belongs 
to  him). 

[Narr.  wuttcth,  (his)  heart;  vittd,  my 
heart.  Muh.  utoh,  Edw.  Del.  (3d pers. )  j 
w’dee,  Zeisb.  and  Hkw.  (  =  w’tay);  ntee, 
my  heart,  Zeisb.  Chip,  oo-ddi,  o-tay. 
Menom.  may  tali.  Shawn.  6  ddi  ee .] 
*meteauhock  (Narr.),  “the periwinkle, 
of  which  they  make  their  wdmpun 
[ wdmpam ,  p.  130]  or  white  money.” — 
R.  W.  104.  Pyrula  casica  or  P.  canali- 
culata(?).  From  mehtauog  (Abn. 
meta8cik8),  an  ear  (?),  ear-shaped  shell. 
*metewis  ( Narr. ), 1  black  earth  ’ :  “  From 
this  mitewis,  is  an  Indian  town,  a  day 


*metewis — continued. 

and  a  half’s  journey,  or  less  (west,  from 
the  Massachusetts)  called  Meteweme- 
xick.” — R.W.  Plumbago  or  graphite  (?). 
metsu.  See  rneetsu. 
mettasash.  See  muttdsash. 
metugkcokontu.  See  mehiug. 
*metup-peash,  n.  pi.  brains;  waantam 
wuttup,  a  wise  brain,  C.  Narr.  vmUip. 
the  [his]  brain,  R.  W.  Cf.  oittnp  (Abn. 
8tep ),  his  head. 

[Abn.  a8iriteban,  cervelle;  rnetep, 
t6te.] 

metwe.  See  meetwe. 
meun.  See  *meeun. 
meyausunk.  See  meesunk. 
m’hog'k.  See  muhhog. 
miae,  miyae,  moae,  moeu,  adv.  to¬ 
gether,  Is.  45,  8,  21;  Job  41,  15;  Dent. 
33,  17;  moe,  Acts  1,  6;  moeu,  El.  Gr. 
21;  moywe,  C. :  mode  pasootshagk,  draw 
near  together,  Is.  45,  20;  moaeu,  v.  16; 
nauivaeug  moeu,  they  bow  down  to¬ 
gether,  Is.  46,  2. 

[Abn.  man8i.,  man8i8i,  ensemble. 
Micm.  rnaS,  ma8i,  ensemble,  tout  a  la 
fois.  Chip,  mdmaai.  Bar.  Cree  rndh- 
moiu,  all  together,  collectively.] 
miaeog,  miyaeog,  v.  i.  they  are  as¬ 
sembled,  are  together,  Num.  20,  2;  ( mai - 
yaJeog,  Rev.  19,  19);  miyaweog,  ‘they 
gather  together’,  Is.  49, 18;  imperat.  mi- 
yaek,  rnol&k,  assemble  yourselves,  Gen. 
49, 1;  Is.  45,  20;  Zeph.  2,  1.  With  inan. 
subj.  nippe  moiemoo,  the  water  is  gath¬ 
ered  together,  Ex.  15,  8;  mukkinneonk 

moemro,  Lev.  8,4  ( - miyaemoo,  Judg. 

20,  1),  the  assembly  is  gathered  to¬ 
gether;  pi.  moemoash,  Prov.  27,  25. 

[Narr.  midwene,  ‘a court  or  meeting’ ; 
miawetuck,  let  us  meet.  Abn.  maihsa  ii  n , 
on  s’assemble.  Quir.  mduwewunk,  a 
congregation,  Pier.  61.] 
mianaii,  moiinau,  etc.,  v.  t.  an.  he  as¬ 
sembles,  gathers  (them)  together,  2 
Sam.  12,  29;  suppos.  mayanuk,  ‘if  he 
gather  together’,  Job  11,  10;  imperat. 
2d  sing,  miun,  miyan,  moin,  gather  thou 
(them)  together,  2  Sam.  12,  28;  Esth. 
4,  16;  Num.  21,  16.  Augm.  and  freq. 
mohmounau,  Mark  13,  27.  With  inan. 
obj.  [ miannum ]  mdunum,  he  gathers  (it 
or  inan.  things).  See  mdunum.  This 


Trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


57 


mianaii,  moiinau — continued. 

verb  has  the  formative  of  action  by  the 
hand,  and  perhaps  Eliot  was  wrong  in 
using  it  in  the  sense  of  calling  together 
or  causing  to  assemble.  In  the  same 
sense  Rasies  (as  Abn.  below)  employs 
the  caus.  an.  form. 

[Abn.  ne-rriae/ghimank,  j’ assemble 
(les  homines).] 

*mfchachunck  (Narr. ),  the  soul.  R. 
Williams  (113)  says  this  word  “is  of 
affinity  with  a  word  signifying  a  look¬ 
ing  glass,  or  clear  resemblance,  so  that 
it  hath  its  name  from  a  clear  sight 
or  discerning.”  Pierson’s  Catechism 
in  the  Quinnipiac  dialect  has  mitta- 
chonkq ,  soul.  The  word  has  no  discov¬ 
erable  affinity  with  either  of  the  two 
names  ( kaukakineamuck  and  pebenoch- 
ichauqudnick?)  which  Williams  gives 
(p.  136)  to  ‘looking  glass’.  Elsewhere 
(p.  116)  Williams  writes  pi.  micMch&nck- 
quog. 

[Chip,  wabmotcliitchagivan,  Bar.  46. 
Del.  me  tschi  tschank,  soul,  spirit,  Zeisb.] 
michemappu  [  =  wdcheme-appu~) ,  v.  i.  he 
abides  forever,  Is.  40,  28;  suppos.  Miche- 
mapit  Manit,  ‘  the  Eternal  God  ’ ,  Deut. 
33,  27. 

micheme,  misheme,  adv.  forever,  ever¬ 
lastingly,  Matt.  6,  13;  Philemon  15;  Ps. 
90,  2  (so  Cotton). 

[Narr.  micheme.  Abn.  metsimiSi,  tou- 
jours.  Micm.  mech,  d’avantage,  en¬ 
core,  de  jdIus.  Cree  moosuk,  always. 
Del.  amelschimi,  often  (?),  Zeisb.] 
michemohteau  \_—micheme-ohteau),  v.  i. 
it  is  forever,  endures  forever;  suppos. 
ne  michemohtag,  that  which  is  forever, 
‘eternal’,  Rom.  1,  20  (  =  micheme  ohtClg, 
Ps.  145,  13).  Adv.  and  adj.  micliemoh- 
tae  and  machemohtae,  everlasting (ly), 
Deut.  33,  15;  Hab.  3,  6. 

*mfchokat  (Narr.),  a  thaw;  michokateh, 
when  it  thaws,  R.  W.  =mahshequodt, 
when  it  melts  away,  vanishes.  Of. 
mahtsheau. 

[Del.  moschhaqucti,  ‘the  river  clears 
up,  is  getting  free  of  ice’,  ‘the  weather 
clears  up’,  Zeisb.  Gr.] 
*micuckaskeete  (Narr.),  a  meadow, 
R.W.  See  mukkoshqvt,  a  plain, 
min,  n.  gen.  a  fruit;  restricted  in  its  ap¬ 
plication  to  the  smaller  fruits,  such  as 


min — continued. 

corn,  berries,  nuts;  pi.  minneash.  Not 
used  by  Eliot  except  in  compound 
names.  It  appears  to  be  formed  by 
prefixing  the  indef.  particle  m’  to  -in, 
the  formative  of  verbs  of  growing, 
‘that,  which  is  grown’,  or  which  results 
from  growth.  See  weatchimin  (corn), 
wenominneash  (grapes),  keneii-munneash 
(first  ripe  fruits),  'tvornpi -minneash 
(chestnuts,  ‘white  nuts’),  etc.  Eliot 
has  always  the  inan.  plural.  In  some 
other  dialects  names  compounded  with 
min  (or  minis)  have  occasionally  the 
an.  form. 

[Chip,  meen;  pi.  inan.  meen-un,  ber¬ 
ries,  Sch.  ii,  368;  but  manda-min,  pi. 
an ,-minag,  corn;  miskwi-min,  pi.  -minng, 
raspberries,  etc.  Cree  menis,  a  berry. 
Del.  mihn,  ‘huckleberry’,  Zeisb.] 
misashq.  See  mishashq. 
mishabohquas,  -bpuhquas,  n.  ‘mouse’, 
Lev.  11,  29;  Is.  66,  17.  Properly  the 
great  mouse  (mishe-abohquas)  or  rat. 
Cf.  mattappasquas,  bat. 

[Abn.  8anbig8sess8 ,  souris.  Chip. 
wmvdbigonodji,  mouse,  Bar.  Del .poques, 
a  mouse,  Hkw. ;  achpo  quees,  Zeisb.] 
mishadchu  [  =  rnishe-wadchu) ,  n.  a  great 
mountain,  Luke  3,  5;  Rev.  8,  8. 
mishadtuppoo,  -pu  [ mishe-adt-uppco ],  v. 
i.  he  feasts,  Prov.  15,  15.  Ybl.  n.  -pco- 
onk,  a  feast,  Ex.  23,  16;  34,  22.  Caus. 
mishadtupiveheau,  he  makes  a  feast,  he 
causes  (others)  to  feast,  Gen.  40,  20; 
Dan.  5,  1. 

mishanamco  (?),  v.  i.  hegroans,  John  11, 
33;  pi.  mish&namcoog  ( mishonomcoog , 
Job  24,  12);  mim-mishanomumun,  we 
groan,  2  Cor.  5,  2,  4. 

mishanantam,  v.  t.  he  despises,  con¬ 
temns,  thinks  meanly  of  (it);  with  an. 
obj.  mishananumau,  he despiseth  (him), 
Prov.  14,  2,  31.  Ybl.  n.  act.  mishan- 
anumdonk,  dishonoring;  pass,  mishan- 
anittuonk,  being  dishonored,  contempt, 
disgrace  (passive),  Ezra  4,  14;  Ps.  35, 
26;  Prov.  18,  3  ( meshanantamire ,  ‘mean¬ 
ly’,  C. ).  Cf.  mgtchenantmn. 
-mishanneke  (Narr.),  =mishi’-annek,  a 
squirrel;  pi.  -nequock,  R.  W. ;  -xhennea- 
gue,  Stiles  ( mishannek ,  C. ).  [The  root 
is  ‘claw’  or  ‘scratcher’  (?).] 


'58 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


*mishanneke — continued. 

[Abn.  mi'kde,  6cureuil;  prenik8 ,  mes- 
dnikS,  ‘ces  deux  ont  un  beau  poil’; 
aniknsess  (dimin. ),  suisse  [chipmunk]. 
Etch,  mekoo,  red  squirrel.  Miami  ne- 
kwawh,  squirrel.  Shawn,  an-cek-wah. 
Del.  hanicquai,  Camp.] 
mishanogqus  [=  mishe-anogqs,  great 
star],  n.  the  morning  star,  2  Pet.  1,  19; 
Rev.  2,  28. 

mishantam,  missantam,  v.  i.  and  t. 
inan.  he  thinks  much,  meditates,  is  in-  j 
tent  upon  (it);  Jer.  49,  30;  Dan.  6,  3.  I 
Vbl.  n.  -tamoowonk,  much  thinking, 
meditation,  Ps.  119,  97. 
mishantoowau,  -ontcowau,  v.  i.  he 
shouts,  cries  out  with  a  loud  voice,  Jer. 
25,  30;  impers.  (?)  mishontoowi,  Is.  30,  7; 
imperat.  2d  sing,  misliantcowash ,  cry 
aloud,  ‘lift  up  thy  voice’,  Is.  40,  6,  9. 
Adv.  and  adj.  mishantcowde,  with  loud 
voice,  loudly,  Ps.  150,  5;  Prov.  27,  14. 
Vbl.  n.  mishantooivaonk,  -ontcowaonk,  a 
shout,  a  loud  noise  ( mishontcoonat ,  to 
roar,  C. ).  From  mishe  and  -onloowail 
(he  utters).  See*rnishontcoahpuhsu,  he 
howls. 

[Narr.  mishadntowash,  speak  out.] 
mishashq,  misashq  [=mishe-m’ askehi  or 
mishe-asliq,  great  grass],  n.  a  rush,  Job 
8, 11;  pi.  -quog,  rushes,  ‘  flags’,  Ex.  2,  3. 
Adj.  and  adv.  mishashque,  of  rushes, 
‘of  bulrushes’,  Ex.  2,  3.  Gi.  wekinasq;- 
wusshashquobok. 

mishasketomp,  n.  ‘champion’,  1  Sam. 
17,  4,  23,  51. 

*mishaupan  (Narr.),  a  great  wind,  R. 
IV.,  i.  e.  it  blows  greatly;  mishe-icaupan. 
See  wdban. 

mishe.  See  missi,  great, 
mishe-abohquas.  See  mishabohquas. 
mishe-adtoau.  See  mishoadtue. 
mishe-adt-uppco.  See  mishadluppco. 
mishe-annek.  See  *mish&nneke. 
mishe-anogqs.  See  mishanogqus. 
misheashkco,  v.  i.  (and  t.  inan.)  he 
swallows  it  (completely),  swallows  up, 
Rev.  12,  16;  ne  masheashqut  (suppos. ), 
that  which  he  swallows  up,  Jer.  51,  44; 
with  an.  obj.  misheashqunneaw (misse-) , 
he  swallows  (him)  up.  Cf.  qusseashkco. 
mishe-ashq.  See  mishashq. 
mishegski.  See  mishikski. 


misheheau,  v.  caus.  an.  he  makes  (him) 
great,  exalts  (him),  1  K.  1,  15;  num- 
misheh,  I  exalt  (him),  Ps.  89,  19;  sup¬ 
pos.  noh  misheheunt,  he  who  exalts,  2 
Cor.  12,  20;  suppos.  pass,  (part.)  mishe- 
hil,  made  great,  exalted,  2  Cor.  12,  7; 
with  inan.  obj.  mishehteau,  he  makes 
(it)  great,  increases,  enlarges,  exalts 
(it),  Hos.  12,  1;  num-mishteofi,  ‘I  mag¬ 
nify’  (it),  Rom.  11,  13;  suppos.  noh 
mashteunk,  Prov.  28,  8. 
mishehtashin,  v.  i.  it  storms,  there  is  a 
tempest;  as  n.  (mishehtash) ,  a  tempest, 
a  gale  of  wind,  Job  27,  20;  Is.  29,  6; 
waaban  mishshehtash,  ‘  there  arose  a  tem¬ 
pestuous  wind’,  Acts  27,  14;  watch  mishe 
tahshinit,  ‘from  the  storm’,  Is.  25,  4; 
suppos.  mahsMlahshik,  Acts  2,  2.  [The 
separation  of  words  in  the  last  example 
implies  that  Eliot  understood  misheh¬ 
tashin  to  be  formed  of  mishe  and  tahshin 
(it  lifts  up),  i.  e.  ‘a great  uplifting.’  It 
seems  rather  to  be  from  mishehteau,  with 
(the  characteristic  of  violent  action,  sh, 
and)  the  formative  of  verbs  denoting 
action  of  the  wind,  -shin,  ‘the wind  in¬ 
creases  greatly.’] 

[Narr.  mishitdshin,  there  is  a  storm.] 
mishekishki,  -koi,  (it  is)  broad,  wide 
(mishe -kishki,  great  from  side  to  side), 
Job  11,  8;  Is.  33,  21;  mishshukskoi,  Matt. 
23,  5;  mishshekski,  Ps.  119,  96;  missi  kali 
misliigski  kehtoh,  the  great  and  wide  sea, 
Ps.  104,  25;  mishekiske-maogkehlu,  ‘in 
the  broad  ways’,  Cant.  3,  2.  See  kishki. 
mishe-m’askeht.  See  mishashq. 
misheme.  See  micheme. 
misheu,  (itis)  great;  adv.  greatly,  1  Chr. 

16,  25.  See  missi. 
mishe-wadchu.  See  mishadchu. 
mishikski,  mishegski  (?),  (it  is)  ‘fro- 
ward’;  suppos.  mashiskag,  when  it  is 
froward,  ‘  frowardness’,  Prov.  6,  14;  10, 
32;  with  an.  subj.  mishegskiyeuog,  ‘they 
are  froward’,  Prov.  2,  15. 
mishketu  (?),  pi.  mishketuog,  (they  are) 
‘  new-born  babes  ’ ,  1  Pet.  2,  2. 
mishkom.  See  miskom. 
mishkonontup,  n.  a  skull,  John  19,  17 
( muskononlip ,  C. );  wuskonontup,  (his) 
skull,  2  K.  9,  35;  Judg.  9,  53;  Mark  15, 
22.  For  muskon-dntup,  bone-head.  Cf. 
chepiontup. 

*mishkouantam,  v.  i.  he  rejoices,  C. 
See  muskouantam. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


59 


mishkouwutcliinnoo-we  kous,  a  prick¬ 
ing  briar,  Ezek.  28,  24. 
mishoadtue,  adv.  of  great  price,  precious; 
suppos.  mishoadlik,  1  Pet.  3,  4.  From 
mishe-adtoau.  Seemagoadlik;  mugoadtue. 
mishonog'od,  (it  is)  wide,  broad;  suppos. 

-ogok  (of  a  gate  or  way,  Matt.  7,  13). 
*mishontooahpulisu,  v.  i.  he  howls; 
num-mishontcoahpuhs,  1  howl,  C.  See 
mishantoowau,  he  shouts, 
mishontcowau.  See  mishantoowau. 
*misha)n,  n.  a  chin,  C. 
mlshron,  n.  a  boat.  See  mdslicon. 
*mishquammag,  pi.  -mauquock  (Narr.), 
n.  salmon,  red-fish,  R.  W.  103  ( =  inish- 
qui-dmaug) . 

[Abn.  mesk§ameg8;  pi.  -g8ak.] 
*mishquashim  (Narr. ),  a  red  fox,  R.  W. ; 

mishquissups,  a  fox,  Stiles, 
-mishquawtuck  (Narr.),  a  (red)  cedar 
tree,  R.  W.  ( =  mishqai-uhtug ). 

[Del.  me  liok  ho  cus,  Zeisb.] 
mishqui,  (it  is)  red.  See  musqui. 
*mishquslikou,  n.  a  trout,  C. 

[Abn.  (pi.)  sk8tam-8k.  Del.  nieschil- 
ameek,  a  trout,  Zeisb.] 

[mishuntugkco,  it  is  much  wooded,  a  for¬ 
est?]  -koooo,  ‘it  is  a  wood’,  Josh.  17,  18. 
miskaiiaii,  mussuhkauau,  v.  t.  an.  it 
happens  to  or  befalls  (him),  it  is  found 
by  or  comes  by  chance  to  (him):  mah- 
chukish  .  .  .  pish  um-miskauouh,  evils 
shall  befall  them,  Deut.  31, 17;  suppos. 
mussuhkunk,  Gen.  42,  4. 
miskom,  mishkom,  v.  t.  inan.  he  happens 
upon,  finds  (it);  woh  kummishkom,  thou 
shalt  find  (it),  Matt.  17,  27;  suppos. 
maskog,  when  he  finds  (it),  Ps.  119, 162; 
Matt.  13,  44. 

[Abn.  ne-meskamen,  je  trouve  ce  que 
j’avois  perdu  (with  an.  obj.  ne-mes- 
kaSah) ;  ned-askamesi,  j’ai  fais  une  bonne 
trouve,  Rasies.  Cree  miskum;  with  an. 
obj.  miskawayoo.  Chip,  mekahwon,  (he) 
found  him,  J.] 

missantam.  See  mishantam. 
tnissegen,  mussegen  [v.  i.  it  grows  or 
produces  abundantly,  =  missekin ] ,  it  is 
plenteous,  abundant,  Gen.  41,  29,  31; 
suppos.  ne  masegik,  that  which  yields 
abundance,  plenty,  i.  e.  plenteous  har¬ 
vest,  Gen.  41,  30,  34.  Adv.  and  adj.  ut 
missegene  ohke-it,  to  a  plentiful  land, 
Jer.  2,  7;  48,  33. 


misseh.ch.uog,  n.  ‘iron’,  Josh.  8,  31;  2K. 
6,  6;  Job  28,  2;  missehchmg  kali  menuli- 
kequog,  iron  and  steel,  Jer.  15,  12;  mis- 
sehchuogque,  made  of  iron,  Deut,  28,  48; 
1  K.  6,  7.  In  other  places  moooshog  (or 
moushag ) ,  q.  v. ,  is  used  for  ‘  iron.  ’  Cot¬ 
ton  has  missehchooog,  mines. 

*missesu  (Narr.),  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  whole 
(the  whole  of  him).  See  mussi. 
*misshat,  n.  belly,  C.  Probably  ‘gros 
ventre’;  for  mishe-ohteau,  it  is  great(?). 
missi,  mishe,  misheu,  missiyeu,  (it 
is)  great,  Ezek.  17,  3;  1  Chr.  16,  25; 
pi.  missiyeuash  kut-onkquaiunkanash, 
your  rewards  are  great.,  Matt,  5,  12; 
ndno  missi,  it  is  more  and  more  great, 
‘it  increaseth’,  Ps.  74,  23;  Job  10,  16; 
suppos.  mohsag ,  when  it  is  great,  a  great 
thing,  Ex.  15,  7;  Deut.  4,  32;  Matt.  23, 
17,  19;  anue  mohsag,  (that  which  is) 
more  great,  the  greatest,  Matt.  22,  36. 

[Narr.  mishe,  missi.  Abn.  mese; 
nemeseghik8ilt8n,  je  le  fais  plus  grand. 
Cree  missow,  it  is  large.  Chip,  mitcha, 
it  is  big,  large,  Bar.  Del.  m’cheu,  big, 
large  (it  is),  Zeisb.] 

missfn,  mussin,  (he  is)  a  captive,  Is.  49, 
24;  51,  14;  2  K.  5,  2:  missinnoou,  mis- 
sinno,  he  is  taken  captive,  becomes  a 
captive,  Gen.  14,  14;  Lam.  1,  3;  pi. 
-noooog,  Lam.  1,  5.  Ybl.  n.  missinnoco- 
onk,  captivity. 

[Narr.  missinnege,  num-missinndm 
[-wco?n]  ewb,  this  is  my  captive.] 
missinnin,  n.  (from  missin,  with  indef. 
affix)  a  man,  homo,  i.  e.  any  captive 
or  tributary,  in  which  classes  were  in¬ 
cluded  all  men  other  than  those  of  the 
speaker’s  nation  or  race  (viri).  Cf. 
wosketomp,  omp.  PL  missinninnuog , 
people,  oi  noXXol,  Ex.  24,  2,  3;  Deut.  4, 
33;  Num.  22,  5;  missinnin  kah puppina- 
shim,  man  and  beast,  Gen.  6,  7;  howae 
missinnin  ken,  of  what  people  are  you? 
Jonah  1,  8;  lit.  what  kind  of  slave  are 
you?  ( missinnin  or  missinninnuog,  a 
people;  wunnissue  missinnin,  a  pretty 
fellow,  C. ). 

[Narr.  ninnuock,  ninni-missinnuwock, 
men,  folk,  people.] 

missinolikau,  v.  t.  an.  he  carries  (him) 
away  captive.  See  2  K.  15,  29. 
missinum.  See  mussinum. 


60 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


missippano  sokanunk  (?),  it  [a  cloud] 
rains  rain,  Is.  5,  6.  Cf.  mussuppeg,  a 
tear.  See  -sippaeu. 

*missippuskunnicheg,  n.  the  wrist,  C. 
For  mussipskonnutcheg,  the  bone  next 
to  (joining)  the  hand.  Cf.  mussipsk. 
-missis,  -musses.  See  um-misses-oh . 
missishin,  v.  i.  it  touches.  See  mussinum. 
*mississikkoshk,  n.  a  shin  (bone),  C. 
missittipuk.  See  mussiitipuk,  a  neck, 
missiyeu.  See  missi. 
missohham,  v.  t.  he  announces,  makes 
public  (see  mussisse) ;  imperat.  2d -(-1st 
pers.  sing,  missohamah,  tell  me,  Gen.  24, 
23;  with  quosliae  (beforehand),  he 
prophesies;  pi.  quosliae  missohhamwog, 
they  prophesy,  Num.  11,  27.  Vbl.  n. 
quoshae  missohhamdonk,  prophecy,  Prov. 
30,  1;  31,  1;  with  an.  obj.  (remote)  -oh- 
hamau,  he  announces  to  (him), 
missohquam.  See  mussohquam [in] ,  an 
ear  of  (dried)  corn;  missunkquamin,  a 
(full)  ear  of  corn. 

misscounk.  See  mussamnk,  a  dry  tree. 
*missuckeke  (Narr. ),  pi.  -kequock,  bass, 
R.  W.  ( suckequog ,  Stiles);  striped  bass 
(Labrax  lineatus)?  Peq.  m’ ssugkheege, 
Stiles. 

missugken[co],  missuken,  v.  i.  he  is 
great,  powerful,  mighty,  1  Chr.  16,  25: 
anue  missuken  onk  neen,  he  is  more  pow¬ 
erful  (‘mightier’)  than  I,  Mark  1,  7; 
suppos.  masugkenuk  (q.  y. ).  Vbl.  n. 
missugkenooonk,  greatness  (in  power, 
importance,  etc.,  relatively),  Esth.  10, 1 
( missegkin-neat ,  to  abound;  missekin-ne&t, 
to  increase,  C. ).  From  missi,  with  ap¬ 
parently  the  formative  of  verbs  of  phys¬ 
ical  or  inanimate  growth  (-kin)-,  but,  if 
so,  this  verb  could  not  properly  have 
an  animate  subject. 

[Abn.  ne-meseghir,  je  suis  grand;  3d 
pers.  meseghir;  suppos.  meseghire) ^  but 
mesak8s8,  il  est  gros,  or  rnesegS.  Cree 
misslugittu,  he  is  large.  Del.  meechgiluk, 
the  big,  great  one,  Zeisb.  Voc.] 
missuhkauau,  missuhkomco.  See  mus- 
sulikomco. 

missunkquamin,  mus-,  n.  a  (full)  ear 

of  corn;  pi.  -minneasli,  -munash,  -min- 
ash,  Deut.  23,  25;  Gen.  41,  5,  7,  22.  Cf. 
munnequomin. 

[Del.  me  sa  quern,  a  corn  ear,  Zeisb.] 
missunum.  See  mussinum,  he  touches. 


mittamwus,  -wussis,  -wossis,  n.  (1)  a 

woman,  mulier,  Deut.  21,  11;  28,  56; 
Gen.  2,  22;  3,  2  (cf.  squd,  femina);  (2) 
a  wife,  uxor,  Gen.  12,  14;  Deut.  22, 
14;  1  Cor.  7,  16;  numm-,  my  wife; 
kumm-,  thy  wife;  um-miltammis-soh,  his 
wife,  the  wife  of  (him),  Gen.  12,  12; 
19,  26.  Cf.  n-usso,  (she)  is  his  wife. 

[Narr.  miUarnus;  kommiltamus  or  ko- 
weewo,  thy  wife;  nummUUmms  or  wullo- 
gana,  my  wife,  R.  W.  Chip,  ne-minde- 
moamish,  my  wife  (Sch.  ii,  458) ;  minda- 
mdie,  ‘an  old  woman’,  Bar.  26.  Miami 
metairnsah,  woman;  ne-we-wah,  my  wife. 
Menom.  metamo,  woman;  nayon,  my 
wife.  ] 

mittamwussu,  v.  i.  she  is  a  wife;  suppos. 
mittamwussit  onkatog,  if  she  be  the  wife 
of  another,  Jer.  3,  1;  um-mittamwussu, 
-umsissu,  he  takes  to  wife,  2  Chr.  21,  6; 
Gen.  25,  1. 
miyae.  See  miae. 
miyaeog.  See  miaeog. 
m’ncot.  See  manoot. 
mo,  adv.  ‘sometimes  signitieth  not’,  EL 
Gr.  21;  mo  teag,  nothing,  Is.  40,  17, 
=  monteag  (Is.  41,  17),  malleag  (Luke 
22,35).  See  malta.  Negation  appears 
to  be  the  primary  signification  of  this 
particle,  or  rather  of  its  base,  m’  (q.  v. ). 
With  the  formative  of  the  verb  sub¬ 
stantive  ( m-co ,  mo)  it  came  to  have  the 
force  of  an  affirmation  of  past  being 
(fuit)  by  denial  of  present,  and  thus 
supplied  the  preterit  of  the  defective 
verb  of  existence;  ko,  it  was  and  con¬ 
tinues  to  be;  mo,  it  was  and  is  not;  pish, 
it  will  be-  (The  limited  or  definite  pres¬ 
ent,  ‘is  now’,  was  marked  by  the  affix 
-co  for  verbs  of  being,  -ni  or  -i  for  verbs 
of  an.  or  inan.  action.  For  the  former 
class,  see  El.  Gr.  16.)  Eliot  some¬ 
times  combined  mo  with  ko  to  form  an 
aorist  (koh  m6,  m6nk6.  See  ko).  For 
the  force  of  m’  as  a  prefix,  indeter¬ 
minate  and  impersonal,  see  m’:  na 
mo  ayemouttuonk,  there  was  a  battle, 
2  Sam.  2,  17;  m6  wequai,  there  was 
light,  Gen.  1,  3;  ken  mo  u-uttinneumin, 
thou  wast  a  servant,  Deut.  5,  17;  neg  mo 
neematog,  these  (who  are  dead)  were 
my  brothers,  Judg.  8, 19;  mo  ayeuau,  he 
was  made,  etc.,  1  Cor.  15,  45.  -mo  or 
-mco,  the  characteristic  of  active  in- 


trumbull] 


N ATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


61 


mo — continued. 

transitive  verbs  when  their  subject  is 
inanimate,  is  nearly  related  to  the  im¬ 
personal  prefixm’ — for  example,  nmkeu, 
he  descends;  ncoke-mco,  it  descends  or  is 
letdown;  com,  he  goes;  comm,  it  goes. 

[Micm.  mS,  point;  maSen  (de  mS  et 
Sen,  quelqu’un),  personne.] 
moae.  See  miae,  together. 
*moamitteaug  (Narr.),  “a  little  sort,  of 
fish,  half  as  big  as  sprats,  plentiful  in 
winter.  ’  ’ — R.  W.  105.  Perhaps  the  smelt 
(Osmerus  eperlanus),  but  the  name 
may  be  applied  to  any  species  which 
‘goes  in  shoals’  or  ‘a  great  many 
together.’  It  has  been  corrupted  to 
mu mmychaug and  mummachog,  by  which 
name  several  s}ieeies  of  small  fish  are 
popularly  known,  especially  the  orna¬ 
mented  minnow  (Hydrargyra  ornata, 
LeSueur).  From  mohmoeau;  pass,  and 
mutual  form,  mohmoitleauog,  they  go 
gathered  together  or  in  great  numbers. 
*moattoqus  (Narr.),  ‘a  black  wolf’,  R. 

W.  95.  See  mukquoshim;  naitaohqus. 
mobpee  (?) ,  n.  the  hip,  the  upper  part  of 
the  thigh,  the  ham,  Gen.  32,  32;  pi. 
-piaog;  2d  pers.  kobp-,  kupp-,  Num.  5, 
21,  22;  3d  pers.  wobpee  (dapwas,  a  hip, 
C. ).  Cf.  mehqp.au,  thigh;  mohpegk, 
shoulder. 

[Narr.  apome,  thigh.] 
moehteomco,  v.  inan.  (pass.)  cans,  it  is 
made  to  be  together,  it  is  put  together; 
suppos.  moeliteomuk,  when  it  is  ‘framed 
together’,  ‘knit  together’,  Eph.  2,  21; 
Col.  2,  19. 

moeu.  See  miae,  together. 
moeuwehkom.au,  v.  t.  an.  heealls(them) 
together,  he  assembles.  Vbl.  n.  -ko- 
monk,  an  assembling,  assembly,  Num. 
20,  6. 

[Quir.  mauwewhekomunk,  the  church, 
Pier.  63,  64.] 

mogki,  mogke,  mogge,  (it  is)  great  (of 
its  kind  or  comparatively).  Adv.  and 
adj.  great;  mogke  qusmkquanash,  great 

stones,  Josh.  10,  11;  1  K.  5,  17;  - 

wetuomash,  great  houses,  Amos  3,  15; 
mogkiyeu,  it  is  great;  pi.  -yeuash,  Gen. 
41,5  (of  ears  of  corn,  they  are  ‘rank’); 
suppos.  pi.  mdgagish,  mcigagish,  great 
things. 


mogki,  mogke,  mogge — continued. 

[Del.  amangi,  great,  big,  large,  Zeisb. 
Gr.  168;  machweu,  great,  large,  Zeisb. 
Voc.] 

mogoadtue,  adj.  and  adv.  precious,  of 
great  price,  2  ('hr.  20,  25.  See  magoad- 
tik;  mishdadtue. 

mogquan,  -quon,  n.  the  heel;  pi.  -nash, 
Job  13,  27;  3d  pers.  wogquan,  wogquoan, 
his  heel,  Gen.  3,  15;  25,  26;  49,  17. 

[Abn.  magSnnn,  nagSafm,  mon  talon. 
Menom.  wahquodn,  (his)  heel.  Shawn. 
okwdnee.  Del.  nan  quon,  the  [my?] 
heel,  Zeisb.] 

mogqueen,  -quen,  n.  a  boil,  a  swelling, 
2  K.  20,  7;  Is.  38,  21;  Lev.  13,  10,  19. 
From  mogqueinnu,  it  grows  large,  en¬ 
larges  (mogquinuoo,  ‘it  became  a  boil’, 
Ex.  9,  10).' 

[Abn.  magSin,  enflure.  Del.  mac.h- 
quin,  swelled,  Zeisb.] 
mogque'in,  -quen,  v.  i.  it  swells,  en¬ 
larges,  Num.  5,  27;  mogqueinnu,  it  be¬ 
comes  large  or  swollen,  Dent.  8,  4;  with 
an.subj.  mogquesu,  he  swells,  is  swollen 
{noli  mogquesui,  he  swelleth;  num-mok- 
ques,  I  swell,  C.). 

[Narr.  mocquesui,  he  is  swelled;  num- 
mockquese,  I  have  a  swelling.  Del. 
machweu,  great,  large,  Zeisb.  Voc.] 
mohchi,  (it  is)  empty,  unoccupied  ( moh - 
chiyeue,  C. ) ;  mohchoi  kcosh  week,  is  there 
room  in  thy  father’s  house?  Gen.  24, 
23.  Cf.  mehcheeu. 

mohchumco.  See  rnahchumoo,  it  is  waste, 
barren,  made  desolate. 

*mohewonck  (Narr.),  a  raccoon-skin 
coat,  R.  W. 

[Abn.  maiSak,  robe  de  peau  de  cerf, 
de  chat-sau vage,  etc.] 
mohkas.  See  muhkos,  a  nail,  a  claw. 
*mohkodtaen-in,  a  widower,  C. 
mohkont.  See  muhkonl,  a  leg. 
mohkussa,  mohkos,  mukos,  n.  a  (burn¬ 
ing)  coal;  pi.  -mash,  Is.  44, 12;  ‘coals  of 
fire’,  Prow  26,  21;  vl  mohkomihtu,  upon 
[among]  hot  coals,  Prow  6,  28;  Is.  44, 
19;  anue  inooi  onk  ne  mohkos,  blacker 
than  a  coal,  Lam.  4,  8.  For  m’kussa, 
the  hot  (n.  concrete)?  or  if  Rasies’ 
translation  of  the  corresponding  word 
in  Abnaki  be  correct,  from  mcoi  and 
kussa,  black-burned  (?),  or  (Abn.  rnkase) 

\  merely  ‘ it  is  black’  (?).  Cf.  kussitteau, 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25- 


62 

mohkussa,  etc. — continued. 

etc.;  “moeassa,  the  black  of  the  nail”, 
Wood . 

[Abn.  mkase,  charbon  4teint  (?); 
mkase-skSlai,  charbon  ardent.  Del.  me 
hackachley,  a  coal,  Zeisb.] 
mohmoeog,  freq.  of  moeog  ( =  mideog , 
q.  v.),  they  go  often,  or  habitually,  to¬ 
gether,  ‘they  often  met’,  El.  Gr.  17. 
mobmosktLhteas,  n.  a  frog  (obj.  pi. 
-teasu,  Ps.  78,  45,  a  misprint?  Mass. 
Ps.  has  mahmoskohleaseuh ) .  Elsewhere 
Eliot  has  linogkukquasu-og,  frogs.  Cf. 
Peq.  kapiauss. 

moh.m6u.num,  freq.  of  mounum,  he  gath¬ 
ers  together. 

mohmuttahtag',  mamuttattag,  mah-, 

(suppos.  as)  n.  lead,  Ezek.  22,  18,  20; 
27,  12;  Ex.  15,  10;  Zech.  5,  7;  ‘tin’, 
Num.  31,  22,  but  not  elsewhere, 
mobpanag,  muh-,  -og,  n.  the  breast 
[mammae],  Joel  2,  16;  Hos.  9,  14;  noli- 
panag,  my  breast,  Cant.  1, 13;  wohpanag, 
wuhp-,  her  breast,  ‘bosom’,  Prov.  5,  20 
( mohpdnneg ,  C. ). 

[Narr.  mapannog,  the  breast;  vran- 
nunnogan-ash,  breasts.  Menom.  oh- 
paun.  Shawn,  6pah  la.) 
mohpegk,  muhp-,  -peg,  n.  theshoulder, 
Lev.  8,  25;  9,  25;  oftener  without  the 
impers.  prefix,  uhpegk,  Num.  6,  19; 
18,  18;  Ezek.  24,  4;  nauw&nciu  uhpequa- 
nuh  [accus.  pi.),  ‘he  bowed  his  shoul¬ 
ders’,  Gen.  49,  15;  nashaue  ohpequan-it, 
between  his  shoulders,  Deut.  33,  12. 
Cf.  muttugk. 

[Narr.  uppeke,  shoulder;  pi.  uppe- 
qubck.  Chip,  pekwun,  pikqun ,  the  (up¬ 
per  part  of  the)  back.  Del.  ho  pi  quon, 
the  fore  shoulder,  Zeisb.] 
mohsag,  suppos.  of  missi,  great, 
mohshequssuk,  n.  a  ‘flinty  rock’,  Deut. 

32, 13  ( =  mcoohshi-qussuk) .  See  qussuk. 
mohshipsq,  n.  flint  stone,  Is.  50,  7  ( =mco - 
ohshi-pisk,  iron  stone) . 
mohtantam.  See  mahtdnlam,  he  is  old, 
decrepit. 

*[mohtanuhkussu,]  num-mohtanuh- 
kus,  I  finish  or  conclude,  C.  [?] 
*mohtchinau  [=mahchinau),  he  is  sick; 

num-mohtchinam ,  I  am  sick,  C. 
mohtompan,  (it  is)  morning,  Ezek.  7,  7; 
suppos.  -ompog,  when  it  is  morning;  as 
n.  Gen.  1,  5,  8,  etc.;  en  (or pajeh)  moh- 


mohtompan — continued. 

tompan-it,  till  morning,  till  the  morrow, 
Ex.  23,  18;  Zeph.  3,  3. 

[Narr.  mautdhon,  it  is  day.] 
moh.tshanco.  See  mahishdnoo. 
mohtukquas-og,  n.  pi.  ‘conies’,  Ps. 
104,  18,  and  ogkoshquog,  Prov.  30,  26. 

[Abn.  matlegSessS-ak,  lievre.] 
mohtupohsin,  v.  i.  it  lies  waste,  Is.  15, 1. 
mohtuppaeu,  v.  i.  it  melts  or  vanishes 
(as  ice  by  heat  or  a  cloud  by  the  sun); 
pi.  -aeog,  Job  6,  17;  pass,  -aemco,  it  is 
melted,  made  to  vanish,  Job  7,  9;  6, 17; 
Josh.  5,  1.  Cf.  mahtsheau. 
mohtutteau,  v.  t.  caus.  inan. ;  pass,  it  is 
consumed  or  made  an  end  of,  melted, 
Jer.  6,  29  (of  lead,  by  the  fire);  act.  it 
consumes,  makes  an  end  of,  Deut.  32, 
22. 

mohwhaii.  See  mcowhau,  he  eats  (him), 
mokaketcomuk,  (when  he  is)  dumb, 
Ps.  38,  13;  suppos.  of  mokakultoo  =  mat 
kakutloo,  he  does  not  speak,  he  is  mute, 
dumb;  pi.  -icog,  Ex.  4,  11;  Matt.  9,  33; 
mo  nuk-kaketcop  (pret. ),  I  was  dumb, 
Ps.  39,  2,  =  mat  nuk-kaketcop ,  v.  9. 
mokus,  mokis,  (indef. )  -sin,  a  shoe 
(moccasin);  pi.  rnokussinash,  moxinash, 
Amos 8,  6;  Matt.  10, 10;  um-mokis  (-us), 
his  shoe,  Deut.  25, 9, 10;  pehtoxinash,  put 
on  your  shoes,  Ezek.  24,  17;  nukkdnok- 
kussinash,  old  shoes,  Josh.  9,  5. 

[Narr.  mocussinass  and  mockussin- 
chass,  shoes  which  ‘they  make  of  their 
deer  skin  worn  out  ’ ,  R.  W.  Peq.  mtick- 
asons,  Stiles.  Abn.  mkessen,  pi.  -nar; 
ne-mekessen,  mon  soulier;  ne-makseneke, 
j’en  fais.  Micm.  m’keshen,  pi.  -nel. 
Chip,  (pi.)  makisinan  (mekisiniked,  shoe¬ 
maker),  Bar.  ;  mukesin,  pi.  -nun,  Howse. 
Cree  muskesin,  pi.  -es'ind.  ] 
momanch,  moomansh,  adv.  at  times, 
now  and  then,  often,  Prov.  7,  12;  Judg. 
13,  25;  Matt.  17,  15;  at  intervals. 

[Cree  mummain,  here  and  there  one.] 
momonchu.  See  mamonchu,  he  moves 
about. 

momone,  (it  is)  ‘freckled’;  momdne 
chohki,  ‘it  is  a  freckled  spot’,  Lev.  13, 
39. 

momonehtaiiau  and  momontaii,  v.  t. 
an.  he  makes  sport  of,  mocks  at,  de¬ 
rides  (him),  Neh.  4,  1;  pi.  -taiiAog,  2 
Chr.  36, 16;  suppos.  momontauont,  when 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


63 


momonehtatiau,  etc. — continued. 

he  mocks  at,  mocking,  Gen.  21,  9;  Job 
12,  4. 

momonesu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  spotted,  is 
black  or  dark  colored  here  and  there,  in 
spots  or  stripes.  Freq.  distrib.  of  mco- 
esu,  he  is  black;  pi.  mdmonesuog,  they 
are  ‘grisled’,  Gen.  31,  12;  suppos.  md- 
monesit;  pi.  part,  -sitcheg,  ‘speckled’, 
Gen.  30,  32,  39  ( weenu  momoeesit,  when 
he  is  round-about  dark-marked,  ‘ring 
streaked’,  Gen.  31,  8).  Cf.  momcoechoh- 
kesu. 

momonowantam,  mamonau-,  v.  i.  he  is 
scornful,  a  scorner,  Prov.  9,  7,  8;  15,  12. 
Adv.  -lamwe,  2  Chr.  30,  10. 
momontunnum,  mamont-,  v.  t.  he  puts 

it  in  motion,  moves  (it)  about:  - 

nippe,  he  ‘troubled  the  water’,  John 
5,  4;  suppos.  mamonlunuk  wussissittao- 
nash,  when  he  moves  his  lips,  Prov. 
16,  30. 

momounog-,  n.  pi.  the  eyebrows;  3d  pers. 
ummomounog  (accus.  -oh,  Lev.  14,  9), 
his  eyebrows. 

[Abn.  manmahn,  sourcil,  le  poil,  etc. 
Del.  mamawon,  Zeisb.] 
momcoecholikesu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  black- 
spotted,  has  dark  spots;  pi.  momcoechoh- 
kesuog  ( mohmcoe  cholikesuog,  they  are 
speckled,  Gen.  31,  12);  suppos.  pi. 
(part. )  momooechohkesitcheg,  (when  they 
are)  spotted,  Gen.  30,  32;  speckled,  Gen. 
31,8.  From  mooi  (it  is  dark  colored), 
with  freq.  or  distrib.  reduplication,  and 
chohkesu,  he  is  spotted  or  has  a  spot, 
[monae,  mconae,  there  is  much,  there 
is  abundance;]  pi.  nano  mamaash,  they 
are  increased,  Jer.  5,  6;  monaash,  they 
are  many,  ibid.;  suppos.  monak,  when 
there  is  abundance,  when  it  abounds, 
Ps.  72,  7;  1  Pet.  1,  3;  yeu  monak,  ‘this 
great  store’,  2  Chr.  31,  10;  with  an. 
subj.  monaog,  (they  are)  many  persons 
(El.  Gr.  8),  Ex.  1,  9;  Dan.  12,  4;  Matt. 
7,  14;  suppos.  pi.  monaclieg,  Is.  60,  5;  2 
Cor.  4, 15;  suppos.  3d  pi.  monahettit,  when 
they  ‘  are  increased  ’ ,  become  many, 
Hos.  4, 7.  Vbl.  n.  monaonk,  abundance, 
Deut.  33,  19. 

[Narr.  vmssaume  maunduog,  ‘they  are 
too  full  of  people.’] 


monak,  moonak  (in  compounds,  -onak, 
-onagk,-6nag) ,  n.  (1)  cloth,  2  Sam.  20, 12; 
Matt,  9,  16;  Judg.  16, 14:  hcishabp-onak, 
linen  cloth,  Mark  14,  51;  vmsk-onagk, 
new  cloth,  Mark  2,  21;  womp-onak, 
(white)  cloth,  Deut.  22,  17;  kuh]jogk- 
onag,  a  thick  cloth,  2  K.  8,  15  ( mooak 
monag,  black  cloth,  C.,  but  better,  moo- 
6nak ).  (2)  a  garment  of  cloth,  as  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  ne  dqut  or  hogkooonk  (cf. 
ohkoori),  a  covering  of  skins:  ‘coat’, 
Dan.  3,  21;  ‘cloak’,  Matt.  5,  40;  ‘vest¬ 
ure’,  Dan.  22,  12. 

[Narr.  mai'mek,  ‘an  English  coat  or 
mantle’,  R.  W.  107.] 

monakenelxheau,  v.  caus.  trans.  he 
makes  cloth,  he  weaves;  pi.  -heaog,  Is. 
59,  5;  with  inan.  obj.  monakenehteau,  he 
weaves  (it).  N.  agent,  monakenehteaen 
(indef.  - enin ),  one  who  weaves,  a 
weaver,  Ex.  35,  35;  Job  7,  6. 

[Narr.  ko-maunekunnuo,  have  you  any 
cloth?] 

monanehteau,  v.  i.  he  is  merciful,  Num. 
14,  18:  num-monanehteam,  I  am  merci¬ 
ful;  intens.  num-momonaneleam,  Jer.  3, 
12.  Vbl.  n.  monaneteaonk,  mercy,  Ex. 
34,  7;  Neh.  9,  32;  Ps.  145,  8.  Cf.  kit- 
tea  m  ontea  nu  mail . 

monanumau,  v.  t.  an.  he  compassion¬ 
ates,  is  merciful  to  (him);  nummond- 
num,  I  show  mercy  to,  Ex.  33,  19;  im- 
perat.  monanumonch,  Zech.  7,  9;  with 
suffix  monanumeh,  be  merciful  to  me, 
Ps.  119,  132. 

monaskcotasq-uash,  n.  pi.  melons, 
Num.  11,  5  ( mconosket&muk ,  cucumbers, 
C. ) .  See  askootasq. 

monasquisseet.  See  *rnanusqussed-ash , 
beans. 

monat,  (it  is)  abundant,  (there  is)  much, 
Ps.  37, 11 ;  woh  monat,  ( it)  might  abound, 

2  Cor.  4,  15;  moocheke  monat,  exceed¬ 
ingly  abundant,  1  Tim.  1, 14;  pish  monat, 
it  shall  be  increased,  i.  e.  become  abun¬ 
dant,  Dan.  12,  4;  pi.  monatasli,  Prov.  15, 
16;  2  Chr.  9,  9.  From  monaohteaa. 

[Narr.  mdunetash,  ‘great  store’, 
abundance.] 

monchanamukqussu,  v.  i.  he  does  that 
which  is  wonderful,  he  works  wonders;, 
with  an.  obj.  -qussuau,  he  does,  etc.,. 


64 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


monchanamukqussu — continued, 
to  (him);  whence,  n.  agent,  -qusmaen, 
a  ‘  wonderful  one’,  Is.  9,  6.  From  mon- 
chcinamuk,  suppos.  Oi  mohchanamau  (t. 
an.  form  of  mohchanatam) ,  and  ussu. 
monchanatam,  -um,  v.  i.  (and  t.  inan.) 
he  is  astonished,  he  wonders  (at  it),  he 
is  surprised,  Is.  59,  16;  pi.  -amwog, 
Matt.  22,  33  (  —  chepshaog,  Mark  11,18); 
monchantash,  ‘marvel  (thou)’,  John  3, 

7  (  —  muhchantash,  Mass.  Ps.).  Vbl.  n. 
-tamooonk,  wonder,  amazement,  Acts  3, 
10;  and  causat.  -tamwahuwaonk,  caus¬ 
ing  wonder,  a  marvel,  a  wonder,  Deut. 
13,  1,  2.  From  mohch-u,  he  moves, 
with  formative  of  verbs  of  mental  ac¬ 
tivity,  he  is  startled  or  disturbed  in 
mind. 

monchanau,  v.  t.  an.  (1)  he  moves  (him), 
carries  (him)  away,  Gen.  31,  18;  with 
affixes,  1  Sam.  30,  2.  (2)  he  conducts  or 
guides  (him):  um-monchan-uh  en  may- 
ut,  he  guided  them  in  the  way,  Gen. 
18,  16. 

[Narr.  mahchase,  be  my  guide  (im- 
perat.,  =  monchussish ,  from  monchussu, 
v.  i.  act.  he  acts  as  guide,  he  guides); 
kum-mahchan-ish,  I  will  conduct  you.] 
morichu,  v.  i.  he  goes,  se  movet  (denot¬ 
ing  merely  the  act  of  going,  without 
reference  to  its  end  or  aim ) ;  hence,  he 
departs,  goes  away,  removes,  Matt.  25, 
18;  Gen.  24,  10:  num-monchem,  I  go, 
Matt.  21,  30;  pret.  num-monchip,  I  went, 
Jer.  13,  5;  suppos.  noli  monchit,  he  who 
goes,  Jer.  22,  10;  iinperat.  monchisli; 
pi.  monchek,  go;  freq.  mamonchu,  q.  v. 
Related  to  aindeu,  he  departs  (?). 
Cf.  Sansk.  manch  (ire,  se  movere); 
month,  math  (commovere,  agitare); 
Lat.  motus,  mittere.] 

[Narr.  mcmchH  (pres,  defin.  =  rnon- 
chu-i),  he  is  gone;  mauchish,  be  going 
( imperat. ) ;  num-mauchhnin,  I  go.  Abn. 
ne-maiitsi,  je  vais;  ne-mari  neda,  je  vais 
lit.  Cree  dchee-oo,  he  moves.  Chip. 
aunjeh,  Howse  194;  ma'ja,  he  goes, 
Sch.  ii,  469.  Del .matschiu,  he  is  gone; 
suppos.  matschit,  Zeisb.] 
moneaii,  monneaii,  monunneaii,  v.  t. 
an.  he  looks  (intently)  at,  observes 
(him);  um-monunneau-oh,  he  looked  on 
them,  2  K.  2,  24;  imperat.  (affix)  mon- 
neah,  look  thou  on  me,  Ps.  119, 132;  pi. 


1  moneaii,  etc. — continued. 

monneiek,  monunneiek,  look  ye,  Job  6, 28; 
suppos.  moneauont,  Matt.  5,  28.  With 
inan.  obj.  m&ninneam,  mdnunneaum,  he 
looks  at  (it),  Ps.  104,  32;  Ezek.  21,  21; 
Ex.  14,  24;  suppos.  noli  moninneog,  he 
who  looks,  etc.,  Num.  21,  8.  Cf.  kuh- 
kinnearn. 

monetu,  v.  i.  he  is  a  diviner,  a  magician. 
Vbl.  n.  monetuonk,  ‘divination’,  Deut. 
18,  10.  Cf.  mamontam. 

[Narr.  mauiwtu,  a  conjurer,  R.  W.] 
monko.  See  mo  and  ko. 
monneaii.  See  moneaii. 
monoi.  See  moondi,  it  is  deep. 

|  monomansuonk,  vbl.  n.  a  vision,  Dan. 
8,  17,  26;  10,  14. 

|  *monoowau,  he  hisses;  infin.  maunu- 
wdnat,  to  hiss,  C. 

monopuhpeg,  n.  a  trumpet,  Neh.  4,  20; 
Ps.  150,  3:  pulipequash  monopuhpeg, 
sound  a  trumpet,  Matt.  6,  2.  Cf.  puli- 
pegk. 

monsh,  n.  a  cock  or  hen,  Luke  22,  34, 
60,  61  ( mdnish ,  ndmpash,  a  hen,  a  cock, 
C. ).  R.  Williams  (p.  56)  has  “chicks,  a 
cock,  or  hen:  a  name  taken  from  the 
English.” 

monteag,  nothing.  See  malta. 
monunks,  n.  the  ash  tree,  Is.  44,  14. 

[Abn.  ahgmakS,  frene.  Chip,  papdg- 
imak.  ( Baraga  has  agimak,  ash  tree  [cf. 
agiin,  snowshoe],  and  three  “other 
kinds”,  viz.  gawakomij,  papagimak,  and 
wissagak. )  Del.  pachgammak,  black  ash 
tree,  Zeisb.] 

monunneaii.  See  mdneaii. 
mos,  “a  word  signifying  futurity”  (El. 
Gr.  20),  corresponding  to  the  auxil¬ 
iary  ‘must’  or  ‘shall’  before  a  verb  in 
the  indicative:  mos  nunnup,  I  must  die, 
Deut.  4,  22;  mooche  mos  nut-ahquonta- 
mau,  how  often  shall  I  forgive  him? 
Matt.  18,  21;  ne  mos  nnih,  it  must  needs 
be  so,  Mark  13,  7.  See  mahche;  rno. 
i  [Narr.  moce,  mesh:  mesh  noonchem 
peyaum,  I  could  not  come;  moce-nanip- 
peeam,  I  will  come  by  and  by.] 
moskeht,  maskeht,  n.  grass  (El.  Gr. 
10) ,  Gen.  1,  11 ;  Is.  40,  7,  8;  pi.  -ehtuash, 
Dan.  4,  25,  32,  33;  ‘ pasture’,  1  Chr.  4, 39, 
40;  moskehtuash,  ‘hay’;  woskoshkehtuash 
( =  vmxke - oskehtuash ) ,  ‘tender  grass’, 
Prow  27,  25;  mish-ashkehtuai  ne  ohte, , 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


65 


moskeht,  maskeht — continued. 

‘there  was  much  grass  in  that  place’, 
John  6,  10  ( oskosk ,  grass;  mosketuash, 
hay,  C. ).  Ybl.  subst.  moskehtuoo,  he 
is  grass,  Is.  40,  6.  Dim.  moskehtuemes, 
El.  Gr.  12.  From  askehteau,  it  is  (lit.  it 
makes,  caus.  inan.)  green,  with  the 
indeterm,  prefix,  that  which  is  green. 
See  aske. 

[Narr.  maskituash,  grass  or  hay.  Abn. 
meskikSar,  herbes.  Del.  masgik,  Zeisb.] 
moskehtu,  mask-,  n.  (the  same  word 
as  the  preceding)  is  used  for  medicine, 
physic,  i.  e.  herbs;  onatuh  moskehtu-ut, 
like  a  medicine;  iyan-askehtuash,  many 
(kinds  of)  medicines,  Jer.  46,  11. 

[Narr.  maskit,  physic.  Chip.  mash- 
kiki  \_-keke],  Bar.] 

mosogque,  adv.  andadj.  adhering,  stick¬ 
ing  to  [v.  i.  it  sticks  close,  adheres], 
Prov.  18,  24;  Jer.  42, 16.  Cf.  mussinum, 
he  touches;  mississin,  it  touches, 
mosogquehteau,  v.  caus.  inan.  he  makes 
it  adhere,  joins  it  to;  imperat.  mosog- 
queteoush,  join  them  together,  Ezek. 
37,  17. 

mosogqunnum,  v.  t.  (inan.  obj.)  he  joins 
or  puts  together;  suppos.  mosogqunuk, 
when  he  joins  together,  Matt.  19,  6. 
See  mussuhkomoo. 

mosq,  masq,  mashq,  n.  a  bear,  Prov. 
17,  12;  Amos  5,  19;  1  Sam.  17,  34,  36 
( moshq ,  C.).  The  base  is  the  same  as 
that  of  naosquodtamunat,  to  lick,  and  the 
name  signifies  ‘the  licker,’  from  the 
bear’s  habit  of  licking  his  fore  paws 
(see  the  Abnaki  below);  [or  is  it  from 
(Cree)  mdkwa-num,  he  squeezes  (hugs)? 
(Howse  93).]  Cf.  *avxiusseus;  *pauku- 
nawaw. 

[Narr.  mosk,  or  paukunawaw.  Muh. 
mquoh,  Edw.  Del.  machk,  Zeisb.  Abn. 
aSessSs,  ours;  m8sk8a8irtseh8s8  [=m£s- 
kSa-Sretsiar] ,  il  se  leche  les  pattes;  mes- 
k8e,  peau  d’ours.  Chip,  makivd  ( muk - 
wah,  Howse).  Cree  muskwah.] 
mounaii.  See  mianau. 
mounum,  v.  t.  he  gathers  together  (inan. 
obj.);  kum-vi&unum,  thou  gatherest, 
Matt.  25,  24.  Freq.  mohmounum.  Vbl. 
n.  mounumoonk,  mouunnumooonk,  (a 
gathering,)  tribute,  custom,  1  K.  9,  21; 
Matt.  17,  25.  With  an.  obj.  mianau, 
q.  v.  Cf.  mukkinnum. 

B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 5 


mounum — continued. 

[Narr.  mmmnnee,  he  gathers  (fruit,  or 
inan.  obj.);  mowinnauog,  they  gather. 
Abn.  manSiSi,  ensemble;  ne-mah8ene- 
men,  je  les  mets  ensemble;  maSine,  il 
cueille,  il  ramasse.  Del.  mawuni,  as¬ 
sembled,  Zeisb.] 
moushag.  See  mcooshog,  iron, 
moxinash,  n.  pi.  See  mokus,  a  shoe, 
moyeu.  See  man,  ordure, 
moyeu,  moeu.  See  miae,  together, 
mooche,  as  an  auxiliary  of  the  future 
tense,  expresses  obligation  or  necessity 
(= mos  cotche);  mooche  nuttabuttantamau- 
6mun  God,  ‘we  are  bound  to  thank 
God’,  2  Thess.  1,  3;  mooche  ken pannup- 
wusham,  ‘thou  art  [must]  pass  over’, 
etc.,  Deut.  2,  18  (cf.  ncoche  mos,  it  must 
needs  be,  Matt.  18,  7);  mooche  mos  nut- 
ahquontamau,  (how  often)  must  I  for¬ 
give  him?  Matt.  18,  21.  Cf.  mos;  cache. 

[Quir.  mauche,  there  must  be,  Pier.] 
mcocheke,  “a  word  signifying  more, 
much,”  used  to  express  degrees  of 
comparison,  El.  Gr.  15;  anue  mco¬ 
cheke,  much  more,  Rom.  5,  9;  ‘more 
exceedingly’,  Gal.  1, 14;  nano  mcocheke, 
more  and  more,  Mark  15,  14;  mooclieke 
mcocheke,  exceedingly,  very  much,  Gen. 
17,  2,  6,  20;  mcocheke  onk,  more  than, 
Matt.  10,  37  ( mcochekeyeuuk ,  excess¬ 
ively,  C.). 

mcochekohtau,  v.  t.  he  has  more,  adds 
to  his  possession  of  (it);  noh  maoche- 
kohtunk  (suppos.)  wahteauonk,  mcoche- 
\  kohtau  unkquanumcoonk,  he  who  increas- 
eth  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow,  Eccl. 
1,  18. 

mooee.  See  mcoi,  ordure, 
mcoi,  (it  is)  black,  El.  Gr.  13;  dark 
colored,  Matt.  5,  36;  Esth.  1,  6;  pi. 
maoiyeuash,  Jer.  4,  28  (not  mcoeseuash, 
as  in  El.  Gr.  13,  by  typographical 
error  probably).  With  an.  subj.  mcoesu 
[v.  adj.  an.  he  is]  black  or  dark  colored; 
pi.  mcoesuog,  El.  Gr.  13. 

[Narr.  m&wi,  sucki,  black;  mowesu,  a 
black  man.] 

mroi,  mroee,  moyeu,  n.  ordure,  dung, 
Ezek.  4,  12;  1  K.  14,  10;  um-moyeu, 
their  dung,  2  K.  18,  27;  um-maoe,  Lev. 
4,  11;  8,  17. 

moomansh.  See  momansh. 


66 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  26 


mcomcoskomau  [=  mcomcoskcoaii'!] :  um- 
mcommskom-6uh}  they  murmured  against 
him,  Ex.  15,  24  ( num-mcomooskamxun ,  I 
murmur,  C. ). 

mcomcoskcoau,  -kcowaii,  v.  t.  an.  he 
murmurs  at  (him);  pi.  -koowaog,  they 
murmur,  Ps.  106,  25;  suppos.  pi.  nag 
mcomcDskarwacheg,  they  who  murmur, 
Is.  29,  24.  Ybl.  n.  mcomooskcowaonk , 
-queyeuonk,  a  murmuring,  John  7,  12 
( mcomooskummaonk ,  Ex.  16,  7). 
mcomooskquenaii  [=  moomcoskooau ?]  : 
mcomcosquendog,  they  murmur  at  (him), 
Ex.  17,  3  ( mcomaosquencowonat ,  to  mut¬ 
ter,  C.). 

[Abn.  ne-mSskSerdam,  je  gronde,  suis 
fache;  ne-m8sk8erman,  je  le  gronde.] 
mcDmoDsqheau,  freq.  or  intens.  of  mcos- 
qheau,  he  provokes  (him)  to  anger. 
Vbl.  n.  pass,  moomcosquettuonk,  provo¬ 
cation  (received),  1  K.  21,  22. 
mcomoosqueuttam,  v.  i.  he  murmurs, 
mutters,  grumbles.  Perhaps  not  rightly 
used  in  John  6,  61;  cf.  um-momoskkee- 
lau-ouh,  ‘he  gnasheth  upon  him  with 
his  teeth’,  Ps.  37,  12,  and  num-mau- 
rnmkelunkquog ,  ‘they  gnash  upon  me’, 
etc.,  Ps.  35,  16. 

[Abn.  ne-inahmaskig8etassi,  je  fais  des 
grimaces.  ] 

mconae.  See  rnonde. 

*moonaeecli  (?),  a  dish  or  tray,  C. 
mconaeu.  See  moonoi. 
mranak.  See  monak,  cloth, 
moonoi,  -naeu,  (it  is)  deep,  Ps.  140,  10; 
Eccl.  7,  24;  Lam.  3, 55;  as  n.  the  deep, 
Gen.  1,  2;  a  gulf,  Luke  16,  26;  depth, 
Eph.  3,  18;  moonoi  onk,  it  is  deeper  than, 
Job  11,8.  Adv.  and  adj.  mconoe  nippe- 
ash,  deep  waters,  Ezek.  34,  18;  suppos. 
moouoag,  when  it  is  deep;  pi.  (with 
intens.  redupl. )  mamoonoagish,  (very) 
deep  places,  Ps.  135,  6.  In  compound 
words  sometimes  conoi-,  conou-. 
mconokoi,  n.  a  valley,  Deut.  8,  7.  See 
oonouhkoi. 

*mconopagwut,  in  deep  waters,  Mass. 
Ps.,  Ps.  69,2. 

mcoohshog.  See  moodshog. 

*mooonk,  vbl.  n.  weeping,  C.  See  mail. 
moooshog,  mcoohshog,  moushag,  n. 
iron,  Num.  31,  22;  Is.  60, 17;  1  Tim.  4,  2. 
Adj.  and  adv.  -shogque,  -shagque,  of  iron, 
Deut.  8, 9;  Is.  45, 2,  etc.  Cf.  missehchuog; 
mohshipsq. 


moooshog,  etc. — continued. 

[Narr.  moivashuck.  Abn.  san'ghere, 
eela  est  dur;  cf.  siogke,  soggohlunk  (the 
name  apparently  signifies  black  metal; 
cf.  *  wompohshog) .  Del.  suck-achsun , 
[black  stone,]  iron,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  29.] 
mooosketomp,  n.  a  black  man  [?],  El. 

Gr.  15.  Cf.  wosketomp. 
mcopau,  -p6,  -paog  (?),  n.  the  cater¬ 
pillar,  1  K.  8,  37;  2  Chr.  6,  28;  Joel  1,  4; 
2,  25;  assamau  mcopoh  (accus. ),  he  gives 
food  to  the  caterpillar,  Ps.  78,  46  ( mat - 
paut,  Mass.  Ps. ). 

moos,  n.  The  name  of  the  moose  (Cervus 
alces,  L. )  is  used  by  Eliot  in  the  pi.; 
mcosoog  for  ‘fallow  deer’,  1  K.  4,  23; 
“moos,  a  beast  bigger  than  a  stag,”  etc., 
Smith’s  Descr.  of  N.  E.  (1616).  “Which 
the  salvages  call  tunose” ,  Morton’s  N.  E. 
Canaan.  “The  beast  called  a  moose’1, 
Wood’s  N.  E.  Prospect.  The  plural 
indicates  moosco,  or  mcosu,  as  the  orig¬ 
inal  form  of  the  singular,  a  name  given 
to  the  animal  from  his  habit  of  strip¬ 
ping  the  lower  branches  and  bark  from 
trees  when  feeding;  moos-u,  ‘he  trims’ 
or  ‘cuts  smooth’,  ‘he  shaves.’  See 
mcosum. 

[Narr.  mods;  pi.  -soog.  Abn.  m8s; 
pi.  -sak.  Chip,  mom  (Bar.) ;  moz,  mooze 
(Sch.  n,  464).  Cr eemongsda.  Menom. 
monsh.  ] 

mcosi,  (it  is)  smooth,  primarily  made 
smooth  (by  cutting?);  bald,  C. ;  mco- 
cheke  mcosi  onk  pummee,  smoother  than 
oil,  Prov.  5,  3;  mcoseu  kus-sequnukqnog, 
they  leave  thee  bare,  Ezek.  16,  39; 
moose  qitssukquanesash,  smooth  small 
stones,  1  Sam.  17,  40;  mcos-ompskquehtu, 
among  the  smooth  stones,  Is.  57,  6. 
Adj.  inan.  \_maosieu~\  mcosiyeu;  pi .  -yeuash, 
Is.  40,  4. 

mcosompskinausu,  it  is  paved,  a  pave¬ 
ment  [i.  e.  an  extension  of  smooth 
stones,  moosi-ompsk-kin-usm ],  Esth.  1, 6. 
mcosompsq,  a  smooth  stone;  mcosomp- 
squehtu,  among  the  smooth  stones,  Is. 
57,  6;  intens.  mamossompsquchtu  grav¬ 
el’),  Is.  48,  19. 

mcDsontupau,  -ppco,  v.  i.  he  is  bald  [on 
the  forepart  of  the  head],  ‘he  is  fore¬ 
head-bald’,  Lev.  13,  41  (cf.  mukukkon- 
tupau,  he  is  quite  bald,  his  head  is 
bare).  Ybl.  n.  -onluppaonk,  baldness, 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


67 


mcosontupau,  -ppco — continued. 

Jer.  47,  5;  Mic.  1,  16  ( musantip ,  a  bald 
head,  C.). 

[Del.  mo  schant  pe  u,  Zeisb.] 
mcosqheali,  -quehbeaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  pro¬ 
vokes,  vexes  (him);  infin.  2d  pers.  sing. 
kum-mcosqheoonat,  Lev.  18,  18.  Freq. 
mcommsqheau,  q.  v. 

mcosuhq,  n.  a  fly;  pi.  -quog,  Ps.  78,  45. 
Dimin.  moosesuhq-uog,  Ps.  105,  31.  For 
mooi-sogke,  black  biter  (? ) .  Cf.  sogkemas, 
gnat. 

[Chip,  amonssag  (pi.),  little  bees  or 
flies,  Bar.;  missisawk,  misisauk,  wasp.] 
mcosum,  v.  t.  [he  cuts  smooth]  he 
smooths  (his  head),  he  shaves  off  or 
removes  (his  hair  or  beard),  ‘he  polls 
his  head’,  2  Sam.  14,  26;  pish  mcosum 
um-meesunk,  ‘he  shall  shave  off  his 
hair’,  Lev.  14,  8;  imperat.  mcosumush, 
‘cut  off  thy  hair’,  ‘poll  thy  head’,  Jer. 
7,  29;  Mic.  1, 16;  suppos.  mcosuk,  when 
he,  etc.,  2  Sam.  14,  26.  With  an.  obj. 
muswau  (for  mcosehheau,  causat.?),  he 
outs  or  makes  smooth  (an  an.  obj.); 

- - *  vmh-hogkuh,  he  shaves  himself, 

Lev. 13, 33; - shepsoh,  he  shears  sheep, 

Gen.  31, 19;  38, 13.  Caus.  inan.  mooseh- 
teciu,  he  makes  it  smooth;  suppos. 
mcositteunk,  when  he,  etc.,  Is.  28,  25. 
Intrans.  act.  maosu,  he  smooths,  cuts  or 
trims  smooth. 

[Abn.  ne-m8si,  je  me  tonds;  je  me 
rase  les  cheveux;  ne-m8sah,  je  le  tonds.] 
mcDsummu  (?),  v.  i.  (adj.)  he  is  jealous; 
num-mcocheke-mcosummuum,  I  am  very 
jealous,  1  K.  19,  10;  suppos.  noli  nico- 
sumont,  he  who  is  jealous,  Num.  5,  14. 
Vbl.  n.  pass,  mcositteamcoonk,  jealousy, 
Is.  42,  13. 

mcDsumwaehquok,  n.  a  razor,  Num. 
8, 7.  From  a  causative,  perhaps  framed 
by  Eliot,  moosumwaehheau,  and  the  gene¬ 
ric  determinative  -quok  (-quog),  si  knife, 
moowhau,  mdh.wh.au,  v.  a.  an.  he  eats 
what  is  alive,  devours,  as  a  beast  of 
prey,  Gen.  49,  27;  1  K.  13,  28;  ummoh- 
whouh,  (the  beast)  devoured  him,  Gen. 
37,  20;  askook  um-mcowhoh,  a  serpent 
bit  him,  Amos  5,  19;  subj.  ne  ivoh  mco- 
whut,  that  (flesh)  which  may  be  eaten, 
Lev.  11,  47;  noh  manvhont,  he  who  eats, 
v.  40;  noh  moohhukque,  ‘he  that  eateth 
me’,  John  6,  57.  Cf.  meetsu. 


mcDwh.au,  mdhwhau  —continued. 

[Narr.  moho,  to  eat  (alive),  R.  W. ; 
cum-mdhucquock,  they  will  eat  you; 
Mohowaugmck  or  Mauquauog,  “the 
Canibals,  or  J Ten-eaters,  up  in  to  the 
West ’ ’  (Mohawks).  Cree  moowdyoo, 
‘he  eats  him’,  Howse.] 
*msickquatash  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  ‘boiled 
corn  whole’  (i.  e.  mo-sohquttahhash,  not 
broken  small  or  pounded?).  See  soh- 
quttahham.  When  broken,  sohquttah- 
hash  without  the  prefix.  Hence  the 
common  name  succotash,  improperly 
applied,  however,  to  the  unbroken 
corn. 

[Abn.  mesikStar,  ble  entier,  qui  n’est 
pas  pile.  Del.  mesittewa.il,  boiled  corn 
whole,  Zeisb.] 
msque.  See  musqui,  red. 
msqueheonk.  See  musqueheonk. 
msqui.  See  musqui,  red. 
m’tah.  See  inetah. 

*muckko-wheesce  Peq. ),  the  whip¬ 
poorwill,  Stiles. 

*muckquetu  (Narr.),  he  is  swift;  kum- 
mdmmuckquete,  you  are  (very)  swift, 
R.  W. 

mugquomp,  mugwomp,  n.  a  captain, 
Mark  6,  21;  Dan.  2, 15;  Luke  22,  52;  an 
officer,  1  K.  2,  9;  2  Chr.  13,  12;  ‘duke’, 
Gen.  36,  40-43;  augm.  mummugquomqo, 
Acts  5,  26;  kelichemugquomp,  chief  cap¬ 
tain,  Gen.  21,  22  (kehchum-,  Acts  21, 
31;  kitchum-,  v.  33;  pi.  kehchimmug- 
quompaog,  Rev.  6,  15)  [ umukquompae , 
valiantly,  C.].  =  mogki-omp,  great 

man  (?). 

[Narr.  muckquomp-auog,  captains  or 
valiant  men.  ] 

muhhog  [  =  m ’ hogk] ,  n.  the  body,  El. 
Gr.  9;  Matt.  10,  28;  kuhhog,  thy  body; 
umhhog,  his  body;  muhhogkunk,  n.  col¬ 
lect.  (an  indef.  number  of)  dead  bodies, 
corpses,  Nah.  3,  3.  See  -hog. 
muhkont,  mohkont,  n.  a  leg,  El.  Gr. 
10;  Is.  47,  2;  pi.  -tasli,  Prov.  26,  20;  3d 
pers.  wuhkontash,  his  legs,  Dan.  2,  33. 

[Narr.  mohkont-ash.  Abn.  Skaht,  son 
jambe.] 

muhkos,  muhkas,  n.  a  nail,  a  claw, 
talon,  or  hoof;  pi.  -kossog;  wuhkassoh, 
his  nails  (accus.  -soh,  Deut.  21,  12); 
Dan.  4,33;  7,  19;  kuhkossog,  thy  hoofs, 


68 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


muhkos,  rmilikas — continued. 

Mic.  4, 13;  Horsese-kossog,  horses’  hoofs, 
Judg.  5,  22.  See  mukqs  and  uhqude. 

[Narr.  mokdssuck,  nails.  Abn.  mekas; 
pi.  -sak;  3d  pi.  Skdmr.  Del.  muckoos, 
awl,  nail,  Zeisb.] 
muhkos.  See  mdhkussa,  a  coal, 
muhpanag.  See  mohpanag,  breast, 
muhpegk.  See  mohpegk,  a  shoulder, 
muhpeteog,  -eag,  n.  a  rib,  Gen.  2,  22 
( mehpeteak ,  C.);  3d  pers.  wuhpeleog  and 
uhpeieog,  Gen.  2,  21;  pi.  -gash,  Dan.  7,  5. 

[Narr.  peteadgon,  petedgon.  Abn.  ne- 
pigdigan,  ma  c6te,  mon  c6te;  3d  pers. 
8pigdigan.  ] 

muhpit,  n.  an  arm  ( mehp'it ,  C.) ;  pi. 
-pittenash,  El.  Gr.  10;  2d  pers.  kuhpit; 
3d  pers.  wuhpit;  pi.  -ittenash,  Gen.  49, 24. 

[Narr.  wuppiitene,  -enash,  (his)  arm, 
arms.  Abn.  pedin,  bras;  ne-pedin,  mon 
bras.] 

muhpco,  v.  impers.  it  snows  ( mavrpaw , 
Wood);  pres.  def.  muhpcdi,  it  is  snow¬ 
ing  ( muhpoowi ,  it  snows;  sun  muhpco,  \ 
does  it  snow?  C.).  Adv.  and  adj. 
muhpcoe  kesukod,  a  snowy  day,  1  Chr. 
11,  22.  Cf.  *sochepo. 

[Cree  mispoon;  suppos.  mispook.~\ 
muh.puh.kuk.  See  muppuhkuk,  a  head, 
muhpuhkukquanitch,  -nutch,  n.  a 
finger  or  finger’s  end;  uhp-,  the  tip  of 
his  finger,  Luke  16,  24;  pi.  -nitcheash, 
fingers,  Dan.  5,  5.  For  muppuhkukque- 
umnnutch,  head  of  (his)  hand, 
muhpuhkukquaseetash,  n.  pi.  the  toes, 
Dan.  2,  41,  42;  3d  pers.  uppuhk-,  his 
toes,  1  Chr.  20,  6.  For  muppuhkukque- 
unmeet-ash,  head  of  (his)  foot  ( muppuh - 
kukquaset,  C. ) .  See  Witequaseet,  the  great 
toe. 

muhpuhkukqut,  (upon  the  head,  as  n.) 
a  helmet  or  covering  for  the  head;  more 
often  with  prefix  of  3d  pers.  uppuhk-, 
Is.  59,  17;  Ezek.  27,  10;  muppuhkukqut 
olitag  (that  which  belongs  on  the  head), 
‘mitre’,  Ex.  28,  39;  pi.  uppuhkukqut 
ahhohlagish,  ‘bonnets’,  v.  40;  Lev.  8, 13. 
mukkatchouks,  mukkut-,  n.  a  son,  ‘a 
man  child’,  1  Sam.  1,  11;  Job  3,  3. 

[Narr.  num-mdckquachucks,  my  son; 
viuckquachuckqubnese,  a  little  boy.  Peq. 
muckachux,  boy,  Stiles.  L.  Island,  ma- 
chuchan,  boy;  machaweeskt  [  =  mv.kkiese, 
El.],  a  little  boy,  S.  Wood.] 


'  mukkee,  n.  r.  scab,  Lev.  13,  7,  8. 

[Abn.  meghi,  gale.] 

mukki,  n.  a  (male)  child;  pi.  mukkiog, 
Ps.  148,  12;  2  K.  2,  24;  Gen.  33,  5;  di- 
min.  mukkies,  a  little,  child,  Prov.  20, 11; 
Matt.  18,  4;  ‘babe’,  Ex.  2,  6  ( mukkoies , 
C. );  pi.  -sog,  Matt.  18,  10.  Yb.  adj. 
mukki hu,  he  is  a  child;  suppos.  mog- 
kiesueon,  when  I  was  a  child,  1  Cor.  13, 
11.  Vbl.  n.  mukkiesucoonk  ( mukkoiesu - 
onk,  C. ),  childhood,  Eccl.  11, 10.  [From 
mukukki.  This  word  has  been  displaced 
by  naumon,  etc.,  in  the  Cree,  Chippewa, 
and  western  Algonquian.  ] 

[Narr.  num-miickiese,  my  son], 
mukkinnum,  magk-,  v.  t.  he  collects  or 
gathers (inan.  objects);  infinit.  -urnunai 
herbs-ash,  to  gather  herbs,  2  K.  4,  39; 
mukkinumcok ,  gather  ye  ( the  tares,  Matt. 
13,  30);  mukkinitch,  let  him  gather 
(the  manna,  Ex.  16,  16);  suppos.  noh 
magunuk,  he  who  gathers  up,  Num.  19, 
10.  Cf.  viounum. 

[Abn.  ne-inegheneman,  je  le  trie.] 
mukkosbqut,  n.  a  plain,  Gen.  11,  2;  13, 
10;  mukoshkut,  Gen.  19,  25.  From  mogki 
and  oshk  ( =  ashkoshki,  green;  m’oskeht, 
grass),  with  the  locative  suffix,  the 
great  grass  place;  mukoshqutde,  plain 
(as  adj.),  Jer.  48,  21. 

[Narr.  micuckaskeete,  a  meadow.  Abn. 
meskikSi  k8,  place  where  grass  is.  Micm. 
m’ skeegooaicadee,  meadow.] 
mukkcokin,  v.  i.  he  bares  himself,  un¬ 
clothes;  imperat.  2d  pi.  mukkcokek,  -eg, 
be  bare,  ‘strip  yourselves’,  Is.  32,  11; 
with  an.  obj.  mukkcokinau,  he  strips, 
makes  (him)  bare;  imperat.  prohib. 
ahque  mukkaokin  matcheku,  do  not  [strip] 
rob  the  poor,  Prov.  22, 22;  suppos.  mag- 
gcokinont;  pi.  -oncheg,  ‘spoilers’,  Jer. 
51,  48.  N.  agent,  mukkajkinnuwaen,  a 
plunderer,  a  robber;  pi.  -enuog,  ‘  extor¬ 
tioners ’,  Is.  16,  4  (suppos.  mukkookin- 
ninvaenuit,  ‘if  he  rob’,  i.  e.  if  he  be  a 
robber,  Ind.  Laws,  xvi). 

[Abn.  ne-meg8gnah,  je  le  pille.] 
mukkukkontup,  n.  a  bald  head,  Lev. 

13,  42  (locat.  -)-  ounit). 
mukkukkontupaii,  v.  i.  he  has  a  bald 
head,  Lev.  13,  40,  42.  Vbl.  n.  -ppaonk, 
baldness,  Is.  3,  24.  Cf.  mcosontupaii. 
mukkutchouks.  See  mukkatchouks. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


mukkuttuk,  n.  the  knee,  Is.  45,  23;  pi. 
-ukquog,  Job  3,  12;  Is.  35,  3;  -3d  pers. 
ukkuttuk,  his  knee.  For  m’quttuk  (from 
quttau-eu,  or  rather  from  the  same  base) , 
that  which  sinks  down  or  goes  down. 
[So,  Ang.  Sax.  cneow,  Goth,  hneigan, 
Engl,  knee,  and  Ang.  Sax.  hnig-an,  incli- 
nare,  incurvare.]  Nish  noli  mukkuttuk 
nauwaeu,  every  knee  bows,  Phil.  2, 10. 

[Abn.  nekedekS,  mon  genou.  Del. 
gulgu,  Zeisb.] 
mukos.  See  mohkussa. 
mukqs,  n.  an  awl,  Ex.  21,  6;  Deut.  15, 
17.  From  uhquueu ,  it  is  pointed.  Cf. 
muhkos. 

[Xarr.  (pi.)  mucksuck,  awl  blades. 
Del.  muckoos,  awl,  nail.] 
mukquoshim,  n.  a  wolf  (El.  Gr.  9), 
Is.  65,  25;  Jer.  5,  6;  mummugquoshum, 
Gen.  49,  27;  mukquisshum,  C.  (who  has 
also  uattoohqussuog,  wolves).  For  muk- 
quoshim  the  Mass.  Ps.  (John  10,  12)  has 
nattcoliqus.  From  mcohwhau,  he  eats 
live  flesh,  with  (- osliim )  the  generic  de¬ 
terminative  of  the  names  of  beasts. 

[Narr.  muckquashim,  pi.  -mwock; 
rnoaitoqus,  a  black  wolf;  natdqus,  a  wolf; 
natdquashunck,  a  wolf-skin  coat.  Peq. 
mucks,  Stiles.  Cb  ip.  rnnh  ing  gun,  me 'em' 
gun,  maw  e  kan  ( maheengun ,  J. ),  Sch. 
n,  464.  Menom.  manh-wawe.  Shawn. 
ni'ivdi  wah.  Mex.  mayaquen  \_qu  =  k]. 
Otomi  muhu .] 

mukquttunk,  n.  the  throat;  kuk-quttunk- 
anit,  to  thy  throat,  Prov.  23,  2.  From 
the  same  root  as  mukkuttuk;  m’quttunk, 
the  going  down  (the  swallow?  or  the 
bending  of  the  head?). 

[Narr.  guttuck.  Abn.  mekStahgan , 
gosier;  3d  pers.  akSdaugan.  Del.  gunta, 
‘swallow  it’,  Zeisb.] 

mukukki,  (it  is)  bare,  bald,  destitute  of 
covering,  Jer.  48,  37. 

[Narr.  muckucki,  bare  (without  nap, 
said  of  cloth).] 

mummishkod,  n.  abundance,  ‘great, 

store’; - meechum,  ‘store of  victual’, 

2  Chr.  11,  11.  From  missi;  augm.  raa- 
missi,  very  great. 

-mungquot,  -quodt,  suppos.  -mungquok, 
the  generic  determinative  of  verbs  of 
smell.  See  asuhmungquodt;  matche- 
mungquot  (it  smells  badly);  weetemung- 
quot  (it  smells  sweetly),  etc. 


69 

*munnannock  (Narr.),  a  name  of  the 
sun  and  of  the  moon,  R.  W.  79.  From 
anogqs,  star  (or  from  its  radical),  with 
a  prefi  x  of  which  the  significance  is  not 
clear  [or  from  munnoh,  island  (?).] 
Mnunnaonk,  n.  the  throat,  C.  (?)  Cf. 
manamau. 

hnunnawhatteaug1  (Narr.),  “a  fish 
somewhat  like  a  herring,”  R.  W. 
Probably  Alosa  menhaden,  Mitch.,  the 
‘bony  fish’,  ‘hard  head’,  or  ‘mun- 
haden’  of  the  fishermen;  called  also 
in  the  northern  parts  of  New  England, 
pauhagen.  Both  names  have  reference 
to  the  use  of  this  and  other  species  of 
herring  as  fertilizers;  munnohquohteau, 
he  manures  or  enriches  the  earth,  and 
Abn.  “pakkikkanh,  on  engraisse  la 
terre,”  whence  “ p8kahgan ,  petit  pois- 
son.” 

munnequomin,  n.  corn  or  grain  when 
growing  or  in  the  field,  Hos.  14,  7;  pi. 
-minneash,  -munneash,  green  ears  of  corn, 
Lev.  2,  14.  (Cf.  missunkquaminneash, 
-munash,  full  ears,  ears  of  corn,  Gen. 
41,  5,  7,  22.)  [Manured  corn  (?).] 
*munnogs,  bowels,  C.  >See  menogkus. 
munnoh,  n.  an  island,  Acts  28,  1;  Rev. 
6,  14;  with  the  locative  affix,  munnoh- 
liannit  ( menoh -,  mimndh-) ,  to,  at,  or  on 
the  island,  Acts  13,  6;  27,  26;  28,  7,  9, 
11;  pi.  -dhhanash,  Ps.  97,  1;  Is.  41,  5. 
Adj.  and  adv.  munnoh-hanne,  of  an  is¬ 
land,  Is.  13,  22;  34,14. 

[Abn.  menahan,  ile;  -han8k,  dans 
l’ile.  Chip,  min  Is,  me  iiiss.  Menom. 
may  nainsh.  Shawn,  men  a  thee.  Del. 
mun  dh  take,  Sch.  ii,  462,  474;  me  na  tey 
(and  -te  ii),  Zeisb.] 

munnohquohteau,  v.  t.  he  enriches  the 
land,  fertilizes,  manures;  pajeh  munno- 
quohteaan,  until  I  dung  it,  Luke  13,  8. 
munnontam.  See  rnanontam,  he  smells  it. 
*munnucks  (Narr.),  the  brant  goose 
(Anser  bernia);  pi.  -suck,  R.  W. 

[Peq.  a’kobyeeze,  brants,  Stiles.  Mass. 
menuks,  a  brant,  C.  ] 

*munnunnug  (Narr. ),  milk.  S eemenin- 
nunk. 

munumuhkemco,  v.  i.  it  rushes  (makes 
a  rushing  sound?);  suppos.  inan.  subj. 
manumuhkemcouk,  when  there  is  a  rush¬ 
ing  (of  mighty  waters),  Is.  17, 12.  Ybl. 
n.  munumulikeonk,  a  rushing,  ibid. 


70 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


*[mununneet  (?),  n.  the  bladder;]  adj. 
-toe  qussuk,  stone  in  the  bladder,  Man.  < 
Pom.  88. 

[Abn.  manSeteti,  manSe,  les  fesses.] 
muppuhkuk,  muhpuhkuk,  n.  a  head, 
Is.  I,  5;  Amos  8, 10.  Rarely  used  with 
the  impers.  prefix;  more  commonly 
(3d  pers. )  uppuhkuk,  (his)  head,  Lev. 
1,4;  3,2;  Job 41,  7;  Ps.  68,  21  (‘scalp’). 
See  -ontup. 

[Narr.  uppaqudntup,  the  head;  rm'ip- 
pacuck,  a  long  lock.] 
muppusk,  -pisk,  n.  the  back,  Rom.  1, 
30;  Jer.  18,  17;  nuppisk,  my  back;  2d 
pers.  kup-;  3d  pers.  uppish,  uppushk; 
uppisquanit,  at,  on,  or  to  the  back,  Prov. 
10,  13;  19,  29;  anaquabeh  hah  nuppis- 
quanxt,  before  and  behind  me,  Ps.  138, 5. 
From  poske,  bare,  uncovered. 

[Narr.  uppusquan,  the  back.  Abn. 
peskSan,  son  dos;  ne-peskSanek,  derriere 
mon  dos;  ne-paski-peskSan-enah,  je  dc- 
couvre  lui,  le  milieu  des  epaules.  Chip. 
pek  ivun',  pe  quoy  nong,  pik  mm.  ] 
*muscbundaug  (Peq. ),  a  lobster,  Stiles.. 
See  *ashaunt. 

*mushoshketomp,  n.  [great  man],  ‘a 
noble  man’,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  4,  46. 
mushoon,  mishoon,  n.  “an  Indian  boat, 
or  canow  made  of  a  pine  or  oak,  or 
chestnut-tree,”  R.  W.  98;  a  boat,  John 
6,  22;  Acts  27,  30;  pi.  -nash,  John  6,  23; 
ut  um-mishcon-ut,  into  the  [his]  boat, 
John  6,  22;  kcomsluon,  thy  boat,  Samp. 
Quinnup.  156;  musshoan,  boat  or  canoe, 
and  peontdem,  C. 

[Narr.  mishoon;  dim.  -memese,  a  little 
canoe.  Abn.  amasSr;  pi.  -8rar,  canot 
de  bois.  Peq.  mesliwe,  Stiles.  Chip. 
chemaun,  Sch. ;  tchiman,  Bar.  Del.  a  mo 
chool,  Zeisb.] 

mushqun,  n.  the  liver:  nushqun,  my 
liver,  Lam.  2,  11;  vmsqun,  wushqun,  his 
liver,  Prov.  7,  23. 

[Chip,  koon,  quoon,  oquoyn,  Sch.  ii, 
458.  Miami  haw  ko  ne.  Shawn,  oh 
hone .] 

muskesuk,  n.  (1)  the  eye,  El.  Gr.  10; 
Job  10,  18;  Matt.  18,  9;  pi.  -ukquash. 
(2)  the  face,  Ezek.  10,  14;  nusk-,  husk-, 
vmskesuk,  my,  thy,  his  face  or  eye. 
(Sansk.  iksh,  videre;  aksha,  oculus. ) 

[Narr.  vmskeesuck  (his)  eye.  Peq. 
skeezucks,  eyes,  Stiles.  Muh.  hkeesque, 


muskesuk — continued, 
eye.  Abn.  w-sisegSk,  ma  face;  8s-,  sa 
face;  ne-tsisek8,  mon  ceil.  Chip,  shkezh 
ig,  skezh  ig,  eye,  face.  Menom.  maisli 
kay  shaick,  eye;  osh  kay  shayko,  (his) 
face.  Shawn,  o  skeis  a  kwee,  (his)  eye. 
Del.  wuschgink,  (his)  face,  Zeisb.] 
muskoau,  v.  i.  he  boasts,  he  speaks 
boastfully,  Ps.  10,  3;  suppos.  2d  pel's. 
ken  mdskowdan,  thou  who  (when  thou) 
boasteth,  Rom.  2,  23;  pi.  (part.)  neg 
mdshdacheg,  they  who  boast,  boasters. 
Vbl.  n.  musk6aonk,  misk-,  boasting, 
muskodtuk,  n.  the  forehead,  Lev.  13, 
42;  nusk-,  kusk-,  uniskodtuk,  my,  thy, 
his  forehead. 

[Narr.  mscdttuck.  Abn.  meskdtegSe, 
front;  3d  pers.  Ssk-.] 
muskon(?),  n.  a  bone;  pi.  -nash,  Prov.  14, 
30;  but  usually  in  3d  pers.  wuskon,  (his) 
bone,  Job  2,  5;  Ezek.  37,  7;  pi.  Judg. 
19, 29  ( wish  kon,  weshkeen,  C. ) .  Cf .  dskon, 
a  horn;  askon,  a  hide,  undressed  skin; 
mishkonontup,  skull. 

[Narr.  wuskdn.  Chip,  okdn,  his  bone- 
Miami  kaw  ne.  Menom.  oh  konne.~\ 
muskon-ontup.  See  mishkondntup. 
muskouantam,  v.  i.  (1)  he  is  boastful, 
Ps.  34, 2.  (2)  he  rejoices,  exults,  is  very 
glad,  Ps.  14,  7;  imperat.  -antash,  rejoice 
thou,  Joel  2,  21;  3d  pers.  -antaj,  let  him 
rejoice,  Ps.  48,  11.  See  muskoau. 
muscotam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  pierces  (it)  with 
an  arrow,  dart,  or  other  sharp  instru¬ 
ment;  .with  remote  an.  obj.  -tamau,  be 
pierces  (it)  to  (him),  makes  (it)  pierce 
(him);  suppos.  masootamaiiut  vmsqun, 
‘  when  a  dart  strikes  through  his  liver’, 
Prov.  7,  23.  The  base  or  primary  verb 
( musoo ,  it  pierces)  is  not  found  in  Eliot; 
massonog  (a  nettle;  masadnock,  R.  W. ) 
is  formed  from  it. 

musquantam,  v.  i.  [musquiantam,  blood- 
minded]  he  is  angry,  Jonah,  4,  1;  2 
Sam.  13,  21;  suppos.  musquantog,  if  he 
be  angry,  when  angry,  Prov.  14, 17;  im¬ 
perat.  prohib.  ahque  musquantash,  be  not 
angry,  Eccl.  7,  9.  Vbl.  n.  act.  -tamcoonk; 
pass,  -nittuonk,  anger.  See  *squdntam. 

[Narr.  num-musquantum,  I  am  angry. 
Abn.  ne-ni8sk8erdam,  je  suis  en  col£re, 
je  suis  fachA  ] 

musquanumau,  v.  t.  an.  he  is  angry  at 
(him),  Lev.  10,  16;  imperat.  prohib. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


71 


musquanumau — continued. 

ahque  musquanum,  do  not  fret  thyself, 
Ps.  37,  1,  7,  8;  ahque  mosquanumeh,  do 
not  be  angry  with  me,  C. 

[Xarr.  kum-musqua'Anam-ish ,  I  am 
angry  with  you.] 

*musquash,  the  muskrat  (Fiber  zibethi- 
cus);  muskquash,  Josselyn’s  Toy.  and 
N.  E.  Rar.  53;  musquassus,  Smith’s 
Deser.  of  X.  E. ;  muskewashe,  Morton’s 
X.  E.  Canaan;  ‘civet  scented  musquash,’ 
Wood’s  X.  E.  Prospect.  [ musqui-oshim , 
red  animal  (?)  or  mcoskou  (?).] 

[Abn.  m8sk8ess8.  Del.  damascus, 
Zeisb.] 

musqueheonk,  msq-,  vbl.  n.  [from 
causat.  musquehheau,  it  makes  him  red, 
it  reddens,]  blood,  Deut.  12,  16,  23; 
Acts  17,  26;  2S,  8;  noosqh-,  my  blood; 
kcosqh-,  thy  blood;  umsq-  or  cosq -,  his 
blood.  Adj.  and  adv.  musqueheongane, 
bloody.  Cf.  *neepuck. 

[Xarr.  rnishqut  and  neepuck,  the  blood; 
misquinash,  the  veins.  Chip,  mis'kwe, 
blood;  us kvjai  aub,  (his)  vein.  Shawn. 
misk  wee,  blood;  m'shks  mail,  vein. 
Menom.  mainh  kee,  blood.  Abn.  mesig- 
8aghes8,  il  est  tout  couvert  de  sang. 
Del.  rnhuk,  blood,  Zeisb.  Gr.  104.] 
musqui,  mishqui,  msqui,  and  -que,  (it 
is)  red,  Ex.  15, 4;  Josh.  24,  6;  Esth.  1,  6; 
suppos.  mosquag,  moshquag,  when  it  is 
red,  Gen.  25,  30;  Ex.  25,  4.  In  comp, 
words,  musqu-,  msqu-;  msquonagk,  -ak, 
red  cloth  or  clothing,  Matt.  27,  28,  31 
(see  m&nak).  With  an.  subj.  (v.  adj.) 
musquem,  (he  is)  red,  Gen.  25,  25;  Zech. 
1,  8. 

[Xarr.  msqui.  Peq.  mesli’piou  [scar¬ 
let?],  Stiles.  Abn.  mkSighen  i8,  cela  est 
rouge.  Cree  mithkw&w,  it  is  red;  miih- 
koo,  blood.  Chip,  misqua,  misquoze  (an. ) ; 
_  radix,  misk,  Sch.  n,  466.  Shawn,  m'sh- 
wd.li  we.  Menom.  mainh  kiew.  Del. 
maehkeu,  v.  adj.  red  (it  is),  Zeisb.] 
musseet,  n.  a  foot;  pi.  -tash,  El.  Gr.  10; 
mis-,  kus-,  vms-seet,  my,  thy,  his  foot; 
vmsseetcooash,  their  feet,  Josh.  3,  15 
( mlsseel,  a  foot,  C.). 

[Xarr.  wussete.  Peq.  kuzseet,  (thy) 
foot,  Stiles.] 

mussegan,  -ekon,  n.  the  loins,  Ezek.  23, 
15;  Xah.  2, 10;  nusseganohtogq-ut,  in  my 
loins,  Ps.  38,  7;  ( nus  sekonohtogq,  ray 


mussegan,  -ekon — continued, 
reins,  Prov.  23,  16);  kus-,  in  or  from 
thy  loins,  Gen.  35, 11;  vMssekonohiogqut 
aoshoh,  in  the  loins  of  his  father,  Heb. 
7,  10. 

mussegen.  See  missegen. 
mussegon,  v.  impers.  it  hails;  as  n.  hail, 
Ps.  148,  8;  78,  48;  missegun,  Rev.  16,21; 
suppos.  missegog,  Is.  32,  19. 

[Abn.  si  kSrai,  il  grele.  Chip,  sesse- 
gan,  Bar.  Cree  seyseytun.  Miami  me 
ze  kwavj.  ] 

musses.  See  um-misses-oh. 
mussi,  whole;  suppos.  (?)  nuk-keteaonk 
ash  mussit,  ‘  my  life  is  yet  whole  ’ ,  2  Sam. 
1,9.  (Xot  found  elsewhere.  The  pri¬ 
mary  meaning  is  ‘great’.  See  missi.) 
mussin.  See  misshi. 
mussinum,  mis-,  mussuAnum,  v.  t.  he 
touches  (it)  [he  smooth-handles  it; 
from  vicosi,  with  the  formative  of  verbs 
denoting  action  performed  by  the 
hand] ;  suppos.  noli  masunuk,  he  who 
touches  it,  Lev.  15,  7,  12;  Amos  9,  5; 
freq.  mohmussunnum,  he  touches  (it) 
often,  he  handles  (it).  Ybl.  n.  mussun- 
numcoonk,  touching,  touch  ( missinu - 
mcoonk,  C.).  With  an.  obj.  rnussu- 
nau  (mis-),  he  touches  (him);  suppos. 
noh  masunont,  he  who  touches  him, 
Lev.  15,  11,  19;  with  inan.  subj.  missis- 
sin  ( -whin,  mus-),  it  touches,  adjoins, 
reaches  quite  to;  missishin  kesukqut,  ‘it 
reached  unto  heaven’,  Dan.  4,  11;  mis- 
sussin  sussipponkomuk,  it  reached  to  the 
wall  of  the  house,  2  Chr.  3,  11, 12;  mis¬ 
sishin  kuhtconog,  the  ship  touches,  is 
aground,  Acts  27,  41. 
mussippeg.  See  mussuppeg. 
mussipsk,  n.  the  ankle;  -kut,  to  the 
ankle,  ankle  deep,  Ezek.  47,  3;  3d  pers. 
wussupskon,  his  ankle  bone,  Acts  3,  7. 
(Strictly  the  back  and  sides  of  the  ankle 
joint;  mussi-poske-oskon,  where  the 
bones  touch  behind.  So,  Abn.  “ne- 
dapsk8’k§e,  mon  cou  derriere,  metabsk8- 
' k§ 'e,  le  derriere  et  les  deux  cotes  du 
cou.”  Cf.  missippuskunnicheg,  wrist 
(the  back  of  the  wrist,  C. ). 
mussisse,  adv.  in  public,  publicly  (?), 
Matt.  1,  19.  Cf.  mdmusse,  mussi. 

[Micm.  m’shet,  tous;  m’sheda,  tous 
ensemble.  Xarr.  missesu,  adj.  an.  the 
whole.  Abn.  messiSi,  mesetsaiSi,  tout 


72 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  C5 


mussisse — continued. 

entier.  Del.  messism,  whole;  me&tsche- 
yeu,  wholly,  entire,  Zeisb.] 
mussissittcon,  n.  a  lip  (missustam,  0. ); 
pi.  -nash,  El.  Gr.  10;  3d  pers.  vmssis-, 
his  lip,  Prov.  12,  19;  17,  4.  For  mus- 
sissi-muttam,  it  is  close  to  the  mouth. 

[Del.  wscheton,  lip,  Zeisb.] 
mussittipuk,  n.  a  neck,  Ps.  75,  5;  Is.  30, 
28  ( missitteippeg ,  C. );  pi.  -kanash,  Judg. 
5,  30;  kussitlipuk,  thy  neck,  Cant.  7,  4; 
low-,  his  neck,  1  Sam.  4,  18;  mussi-t- 
muhpeg  (xippeke,  R.  W.),  joining  the 
shoulders. 

[Narr.  sitchipuck. ] 

mussohquam[in],  missoh-,  mus- 
sunk-,  n.  an  ear  of  ripened  corn,  Lev. 
2,  14;  Mark  4,  28;  pi.  -mimnecish,  -min- 
neash,  Gen.  41,  5,  7;  2  K.  4,  42.  From 
mussoo  (dried),  with  the  formative  of 
verbs  of  growth,  -quam;  mussohquamin, 
it  grows  dry  or  ripens  by  growth. 

[Abn.  mesaskS,  epi  de  File.  ] 
musscoonk,  misscounk,  n.  a  dry  tree, 
Ezek.  17,  24;  20,  47.  Cf.  askunkq  (a 
green  tree);  kishkunk. 

[Abn.  mes8ak8  abdisi,  arbre  sec;  aresk- 
sak8,  arbre  vert,  qui  ne  peut  bruler.] 
mussoopohteau,  v.  i.  (inan.  subj.)  it 
becomes  dry,  ‘it  withers’,  Hag.  1,  4; 
suppos.  -ohtag,  when  it  dries  or  withers, 
Is.  27,  11. 

mussuhkauaii.  See  miskauau. 
mussuh.komoo,  mis-,  v.  t,  he  goes  on 
touching  (it),  Dan.  8,  5;  with  an.  obj. 
-uhkauau,  he  reaches  or  goes  on  to  touch 
(him),  2  Chr.  3,  11. 

[Abn.  ne-sanmenemen,  je  le  touche 
(tango).] 

mussunkquamin.  See  mismnkquamin, 
a  (full)  ear  of  corn, 
mussunnum.  See  mussinum. 
mussuppeg,  mussippeg,  pi.  -pSquash, 
-pegwash,  n.  tear,  Lam.  2, 18;  Mai.  2, 13; 
nus-,  my  tears,  Job  16,  20;  Ps.  6,  6.  Cf. 
missippano  and  -sippaeu. 

[Abn.  mesebig8an\  pi.  -nar,  larrne; 
nSsseblgSani,  j’en  verse.  Del.  suppin- 
quall  (pi.).  ] 

muswaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  pierces  or  wounds 
(him)  with  an  arrow  or  other  missile, 
1  K.  22,  34;  2  Chr.  18,  33;  and  pass,  he 
is  hit  or  wounded,  etc. 


muswaii — continued. 

[Abn.  mesan ,  vel  mes8dans8,  il  est 
blesse  d’une  balle  ou  fieche;  mes8,  il  est 
blesse.] 

mutchaht,  -oht,  n.  a  sinew,  Is.  48,  4; 
pi.  -task,  Job  10, 11 ;  30, 17;  Ezek.  37,  7; 
3d  pers.  miichoht. 

[Abn.  8tset,  nerf  du  corps,  de  l’homme 
ou  des  animaux.  Del.  wtscheet,  sinew.] 
mutchan,  n.  the  nose,  Is.  3, 21 ;  Prov.  30, 
33;  the  muzzle  or  snout  of  an  animal, 
Prov.  11,  22;  nutchan,  kutchdn, umtchdn, 
my,  thy,  his  nose;  ut  wiUch&n-it,  into 
his  nostrils,  Gen.  2,  7. 

[Narr.  wuchaun.  Peq.  kuchijage, 
(thy)  nose,  Stiles.  Abn.  ne-ki  tan,  mon 
nez;  mSsittan,  le  inufle.] 
muttaag,  -agk,  n.  a  standard,  a  banner, 
Ps.  60,  4;  Is.  59,  19;  Jer.  4,  21;  50,  2; 
51,  12;  pi.  -akinash. 

[Abn.  mete8eghen,  etendard.] 
muttaancoog,  -anwog,  [they  are  very 
many],  John  21,  6  (of  ‘the  multitude 
of  fishes’),  Ezek.  47,  10;  Nah.  3,  3; 
v.  i.  from  muttae;  not  used  in  the  sing, 
muttae,  adv.  exceedingly,  very  much, 

very;  - vmnnegen,  (it  is)  exceeding 

good.  Num.  14,  7;  -  mcocheke,  ex¬ 
ceeding  much,  2  Sam.  8,  8;  - wun- 

iietu,  very  beautiful,  2  Sam.  11,2. 
muttannunk,  muttannong  [n.  coll, 
from  muttaeu,  a  very  great  number,  a 
multitude,  an.  or  inan.],  a  thousand; 
neqnt  muttannunk,  one  thousand,  Num. 
31,  4.  Adj.  and  adv.  -ngane;  pi.  an. 
mutiannongan-ogkassuog,  nequt  muttan- 
ong[_ane~\  muttanonganogkussuog,  a  thou¬ 
sand  thousand  (persons),  1  Chr.  21,  5; 
pi.  inan. -ogkodtaxh,  1  Chr.  22, 14.  (See 
-ogkodt-. ) 

[Narr.  n’quitte  mittclnnug,  one  thou¬ 
sand  .  Abn .  rntd  ra,  ten ;  negSd  amkSd  ki, 
one  thousand.  ] 

muttaohke,  muttaok,  n.  the  world, 
Luke  16,  8;  John  14,  27.  For  muttae 
ohke,  very  much  land, 
muttasash,  met-,  n.  pi.  [leggings], 
‘hosen’,  Dan.  3,  21;  ‘greaves’,  1  Sam. 
17,  6;  ‘sandals’,  Mark  6,  9;  muttdssaeh, 
stockings,  C.  Cf.  kaukdanash. 

[Chip,  met 6s,  legging;  (Sag.)  wee  tali 
sun,  (his)  legging.  Menom.  me  teesh 
shon.  Shawn,  mut  a  tdh.  Miami  taw- 
sama.] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


73 


muttasonitch,  n.  the  little  finger;  num- 
mat-,  my  little  finger,  1  K.  12, 10;  2  Chr. 
10,  10.  For  maUci-asuh-nutch  ( menut - 
cheg),  the  last  of  the  hand  [no  hand 
after  (?) ;  last  (or  least)  of  the  hand  (?).] 
muttasons,  n.  the  youngest  son,  Gen. 
42,  13;  2  Chr.  21,  17;  22,' 1;  -oh,  Judg. 
9,5.  From  mat-asuh,  not  after  (?).  See 
the  Abnaki  below. 

[Abn.  ne-medessaiin8i,  je  suis  le  cadet 
de  tous,  ‘posito  quod  nullus  alius  sit.’] 
muttinnohkou,  muttinuhkou,  n.  the 
right  hand;  nutlinnohkou,  my  right 
hand,  Ps.  73,  23;  unit-,  his  right  hand, 
Dan.  12,  7;  ( unninuhkoe  menitcheg,  the 
right  hand,  C.) 

muttinnuhkouneiyeue,  adv.  on  the 
right  hand,  to  the  right,  2  Chr.  23,  10. 

[Narr.  yd  mtunnock,  to  the  right! 
Abn.  arenakai8i,  la  main  droite.] 
muttinwhunutch,  n.  a  finger.  See  ivul- 
tinwhunitch. 

muttompeuk  (?),  -pek,  n.  the  jaw;  3d 
pers.  wvUompeuk,  -pek,  his  jaw,  Judg. 


na,  demonstrative  particle,  there:  na  ut 
(and  nailt),  thereat,  therein,  thereon, 
Is.  42,  11;  Luke  13,  6;  na  wutche,  there¬ 
from,  thence,  hence,  Ex.  11,  1;  na 
oliteau,  there  is,  Eccl.  6,  1;  na  mo,  there 
was,  2  Sam.  2,  17;  Gen.  1,  3.  Cf.  tie, 
nenan,  noh,  nan. 

[Del.  ma,  ‘there  it  is’,  Zeisb.] 
nabo,  nab,  a  particle  which,  “from  10  to 
20,  they  add  before  the  numeral  ’  ’ :  nabo 
nequt,  eleven;  nabo  neese,  twelve,  etc., 
El.  Gr.  p.  14  ( nobo  nes,  twelve,  Mass. 
Ps. ).  Cf.  napanna  and  Chip,  nabino- 
tawan,  ‘he  repeats  his  words’;  nabaan, 
‘he  fastens  it  (or  puts  it)  to  the  end  of 
something,’ Bar.  [From  neepau  (?).] 
[Narr.  piuck-nab-naquit,  eleven ;  piuck- 
nab-neese,  twelve.  Peq.  piug-naubut- 
nuquut,  eleven,  Stiles.  Abn.  -neg8d- 
ahnkdo,  eleven;  nis-ahnkdo,  twelve. 

Chip,  midasswi  ashi  bejig,  eleven ;  - 

ashi  nij,  twelve,  Bar.  Cree  metbtat- 

peyakoo-sdup,  eleven; - neeshoo-sdup, 

twelve,  etc.] 

nabohteai,  n.  dry  land,  Hag.  2,  6.  Cf. 
nunnobohtedou. 


muttompeuk  (?),  -pek — continued. 

15,  15,  16,  19.  Adj.  and  adv.  wutom- 
pukone,  Prov.  30,  14. 

[Del.  ta  warn  pi  can,  the  jawbone, 
Zeisb.] 

mutton,  n.  the  mouth,  El.  Gr.  10;  nut-, 
kid-,  iimttcon,  my,  thy,  his  mouth;  pi. 
-nash;  3d  pi.  wuttconcowoash,  their 
mouths,  Ps.  78,  30;  Heb.  11,  33. 

[Narr.  wuttbne,  (his)  mouth.  Peq. 
kuttoneege,  (thy)  mouth,  Stiles.  Abn. 
ne-d8n,  ma  bouche;  8d8n,  sa  bouche. 
Chip,  nindon,  my  mouth  (Bar.).  Del. 
wdoon,  (his)  mouth,  Zeisb.] 
muttounnussog,  n.  pi.  the  kidneys,  Ex. 
29,  13;  Lev.  3,  4;  the  reins,  Jer.  17,  10; 
nut-,  my  reins,  Ps.  26,  2.  Cf.  umnnus- 
scoog,  testes. 

muttugk,  muttukki,  n.  the  shoulders 
(upper  part  of  the  back);  utnuttukeet, 
on  my  shoulders,  Job  31,  36;  kuttugkd, 
on  thy  shoulders,  Josh.  14,  5;  wuttugkit, 
on  his  shoulders,  Luke  15,  5  (wultukd, 
Judg.  16,  3);  mitik,  a  shoulder,  C. 

-T 

nadtauwompu,  natt-,  v.  i.  he  looks  (for 
the  purpose  of  seeing  some  object, 
looks  for  or  at  an  object;  cf.  nuhquainat, 
to  direct  the  eye  or  look  in  that  or 
this  direction),  1  K.  18,  43;  19,  6  ( nata - 
wompu);  pi.  -puog,  they  look,  2  Sam. 
22,  42.  See  wompu.  With  inan.  obj. 
nadtauwompadtam,  he  looks  for  (it); 
suppos.  2d  pi.  nadtauwompadtamdg  ive- 
quai,  while  ye  look  for  the  light,  Jer. 
13, 16.  With  an.  obj.  nadtauwompamaii, 
he  looks  for  or  at  (him). 

[Abn.  nederahbaddmen;  (with  an. 
obj.)  -baman,  je  le  regarde.] 
nadteoh,  nedteuh,  as  prep,  since,  Deut. 

4,  32:  - ne  kesukok,  since  that  day 

when,  1  K.  8,  16;  nadteoh  paoon,  since 

when  I  came,  Gen.  30,  30;  - kddsldk 

muttaok,  since  the  beginning  of  the 
world,  Is.  64, 4  ( nateah ,  lately,  since,  C. ). 

[Abn.  naighe,  niaga,  netsi,  pour  lors, 
lorsque.  ] 

nadtippaeu.  See  nehtippaeu. 
nadtuppco,  natuppu,  v.  i.  he  feeds  (as 
an  animal,  other  than  man):  pigsog 
natuppuog  ut  wadchu-ut,  swine  feed  upon 


74 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[Bl-LLi.Il>'  25 


nadtuppco,  natuppu — continued. 

the  mountain,  Luke  8,  32;  ke-netassu- 
mog  pish  nadtuppooog,  thy  cattle  shall 
feed.  Is.  30,  23;  with  inan.  ohj.  nadtup- 
pani'antam,  he  feeds  on  (it),  Jer.  50,  19; 
with  an.  ohj.  ncidtuppcoirau,  -pwaii,  he 
prepares  food  (?)  for  or  feeds  (?)  him; 
imperat.  2d  — 3d  sing,  nadtupueh,  ‘dress 
him  meat’,  2  Sam.  13,  7;  cf.  v.  5,  wun- 
nehteauitch  meetmonk,  let  her  dress  the 
meat  [food].  See  -uppco,  determinative 
generic  of  verbs  of  feeding. 

[Narr.  natnpwock,  (animals)  feed.] 
naehtau,  v.  t.  Lcausat.  inan.  from  nd-urn, 
he  sees  (?)],  he  appears,  shows  himself 
to  (him):  monchu  naihtau&nat  (infin. ), 
he  went  to  show  himself  to,  1  K.  18,  2; 
pret.  naehtaomp,  he  appeared  to,  2  Chr. 
3,  1;  with  affixes:  ke-naeihtunkco,  I  ap¬ 
pear  to  you,  Lev.  9,  4.  Cf.  nahtinau,  he 
shows  (it)  to;  nahtussu. 
nag,  suppos.  of  na-um,  he  sees,  when  he 
sees  (it). 

nag.  See  neg,  they, 
nagont,  nagunt  (?),  n.  sand,  Heb.  11, 12; 
1  K.  4,  20;  naguntu,  -ontu,  in  or  on  the 
sand,  Deut.  33,  19;  (Matt.  7,  26.  See 
kehtohliannomuk ,  ‘sand  of  the  sea’  (keh- 
tahhannomuhk,  Mass.  Ps. ),  Ps.  78,  27. 

[Abn.  negdkS,  sable.  Del.  le  kau, 
Zeisb.] 

nagum,  pron.  3d  sing.  an.  he,  El.  Gr.  7 
( =noh ,  q.  v.);  pi.  nagoh  ( =  nahoh ), 
they. 

[Narr.  nafigom,  his  own.  Del.  neka 
or  nekama,  he,  Zeisb.  Gr.] 
nagwutteae,  adv.  continually,  all  the 
time,  always,  Job  7, 16;  27, 10;  Prov.  17, 
17;  19,  13.' 

[Abn.  nekStena,  quelques  jours ensuite 
(in  poster um).] 

nagwutte&eyeuroonk,  vbl.  n.  continu¬ 
ance,  ‘perseverance’,  Eph.  6,  18. 
nagwutteohteau  [iiagvmtiae-ohteau  ] ,  v.  i. 
it  continues  to  be,  it  is  continual, 
1  Sam.  13,  14. 

nahen,  adv.  almost,  El.  Gr.  21;  Judg. 
19,  9;  nearly,  nigh  to,  Phil.  2,  27,  30: 
nen  nahen  nun-nup,  ‘I  am  at  the  point 
to  die’,  Gen.  25,  33;  nahen  nuppoo,  ‘he 
is  at  the  point  of  death’,  Mark  5,  23. 
Cf.  nai;  nano. 

[Narr.  neenk  (of  a  dying  man),  ‘he  is 


nahen — continued. 

drawing  on.’  Abn.  ne  herd,  tot,  bien- 
tot.  C’ree  ni-ee,  ‘exactly.’] 
nahnagkiae.  See  nolmagki&e. 
*nahnafyeumcoadt(?),  a  horse,  C.  See 
nayeum uk;  nayeutam. 
nahnashaii  (freq.  of  nashaii),  v.  i.  he 
breathes;  3d  pers.  infinit.  wunnahnash- 
onat,  to  breathe,  Josh.  11,  11;  -meat, 
v.  14;  suppos.  nanashont  ( nahnashant , 
Deut.  20,  16)  and  nanashonit,  when  he 
breathes;  pi.  (part.)  neg  nanashonit  clieg, 
they  who  breathe,  Josh.  10,  40  ( nen 
nunndssham,  I  breathe,  C. ).  See 
nashauonk. 

*nahog,  they,  them;  id  nahog,  to  them, 
C.,  =nahoh,  El.  CL  noli. 
nahohtoeu  [  =  ne  hohtoeu,  the  next  in 
order],  adv.  secondly,  El.  Gr.  21:  — — 
ompdsik,  the  second  row,  Ex.  28,  18; 
afterwards  (i.  e.  next  after),  Deut.  1, 8; 
Luke  23,  26.  See  hohtoeu. 
nahonnushagk.  See  nohnushagk,  ‘  fare¬ 
well.’ 

[Note. — Definition  not  completed.] 
nahcosik,  a  ‘pinnacle’,  Matt.  4,5;  Luke 
4,  9;  suppos.  from  a  verb  form  nai-nssu 
i  (inan.  subj.  -usseu),  he  makes  pointed 
or  tapering;  ne  nahoosik,  that  which  is 
made  pointed.  See  nai. 
nahtinau,  noht-,  v.  t.  inan.  and  an.  he 
shows  (it)  to  (him);  he  makes  (it) 
appear  to  (him),  Esth.  4,  8  (infin.): 
kenahtinush,  I  will  show  to  you,  Judg.  4, 
22;  hoieannahtinukqueog,  who  will  show 
(it)  to  us?  Ps.  4,  6;  suppos.  nohtinont, 
Judg.  1,  25.  Cf.  naehtau;  nameheau. 
nahtussu,  v.  t.  he  shows,  makes  appar¬ 
ent  (-itssu,  performs  the  act  of  show¬ 
ing);  imperat.no/ifif5,  show  thou  (it), 
Ezek.  43, 10;  with  affix,  nahtusseh  kum- 
mayash,  show  me  thy  ways,  Ps.  25,  4 
( nahtuhseh  keek,  show  me  vour  house, 

CO-  .  . 

nai,  v.  i.  it  makes  a  point  or  angle,  it  is 
angled  or  angular:  yaue  nai,  it  is  four¬ 
angled,  square,  Ezek.  45, 2;  id  yaue  naee, 
on  the  four  corners,  ibid. ;  suppos.  ndiag, 
naiyag,  when  it  makes  an  angle;  as  n. 
a  comer,  an  angle:  yaue  naiyag  iretu, 
the  four  corners  of  the  house  (lit,  where 
the  house  four-corners),  Job  1,  19, 
—  yauve  ndyag,  Ex.  27,  2,  and  yaue  nah 
nayag  ( freq.  all  the  corners),  Acts  11, 5. 
See  nashin. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


75 


naihaue,  nauwae,  adv.  in  the  middle, 
Cant.  3,  10.  See  n6eu. 

*naim  (Narr. ),  by  and  by;  (suppos.) 

ndmitch,  R.  W. 
naioomau.  See  ndyeumau. 
nairomuk.  See  nayeumuk ,  [when  he  is 
carried,]  when  he  rides, 
naj,  3d  pers.  sing,  imperat.  of  nano ,  it  is 
the  same,  it  is  so.  See  nan. 
nameheaii,  namheaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  finds 
(him),  discovers  (him)  [makes  him 
visible;  causat.  an.  form  from  ‘nau,  he 
sees  him;  ef.  nahtinau,  naehtau] :  ne- 
namheh,  ne-namehheh,  I  find  him  (- nam - 
meh,  I  los.  9, 10 ) ;  kenamheli,  thou  findest 
me;  ke-namhesh,  I  find  thee,  1  K.  21, 20; 
suppos.  nameMont,  when  he  finds,  he 
finding,  Prov.  18,  22;  negat.  nen  mattci 
namheoh ,  I  did  not  find  him,  2  Cor.  2, 
13;  with  inan.  obj.  namehteau,  he  finds 
(it),  Prov.  18,  22;  17,  20;  suppos.  na- 
mehteunk,  Luke  15,  9  ( nun-ndmeehteo ,  I 
find,  C.). 

[Abn.  ne-namitt8n;  (an.  obj.)  ne-na- 
mihan,  je  decouvre,  je  vois;  ne-namih§e, 
je  vois.] 

namohkaeihlieau,  v.  t,  [causat.  form  of 
namohkau ],  he  lends  to  (him);  -kaaih- 
huau,  Ps.  112,  5;  -kohheau,  Prov.  19, 
17;  imperat.  2d  pi.  namohkaeihuugk, 
lend  ye,  Luke  6,  35;  namakouhe  (?), 
lend  it  to  me,  Luke  11,  5.  See  nogkoh- 
kaeihhuunat. 

[Abn.  ne-nemekd8ihan,  je  lui  prete; 
imperat.  nemeka8i  or  ka8ihi.~\ 
namohkaii,  v.  t.  he  borrows  (from  or  of 
another) ;  imperat.  -kaush,  borrow,  2  K. 
4,  3;  suppos.  ndmohkauSnont,  when  he 
borrows,  Ex.  22, 14.  Cf.  nogkohkouundt. 
namohs,  n.  a  fish  ( ndmds ,  C. ) ;  pi.  -sag, 
El.  Gr.  9,  Matt.  17,  27;  Ex.  7,  18,  21; 
dimin.  namohsemes,  pi.  -mesog,  Matt,  15, 
34.  [The  first  letter  does  not  belong  to 
the  root,  but  represents  the  determina¬ 
tive  particle.  It  is  not  found  in  com¬ 
pound  words  (see  -dmag).  The  base  is 
the  same  as  in  aum;  trans.  aum-aii,  he 
fishes.  In  the  Old  Algonkin  and  in 
some  modern  dialects  the  determinative 
prefix  is  given  to  the  sturgeon  as  the  fish 
par  excellence.  The  final  s  represents 
the  an.  adj.  form  -esu,  or  what  is  equiv¬ 
alent  to  it,  Mas,  animal,  animate  being.] 

[Narr.  nammauus,  pi.  -suck.  Abn. 


namohs — continued. 
names,  pi.  -sak.  Old  Alg.  Jdcons  ( na - 
main,  sturgeon).  Chip.  ke/go  {nam  ax', 
naughmay,  sturgeon).  Menom.  nah- 
maish  ( nahmawe ,  sturgeon).  Del.  na 
mees,  pi.  -sak.  Powh.  noughmass,  J.  j 
Smith.  Micm.  nemesh,  Maillard.] 
nampooham,  v.  i.  he  answers,  replies: 

- kah  nanvau,  he  answered  and  said, 

Job  15,  1;  16,  1;  with  an.  obj.  -hamau, 
he  answers  (him),  Gen.  41,  16.  Vbl. 
n.  -hamdonk,  an  answer,  Gen.  41,  16; 

2  Sam.  24,  13.  From  nompe,  in  turn, 
reciprocally. 

namshpeyau,  v.  i.  ‘he  sojourns’  [visits, 
remains  for  a  time  (?)],  Gen.  20, 1.  Cf. 
enneapeya/u. 

nan,  a  particle  denoting  likeness  or 
identity,  the  same  as,  or  such  as:  noh 
xicin,  the  same  person,  Heb.  13,  8;  Ps. 
102,  27;  ne  nan,  the  same  thing,  Dan. 

5,  5;  John  4,  53  ( nenan ,  nnih,  nonl  nee, 
‘the  same’,  C.);  ne  nan  qussuk,  that 
same  stone,  Matt.  21,  42;  pi.  inan. 
nanoash,  such  (things),  James  3,  10; 
with  verb  subst.  ne  nano,  it  is  the  same, 
it  is  so:  noh  nano  ( nnoh ),  he  is  the  same 
or  such;  xnatta  ne  nano,  it  is  not  so,  Acts 
10,  14;  yeush  matta  ivoh  nanoash,  these 
things  ought  not  to  be  so,  James  3,  10; 
imperat.  3d  sing,  ne  naj,  let  it  be  so, 
‘even  so’,  Matt.  11,  26;  Luke  11,  2; 
Rev.  22,  20;  alique  ne  naj,  ‘not  so’, 
Acts  11,  8;  suppos.  ne  nag,  if  it  be  so, 
Dan.  3,  17;  matta  nancog,  if  it  be  not 
so,  v.  18.  Cf.  dunag,  necme,  nnih.  [All 
these  have  the  same  base,  and  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  distinguish  always  the  forms 
of  each  under  Eliot’s  varying  notation.] 
[Narr.  mat  endno,  mat  edno,  it  is  not 
true.] 

nanaanont,  pi.  (neg)  nanadnoncheg;  sup¬ 
pos.  of  nanavmnnaii,  they  who  rule, 
rulers,  Ex.  18,  21;  Is.  52,  5. 
nanaanum.  See  nanawunnum,  he  bears 
rule,  he  rules  over  (it), 
nanabpi,  -peu,  (it  is)  dry.  See  nunohpe. 
*nanagka>onk,  vbl.  n.  ‘snorting’,  C. 
nanahkineg,  (as  n.)  a  sieve,  Is.  30,  28. 

See  nmhkik;  nunnohkinnum. 
nana[h]konchiyeu-ut,  in  a  narrow 
way  (passage),  Num.  22,  26;  in  a  strait 
(place),  Job  36,  16:  mo  adt  nanakon- 
chanoog,  ‘where  there  is  no  straitness’, 


7(5 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


nana[h.]koneliiyeu-ut — continued, 
ibid.;  [nun-]nanohkontap,  I  am  in  a 
strait  (betwixt  two),  1  Phil.  1,  23. 
nanamunnum  qunuhtug,  he  bran¬ 
dishes  (‘shakes’)  a  spear,  Job  41,  29. 
nanaseu,  adv.  one  by  one,  Mark  14,  19; 
Is.  27,  12;  nand^e,  John  8,  9.  Freq. 
from  nussu,  nusseu,  alone, 
nanashont,  suppos.  of  nahnashau,  he 
breathes. 

nanashwu,  v.  i.  he  prepares,  makes 
ready;  imperat.  2d  sing,  -wish,  prepare 
thyself,  be  ready,  Jer.  46,  14.  With 
an.  obj.  nanashweau,  he  prepares  or 
makes  (him)  ready;  with  inan.  obj. 
nanashwetam,  he  makes  (it)  ready;  sup¬ 
pos.  nanashwetog,  when  he  prepares 
(it),  Prov.  8,  27;  with  inan.  obj.  and 
an.  ending,  -wetamau  anvetuonk,  he  pre¬ 
pares  a  habitation  for  (him),  Ex.  15,  2. 
nanashwunnum,  v.  t.  he  prepares  (it); 
nunnanashwunnum ,  I  prepare  it,  Matt. 
22,  4.  (With  formative  of  verbs  de¬ 
noting  action  of  the  hand.) 
nanaunum.  See  nanaivunnum. 
*nanawehteou,  he  keeps  [safely,  makes 
safe] ;  nun-ndnaueehloo,  I  keep,  C.  See 
nannowe,  nanoicelea. 

nanawunnum,  -aanum,  -aunum,  v.  t. 

[primarily  to  keep  safely,]  he  rules  over, 
governs  (it),  Dan.  4, 17;  5,  21 :  ke-nanau- 
nam,  thou  rulest  (it),  Ps.  89,  9.  With 
an.  obj.  nanavmnnau,  -dunnaii,  he  rules 
over  or  governs  (him),  Ps.  59, 13;  Rom. 
7,  1 :  pish  ke-nanauwunuk,  he  shall  rule 
over  thee,  Gen.  3,  16;  suppos.  nana- 
minonl,  nanadnont,  he  who  rules;  pi. 
-oncheg,  they  who  bear  rule,  rulers,  Ex. 
18,  21;  Is.  52,  5  ( nananuaeheg ,  magis¬ 
trates,  rulers;  title- pageof  Indian  Laws). 
N.  agent,  nanuwunnuaen,  nananuwabi, 
vananuaen,  a  ruler,  Num.  13,  2;  Ex.  22, 
28;  Jer.  51,  46;  ‘a  nobleman’,  John  4, 
46,  =mnsh6shketomp,  Mass.  Ps.  ( nan - 
auonnudnat,  to  rule  or  govern;  ndnd- 
wanumeeh,  keep  thou  me,  C. ). 

[Narr.  neen  nanowwunnemun,  I  over¬ 
see,  I  look  to  or  keep;  naunouwlieard 
(and  nanouwetea ) ,  a  keeper  or  nurse,  an 
overseer  and  orderer  (of  their  worship), 
R.  W.  52,  112.] 

nanepausliadt,  -pauzshad,  n.  the 

moon,  Gen.  33,  14;  37,  9;  Josh.  10,  12, 
13;  nepduzshad,  Ps.  148,  3.  Cf.  nepdus , 
the  sun;  also  a  (lunar)  month. 


nanepaushadt,  -pauzskad — continued. 

[Narr.  nanepaushat,  the  moon,  the 
moon  god  (and  munndnnock,  a  name  of 
both  the  sun  and  the  moon).  Abn. 
kizSs  (le  soleil  ou)  la  lune;  nibahkizSs, 
la  lune  ( nibah-kizSs ,  nibahiSi,  de  nuit; 
ne-nibahse,  ‘ je  marchede  nuit’).  Chip. 
kee  zis  (Sag.),  ge'zis  (St  Marys),  ( gisiss , 
Bar.),  sun;  le  be  ke  sis,  dib'  ik  ge'  zis 
(night  sun),  moon,  Sch.  Del.  ni  pa 
hum,  the  moon;  nipahwi,  by  night;  ni- 
pawOochwen,  to  go,  to  travel,  by  night, 
Zeisb.] 

nannahkinnum.  See  nunnohkinnum. 
nannowe,  nanouwe,  adv.  freely,  Matt. 
10,  8;  Rev.  21,  6;  safely;  nanoimyeue, 
in  safety,  Lev.  25,  19  ( nanauive ,  free; 
-auwiyeue,  safely,  C. );  nannowe,  volun¬ 
tary,  of  free  will,  Deut.  16,  10. 
nannukshonat.  See  nunnukkushonat. 
nannumit,  n.  the  north  wind,  Cant.  4, 16. 

[Narr.  nanummalin  and  sunnddin.'] 
nannummiyeu,  -mau,  adv.  at  the  north, 
northward,  Gen.  13,  14;  Is.  14,  31, 
ivutch  nannummau,  from  the  north,  Ps. 
107,  3. 

[Del.  lowaneii,  v.  adj.  northerly, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  164;  lo  wan  a  chen,  north  wind, 
Zeisb.  Voc.  44.] 

nano,  (it  increases)  more  and  more,  in¬ 
creasingly;  used  as  an  adverb  of  com¬ 
parison:  nano  missi,  it  increases  (be¬ 
comes  more  and  more  great),  Job  10, 
16;  nano  mconatash,  they  (inan.)  increase 
in  number,  are  more,  many,  Ezra  9,  6; 
nano  waantam,  he  is  more  and  more 
wise,  increases  in  wisdom,  Luke  2,  52 
( ndnd ,  moreover,  C. ) ;  nanomwonkquaeu 
nano  nunkquaash,  ‘heaps  upon  heaps’, 
Judg.  15,  16. 

*nanockquttin  (Narr.),  the  southeast 
wind,  R.  W.  Cf.  nunndkquodtul. 
nanohkinum,v.t.  heseethes  (it),  boils  (?) 
it;  imperat.  and  suppos.  nanohkinu- 
mcok  toll  woh  yeu  ndnohkimnnug,  ‘seethe 
ye  that  ye  will  seethe’,  Ex.  16,  23. 
nanomonkquodtau,  v.  t.  (freq.)  he  con¬ 
tinues  to  heap  up,  he  piles  (it)  up,  Job 
27,  16.  See  nomunkqudg;  numwonk- 
quau. 

*nanompanissuonk,  vbl.  n.  idleness,  C. 
See  the  following: 

nanopassumaii,  he  supplicates  of,  en¬ 
treats  (him).  See  nanumpassumau. 
nanouwe.  See  nannowe. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


77 


*nanowetea,  nanou-  (Narr. ),  a  nurse  or 
keeper,  an  overseer  and  orderer  (of 
their  worship).  For  nanawehteau,  he 
oversees  or  directs.  See  nanawunnum. 
*nandwussu  (Narr.),  vbl.  adj.  an.  it  is 
lean.  See  dnouwussu. 

*nanpeh,  very  (used  in  the  comparison 
of  adjectives):  nanpeh peississu,  (he  is) 
very  small;  nanpehne,  ‘mostly’;  nan- 
pehyeu ,  ‘especially’,  C. 

[Cree  naspich,  very,  Howse.] 
nanukquok,  when  there  is  danger;  sup- 
pos.  of  nunnukquodl. 

nanukqushont,  suppos.  of  nunnuk- 
qushai'i,  he  trembles.  See  nunnukkush- 
ondt. 

nanumpassumaii,  nanop-,  v.  t.  an.  he 

entreats,  supplicates  (him) :  nan-nanum- 
passum,  I  pray  [supplicate]  (him), 
John  14,  16;  vnmnooche  nanopasumouh, 
they  began  to  entreat  him,  Mark  5,  17 
( ken-nanndmpassumush ,  I  pray  or  en¬ 
treat  you,  C. ) . 

nanunkqussu,  nanunkqsu,  v.  adj.  an. 
he  is  palsied,  Matt.  8,  6;  Mark  2,  3; 
suppos.  nononkussit,  v.  4;  suppos.  part. 
-kussinitche,  v.  10.  Cf.  nunnukkushondt, 
to  tremble. 

nanwe,  adv.  and  adj.  common  [from 
nan,  the  same,  such  as],  general,  usual, 
normal;  hence  native  or  indigenous, 
as  opposed  to  pendwe,  strange,  foreign, 
of  another  kind:  nanwe  missinninnuog, 

common  people,  Mark  12,  37;  - pe- 

tukquneg,  common  bread;  -  wut- 

Epistleum  Jude,  the  general  Epistle  of 
Jude  ( nanu’e  umketomp,  any  man,  C.). 
See  nnih;  man. 

[Del.  lenni,  original  (?),  common; 
lenni  m’bi,  pure  water;  len-achpoan, 
common  bread;  lenachsinnaU,  common 
stones,  Hkw. ;  lenee,  common,  “applied 
to  such  objects  of  nature  or  of  art  as  are 
of  common  occurrence”;  lenee  augh- 
kweeyun,  “common  cloth,  such  as  the 
Indians  ordinarily  use,”  Cass  in  N.  A. 
Review,  No.  50,  p.  68.  Abn.  areni; 
areni  8daman,  du  petim  [tabac]  com- 
mun  du  pays;  ned-aren-ahdSe,  je  parle 
Abnaqui;  aren-anpe  [=Del.  len-dpk], 
homo  (sem-anpe,  vir).  Mic.  hi8,  man. 
The  Iroquois  equivalent  is  on8e,  e.  g. 
“onk8e  on8e,  sauvage,  homme  vrai.”] 


nanwetu,  v.  adj.  (he  is  common-born, ) 
a  bastard,  Deut.  23,  2;  Zech.  9,  6  (nan- 
wetue,  C. ).  From  nanwe,  with  the  form¬ 
ative  -etu  of  verbs  of  production  and 
growth. 

nanwiyeu,  v.  i.  he  wanders  about  (has 
no  specified  place),  strays;  pi.  -yeuog, 
they  wander  ( ‘  through  all  the  moun¬ 
tains’,  Ezek.  34,  6).  With  sh  of  invol¬ 
untary  action  or  mischance,  nanwus- 
shau,  ‘he  wanders,  i.  e.  is  lost’,  C. 
nanwunnoodsquaaii,  -squauwau,  v.  i. 
she  is  a  harlot,  a  common  {nanwe) 
woman.  Vbl.  n.  -squauonk,  harlotry, 
fornication,  Acts  15,  20;  21,  25;  Matt. 
5,  32.  N.  agent,  -squauwaen,  Deut.  24, 
17.  See  ncodsquaonat. 
nanwunncodsquaausu,  -squauosu,  v. 
adj.  an.  she  is  a  harlot,  practices  har¬ 
lotry.  N.  agent,  -suen,  Lev.  21, 14;  Prov. 
23,  27;  Is.  57,  3. 

naoosukomunneat.  See  rwmsukomun- 
neat. 

*napaj,  until,  C.  See  pa) eh. 
napanna,  num.  five;  tahshe  is  to  be 
added  unless  nabo  or  nab  is  prefixed, 
El.  Gr.  14:  napanna  tahshe;  pi.  an. 

- tahsuog,  tohsuog;  pi.  inan. - toh- 

suash  or  tahshinash.  Nabo  napanna,  fif¬ 
teen;  - tahshikquinne,  for  fifteen 

days,  Gal.  1,  18. 

[Narr.  napdnna.  Peq.  nuppau,  Stiles. 
This  is  Chip,  nabant,  ‘one  side’,  i.  e. 
one  hand;  nabanedasse,  ‘he  has  one  leg¬ 
ging  on’;  nabanbiindji,  ‘he  has  only 
one  hand’,  Bar.;  nabanmindj,  ‘the 
other  hand.’] 

*napeh,  ‘if  you  dare,’  C. 
napehnont,  “adv.  of  wishing”;  ‘0,  that 
it  were’:  utinam,  ‘I  wish  it  were’,  El. 
Gr.  21,  34;  Deut.  28,  67.  It  serves  as 
an  affix  in  all  numbers  and  persons  of 
verbs  in  what  Eliot  calls  the  optative 
mood. 

‘‘nappiyeue,  adv.  narrowly,  C. 
napwaoach.eg•,  suppos.  pi.  part,  of  nup- 
woau.  See  nupwoaonk. 
nashauanit,  the  spirit  of  God  ( manit ), 
Matt.  4,  1;  cf.  mattanit,  the  devil,  same 
verse.  [Oftener  with  adj.  “Holy” 
prefixed  or  “God”  added (?)].  See 
-anit. 

nashaue,  prep,  between,  Dan.  8,  5;  Mic. 
7,  14;  in  the  middle,  Jer.  39,  3;  - 


78 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


nashaue — continued. 

mayash,  between  the  ways,  1  Sam.  14,  4; 
na  nashaue  tienaicun  kah  ken,  between  us 
and  you,  Luke  16,  25;  nanohkontap  na¬ 
shaue  neeninash,  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt 
two,  Phil.  1,  23;  ne  penou'omai  nashawe 
ummtitamwussin  kah  penomp,  there  is  a 
difference  between  a  wife  and  a  virgin, 
1  Cor.  7,  34;  nashaue  ken  kah  nagum, 
between  thee  and  him,  Matt.  18,  15; 
Cf.  noeu,  in  the  middle,  and  nishwe  or 
nashwe,  third.  To  the  latter  ( nashwe ) 
nashaue  is  nearly  related,  as  are  both 
these  to  neese,  two. 

[Chip,  ndssauaii,  between,  Bar.;  ne- 
sahieahyee ,  J.  (Cf.  Del.  lechauwaak,  a 
fork;  lecheurm,  breadth.).] 
nashaiionk,  vbl.  n.  [from  nashait,  freq. 
nahnashau  (q.  v. ),  he  breathes]:  (1)  a 
breathing,  breath,  Gen.  2,  7;  Ezek.  37, 
9,10;  nashaonk.  Job  4,  9;  nushdonk,  Job 
41,  21.  (2)  the  spirit  of  man,  Prov.  18, 
14;  1  Thess.  5,  23;  a  disembodied  spirit, 
1  K.  22,  21;  2  Chr.  18,  20;  Job  4, 15. 

[Abn.  ne-nesse,  je  respire.] 
nashin,  [v.  i.  it  is  between  or  contained,] 
it  makes  an  angle  or  corner:  yauut 
nashin,  it  is  ‘four-square’,  Rev.  21,  16, 
=  yauut  nasun,  Ezek.  43,  16,  =  yauut 
nashin  it,  v.  17;  suppos.  nashik,  where  it 
makes  a  comer;  as  n.  a  comer  or  in¬ 
cluded  angle:  adt  nashik,  at  the  comer, 
Mark  12,  10,  =adnahshik,  Ps.  118,  21; 
Acts  4,  11;  yauut  nashik  ohke,  in  the 
four  corners  of  the  earth,  Ezek.  7,  2. 
Adv.  and  adj.  nashuine,  of  or  at  a  cor¬ 
ner:  - qussuk,  corner-stone,  Job  38,  6; 

- squontam,  comer  gate,  Jer.  31,  38. 

Cf.  nai. 

nashomuk,  suppos.  pass,  of  nushaii,  he 
kills.  See  nushonat.. 
nashpe,  prep,  by  means  of,  by,  with  (an 
inan.  agent,  instrument,  etc.),  Ps.  78, 
26;  1  Chr.  12,  33-37;  Eccl.  2,  1. 

[Quir.  spe,  Pier.  Del.  nachpi,  Zeisb.] 
nash.quu.anum,  v.  t.  (with  nootau)  he 
kindles  (a  fire),  Lam.  4,  11:  nunnashq- 
un&num  neoteau,  I  kindle  a  fire,  Jer.  21, 
14;  43,  12;  49,  27;  suppos.  noh  nashqun- 
ndnug,  he  who  kindles  (a  tire),  Ex.  22, 6. 
nashquneau,  v.  i.  it  bums:  nwtau  nash- 
quneau,  afire  burns,  ‘is kindled’,  Deut. 
32,  22;  Jer.  15,  14.  Adv.  -unae,  burn¬ 
ing:  nashqunde  nwtau,  burning  fire, 


nashquneau — continued. 

Dan.  7,  9;  -  mohkossaash,  burning 

coals,  Ps.  140,  10; - missechuog,  red- 

hot  iron,  Indian  Laws,  i. 
nashqussum,  v.  t.  he  lights  (a  lamp, 
candle,  torch,  etc.),  he  sets  it  on  fire 
(kindles  a  fire,  Jer.  17,  27);  pret.  -urnup 
lamps-ash,  he  lighted  the  lamps,  Ex. 
8,  3;  suppos.  nash qussuk  wequananteg, 
when  he  lights  a  candle,  Luke  8,  16. 
nashqutteau,  v.  i.  it  bums,  it  is  burn¬ 
ing:  nconconde  nashqutteau,  it  bums 
with  a  flame,  ‘a  flame  burneth’,  Joel 
2,3;  suppos.  ne.  nashquttag,  that  which 
burns,  fire:  onatuh  wuttuhq  en  nashqut¬ 
tag,  ‘as  wood  to  fire’,  Prov.  26,  21. 

Of  all  these  forms  the  base  is  the 
name  of  fire  which  Williams  writes 
sqdtta,  but  which  is  not  used  separately 
as  a  substantive  by  Eliot.  Of  the  three 
names  for  fire  which  appear  to  have 
been  most  frequently  used,  naitau  or 
neoteau  was  apparently  restricted  to  fire 
kindled  for  domestic  use  or  for  the 
service  of  man;  chikoht  (Narr.  ehickot), 
from  cheke,  fierce,  violent,  to  fire  as  a 
power  or  in  action;  and  nashqutta  ( sqiit - 
ta,  R.  W. )  as  nearly  equivalent  to  our 
characterization  of  “the  devouring  ele¬ 
ment,”  or  fire  as  an  enemy.  Cf.  nash- 
quttin. 

[Narr.  squtta,  fire.  Abn.  skStdi,  feu; 
sk8ta8io,  il  y  en  a. — Rasies.] 
nashquttin,  [v.  i.  there  is]  a  destructive 
tempest,  a  violent  storm,  Is.  28,  2;  29, 6; 
suppos.  nashquit,  Job  27,  21  (nashquit- 
tin,  a  northerly  storm  or  a  tempest,  C. ). 
naswaeu,  -wayeu,  v.  i.  it  is  scattered; 
adv.  naswde,  -uayeue,  Is.  18,  2,  7;  Jer. 
50,  17.  [?]  See  seahham. 
natauwompu.  See  nadtamvdmpu,  he 
looks. 

natinneahteau,  natinahteau,  v.  i.  he 

seeks,  makes  search;  pi.  -aog,  they 
sought,  2  K.  2,  17.  Vbl.  n.  -teaonk, 
search,  Ezra  4,  19. 

natinneham,  v.  t.  he  seeks  (it),  Prov. 
14,  6;  18,  1;  Job  39,  29;  pi.  -hamwog, 
they  seek  (it),  Heb.  11, 14;  imperat.  2d 
pi.  -hamcok,  seek  ye,  Matt.  7,  7;  suppos. 
noh  natinnohhog,  he  who  seeks,  Matt. 
7,  8;  with  an.  obj.  natinneawhaii,  he 
seeks  (him),  2  Chr.  26,  5;  -tehoou,  Rom. 
3,  12;  with  affixes,  vmn-natinneahuh-oh. 


Trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


79 


natinneham — continued. 

he  seeks  (him),  Matt.  18,  12;  suppos. 
•  noli  natinnewhont,  he  who  seeks  (him), 
Lam.  3,  25. 

[Narr.  natlnnehas,  search  (thou);  tea- 
qua  kun-ndtinne,  what  do  you  look  for?] 
natippaeu.  >See  nehtippaeu. 
natcotomau,  v.  t.  an.  he  questions  (him), 
asks  (him)  a  question;  ( natcotamauau ) 
Matt.  16,  13;  -mailoh,  Matt.  22,  35; 
with  the  characteristic  (-hk)  of  con¬ 
tinued  action,  natootomuhkau,  lie  makes 
inquiries,  goes  on  asking  questions  (of 
him);  infinit.  -konat,  to  inquire,  Ezra 
7,  14. 

[Narr.  kun-natdtemi,  do  you  ask  me? 
n’ natotemuckaun,  I  will  ask  the  way. 
C’ree  untoic-ethemayoo,  he  looks  for, 
seeks(him);  untr/w-ethetum,  heseeks  it.] 
natcotomuhteaonk,  vbl.  n.  (from  -ah- 
teau,  v.  i.  he  asks)  a  question,  Mark  11, 
29;  12,  34  ( nattcotumvehteaonk ,  C. ). 
nattauwompu.  See  nadtau w6mpu. 
*nattcohqus  (Mass.  Ps. ),  a  wolf,  John  10, 
12  ( nattcoqusm-og ,  wolves,  C.);  ontoquos, 
a  wolf,  Wood. 

[Narr.  natoqus,  wolf;  moattoqus,  a 
black  wolf,  R.  W.] 
natuppu.  See  nadtuppco,  he  feeds, 
natwontam,  v.  i.  and  t.  inan.  he  consid¬ 
ers,  meditates,  devises,  Ps.  36, 4:  nun-nat- 
v'ontam,  I  meditate,  Ps.  119,  15;  I  de¬ 
vise,  Mic.  2,  3;  imperat.  2d  sing,  -ontash 
nun-natwontamov:onk  (vbl.  n. ),  ‘con¬ 
sider  my  meditation’,  Ps.  5, 1. 
na-um,  v.  i.  he  sees,  Job  28,  24;  Matt.  12, 
22;  and  t.  inan.  he  sees  (it),  Job  34,  21: 
nunnaum,  I  see,  Jer.  1,  11;  John  9,  25; 
suppos.  nag,  when  he  sees  (it),  Gen. 
42,  1;  3  6  ( naik ,  Matt.  21, 19);  imperat. 
2d  sing  nciish,  naush,  ndsli ;  pi.  naurn- 
ook,  see,  behold.  Vbl.  n.  ndumcoonk, 
sight,  Deut.  28,  67;  Luke  4,  18.  With 
an.  obj.  ndail,  nauau,  he  sees  (him), 
Gen.  42,  7;  John  1,  29;  imperat.  2d  pi. 
nok,  Is.  42,  1;  suppos.  nauont,  when  he 
sees  (him),  2  K.  4,  25;  with  affixes,  ke- 
nd-eh,  thou  seest  me,  Gen.  16,  13;  noh 
naiit,  he  who  seeth  me,  John  12,  45; 
14,  9.  Cf.  nogque,  wompu. 

[Abn.  ne-namih8e,  je  vois.  Del.  ne 
men,  to  see,  Zeisb.] 

naumatuonk,  vbl.  n.  a  law,  Deut.  1,  5. 
pi.  -ongash,  Ex.  16,  8.  Cf.  nanvaonk, 
wusmttumunat. 


-naumon  (not  found  without  the  pro- 
nom.  prefix),  son.  See  wunnaumonuh. 
*n aunt  (Narr.),  alone,  only.  See  nont. 
naiit  \na  at],  adv.  of  place,  El.  Gr.  21; 
therein,  thereon,  thereat,  Is.  42,  11:  net 
at  ahquompag,  at  that  time,  Dan.  3,  8; 
nah  ut,  thereon,  Luke  13,  6. 
nauusukomunneat.  See  ndaosukomun- 
neat. 

nauwae.  See  naihaue. 
nauwaehtamuneaii,  v.  t.  inan.  he  bows 
down  to  (it);  infin.  2d  pi.  Lev.  26,  1. 
nauwaeii,  v.  i.  (1)  he  bends  down,  bows, 
stoops,  Judg.  5,  27.  (2)  he  worships, 

Ex.  34,  8;  pi.  -aeog,  they  worship,  Ex. 
4,  31;  they  bow  down,  Is.  46,  2;  im¬ 
perat.  2d  pi.  nauwaegk,  worship  ye,  Ex. 
24,  1.  Adv.  nduwde,  Gen.  49,  15. 
nauwakompaii,  v.  i.  he  stands  stooping 
or  bowed  down;  suppos.  -pauit,  when 
he  stoops,  Luke  24,  12. 

[Del.  nauwaquepin,  to  hang  the  head 
down,  Zeisb.] 

nauwanum,  v.  t.  he  bends  or  bows  down 
(his  person,  head,  face,  etc.),  Ex.  34,  8; 
pi.  -umuvg,  Ex.  4,  31;  Luke  24,  5;  pret. 
nauwanumdmp  Judah,  I  have  bent  Ju¬ 
dah,  Zech.  9,  13. 

nauwosu,  -seu,  v.  i.  act.  he  performs 
the  act  of  bowing  or  stooping,  he  bows 
or  stoops,  Is.  46, 1;  John  20. 11;  suppos. 
nddusit,  when  he  stoops,  John  20,  5. 
nauwot,  nauwut.  See  ndadi. 
nawhutche  [na  umtche,  therefrom  or 
there  out  of],  some  of,  a  part  of,  El. 

Gr.  8;  Is.  44,  16,  17:  - kesukodtash, 

some  days,  Dan.  8,  27. 
*nawwauwquaw  (Narr.),  afternoon. 

From  nauwaeii,  he  goes  down,  stoops, 
nayeumaii,  naioomaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  bears 
or  carries  (on  his  back  or  shoulders)  an 
an.  obj.;  infin.  3d  sing,  wu-nayeu- 
mdnat  yokoh  (an.),  to  bear  the  yoke, 
Lam.  3,  27. 

nayeumuk,  naicomuk,  which  has  the 
form  of  the  suppos.  pass,  participle, 
‘when  he  is  carried  or  borne’  (on  the 
shoulders  of  another),  is  used  by  Eliot 
for  the  indicative  v.  t.  he  rides  upon: 
nayeumuk  ass-oh,  she  rode  upon  an  ass, 

1  Sam.  25,  42;  -  cherub, - on  a 

cherub,  2  Sam.  22,  11  ( =  nayeumugk , 
Ps.  18,  10);  pi.  -ukquog,  they  rode 
upon  (camels),  Gen.  24,  61;  suppos. 
part.  pi.  neg  nacomukqutcheg,  they  who 


80 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


nayeumuk,  nairomuk — continued, 
ride  upon  i  asses ),  Judg.  10,  4;  horsman-  i 
og  nayeumukqutrheg  horses-oh,  ‘horse¬ 
men  [when]  riding  upon  horses’, 
Ezek.  23,  6;  sing,  noli  naannukqut  horse-s¬ 
ol),  he  who  rides  horses,  Amos  2,  15 
(hence  nahnaiyeumooadt,  ‘a  horse  ora 
creature  that  carries’,  C. ). 

[Xarr.  kun-niish,  I  will  carry  you  (on 
my  back);  naynayodmeieot,  a  horse; 
vunnia  naynayodmeieot,  he  rides  on 
horseback.  Abn.  ne-nal)8maii,  je  le 
porte  sur  mes  epaules;  3d  sing.  8nali8- 
mah;  ahass8,  cheval;  ne-nah8m8k8 
ahassS,  j’y  vais;  -n8ili8man  o\ine-nanh8- 
mah,  je  charge  l’enfant,  je  le  porte  (sur 
le  dos).  Del.  nech  na  yun  gees,  a  horse; 
na  yu  mau,  he  is  carried;  na  yu  muk,  he 
carries  me;  na  yun  dam,  he  carries  a 
load,  Zeisb.] 

nayeutam,  v.  t.  he  bears  or  carries  (it) 
on  his  person  (on  his  breastplate,  Ex. 
28,  29):  pish  nayeutam  ooweanun,  he 
shall  bear  his  own  burden,  Gal.  6,  5; 
suppos.  part.  pi.  nayeutogig,  they  who 
bear  [are  ‘laden  with’],  Is.  1, 4.  [From 
nauwaeu,  nauwaehtam,  he  bends  or 
stoops  to  it(?) .] 

[Xarr.  niAutash,  take  it  on  your  back; 
nidutamwock,  ‘  they  are  loden’ ,  i.  e.  carry 
burdens.] 

ne,  demonstrative  and  directive  particle 
or  pron.  inan.  (El.  Gr.  7)  this,  that; 
pi.  nish,  these,  those:  ne  teag,  this  thing, 
ne  adt,  thereat,  at  that  place,  Ezek.  6, 13. 
neane,  neyane(l)  [ne  unne,  like  this,  of 
this  kind,  such  as  this] ,  so,  such,  in  the 
same  manner  as,  as,  El.  Gr.  22;  Luke  , 
22, 27,  29;  Mark  4,  26;  suppos.  nedunak,  t 
-ag  ( when  it  is  so,  or  such  as ) ,  according  ! 
to,  in  accordance  with,  like:  neaunak 
wut-anakausuonk,  accordingto  her  work, 
Jer.  50,  29;  - unnaumatuonk,  accord¬ 

ing  to  the  law,  Ezra  10,  3  ( nednag ,  such, 
C. ).  (2)  as  n.  the  appearance  of  a  thing, 
its  likeness:  ne  dunak  onatuh  ne  aunak, 
‘the  color  thereof  as  the  color  of’, 
Num.  11,  7;  neaunag  yen  muttaok,  ‘the  ; 


neaunak  menutcheg,  ‘in  the  form  of  a 
hand’,  Ezek.  10,  8.  See  dunag,  and  cf. 
na;  nan;  nnih;  no;  noh;  unne. 

[Del.  nahanne,  ‘so,  so  it  is’,  Zeisb.] 
neanussu  [ne  unnussii],  v.  adj.  an.  he 


neanussu — continued. 

is  such  as  or  of  the  kind,  he  is  like 
(s eennnussu)-,  suppos.  nednussit,  when 
he  is  like,  of  the  kind  of  ( neyanusit , 
‘after  its  kind’,  Lev.  11,  16,  19;  pi.  ne- 
yanussehettit,  after  their  kind  vv.  14, 15) : 
neanussit  wosketomp,  nnih  um-menukesu- 
onk,  as  is  the  man  so  is  his  strength, 
Judg.  8,  21;  neanussit  xrosketomp,  in  the 
likeness  of  man,  Phil.  2,  7. 
*necawnauquanash,  ‘old  barns’  (pi.). 
See  auqunnash,  R.  \V.  93.  Illin.  (Ms. 
Diet.)  “naganari,  naganara,  (pi.)  viel- 
les  cachis  dont  il  ne  reste  que  le  trou” ; 
“naganaki  nimirigSa,  il  m’a  donne  son 
champ  qu’il  abandonne.” 
nechippog.  See  neechippog. 
nedteuh.  See  nadteoh,  since, 
neechan,  v.  i.  he  or  she  issues  from  or  is 
given  birth;  as  n.  issue  or  offspring 
(without  regard  to  sex  or  age);  pi.  nee- 
ehanog,  they  are  children  (i.  e.  issue): 
ke-neechanog,  thy  children,  Rom.  9,  7; 
thy  issue,  Gen.  48,  6;  suppos.  neechanit, 
when  he  or  she  is  a  child,  Rom.  9,  8;  pi. 
part,  n eg  neechdnulcheg,  they  who  are 
children  or  issue,  ibid.;  wun-neechan-oh, 
the  issue  of  (him),  Rom.  9,  26,27.  X. 
collect,  u-unneechA-neunk,  his  issue,  col¬ 
lectively,  Rom.  9, 8.  See  ontseu. 

[Abn.  n8nitzahni,  j’ai  un  enfant;  3d 
pers.  8nitzahn8;  3d  pi.  -hnar,  ke-nitzah- 
nak  [suppos.],  tes  enfants.  Del.  nitsch, 
nitschaan,  child,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  6,  10.] 
neechau,  nech.au,  v.  i.  and  t.  an.  she 
gives  birth  to  a  child,  is  delivered,  is  in 
labor,  Is.  66,  7;  Gen.  4,  17,  22;  35,  16; 
suppos.  neechadt,  when  she  is  in  labor, 
Gen.  38,  28:  sun  nun-neecham,  shall  I 
bear  a  child?  Gen.  18, 13;  pret.  neechop, 
she  was  delivered,  she  gave  birth  to  (a 
child),  Heb.  11,  11. 

[XaiT.  nSechaw,  she  is  in  travail; 
pav-gedtehe  nechauwau;  she  is  already 
delivered.  Abn.  ne-nighihe,  ne-nitsi, 
j’enfante.] 

neechippog,  nehch-,  nech-,  n.  dew, 
Dan.  4,  15,  23;  Gen.  27,  28,  39.  Cf. 
nehtippaeu. 

[Xarr.  neechipog,  R.  W.  82.] 
neek,  nek,  my  house,  my  dwelling.  See 

week-\~. 

neekin,  nekin,  v.  i.  he  or  she  is  bom. 
[Regularly  the  formative  -kin  denotes 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


81 


neekin,  nekin — continued, 
the  growth  of  inanimate  being,  as  does 
-etu  that  of  animate:  netu,  he  grows; 
nekin,  it  grows;  but  from  Eliot’s  use  of 
these  two  forms  it  appears  that  nekin 
had  the  force  of  an  an.  passive,  he 
is  born,  he  is  grown ;  netu  an.  in- 
trans.,  which  we  may  nearly  translate 
by  1  he  has  birth  ’ ,  ‘  he  grows.  ’  See  both 
forms  in  the  same  verse,  John  3,  4]: 
vntch  nekin-nedt  (infin.),  from  birth, 
Hos.  9,  11;  nekin,  (a  tree)  grows,  is 
grown,  Ezek.  17,  6;  Dan.  4,  33;  (of  the 
hair),  Judg.  16, 12;  suppos.  nekik,  negik, 
when  it  grows  or  is  grown,  Dan.  4, 
33  ( nekuk ,  Matt.  13,  32);  pi.  an.  -kig: 
nekeekig,  Rom.  9,  11;  pi.  man.  -kish: 
nekukish,  2  K.  19,  29;  (pass,  form)  nekit, 
when  he  is  born,  John  3,  5,  6;  pi.  neg 
nekitcheg,  John  1,  13.  Of.  adtannegen; 
sonkin;  tannegen,  etc. 

[Abn.  nig8,  un  enfant  est  ne,  il  est 
sorti;  tzanigS  (cf.  tannegen,  El.),  il  cesse 
de  croitre.] 

neempau,  v.  i.  it  thunders;  as  n.  thun¬ 
der,  Ps.  81,  7  ( nimbau ,  thunder,  C. ) : 
ken-neempomog,  ‘thy  thunder’,  Ps.  104, 
7 ;  77,  18. 

[Narr.  neimpduog,  thunder.] 
neemskom  (?),  v.  t.  he  brings  (it,  i.  e. 
food  or  drink?) :  nunneemskom petukqun- 
neg,  I  fetch  bread,  Gen.  18,  5;  imperat. 
1st  pi.  neemskomuttuh,  let  us  fetch  (it), 
1  Sam.  4,  3.  With  an.  2d  obj.  neemsko- 
mah  nippemes,  bring  me  a  little  water, 
1  K.  17,  10. 

neen,  nen,  pron.  1st  sing.  I;  pi.  inclus. 
kenavmn,  exclus.  neenavmn,  we,  El. 
Gr.  7:  nen  nnoh,  I  am  he  (who),  Is. 
41,  4;  nanashaue  nenaivun  kah  ken,  be¬ 
tween  us  (exclus.  pi.)  and  thee,  Luke 
16,  26;  but  nanashaue  kenaivun,  between 
us  (all  of  us,  inclus.  pi.),  Judg.  11,  10. 
The  pronoun  in  the  singular  has  the 
form  of  the  noun  agent,  with  n’  direc¬ 
tive  or  demonstrative  as  the  base. 

[Del.  ni,  I;  niluna,  we  (exclus.);  ki- 
luna,  we  (inclus.),  Zeisb.] 

*neepanon,  n.  a  shower,  C. 
neepattau,  -padtau,  v.  t.  inan.  (1)  he 
stands  (it)  upright,  erects  ( it ) ,  e.  g.  a  post 
or  column,  2  Chr.  3, 17.  (2)  he  boils  or 
cooks  over  a  tire,  i.  e.  sets  up  the  pot 
for  boiling:  neepatau  sabaheg,  he  ‘sod 
B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 6 


neepattau,  -padtau — continued. 

pottage’,  Gen.  25,  29;  imperat.  nepa- 
tanxh  sahaheg,  ‘seethe  pottage’,  2  K.  4, 
38,  and  with  an.  obj.  nepas  [ =nepaush ] 
mishe  ohkuhk,  ‘set  on  the  great  pot’, 
ibid.  ( nepaltoh huh qu&nat,  to  boil  the 
pot  (?) ,  C. ). 

[Abn.  nibadene,  leve  cela;  ne-nibade- 
nakSn,  je  leve  un  pieu.  Del.  nipachton, 
he  raises  or  sets  up  (e.  g.  a  post,  a  pole), 
Zeisb.  Gr.  160.] 

neepattunkquonk,  nepattuhquonk, 

n.  a  post  or  stake,  1  Sam.  1,  9;  Is.  33, 
20;  a  pillar,  1  K.  7,  2,  17,  20,  21;  an 
image  (statue),  pi.  wun-neepattunkquonk- 
anog,  their  images,  Ex.  34, 13  [nepatuh- 
quonk-ash,  (printers’)  ‘columns’,  Mass. 
Ps.  title-page]. 

neepau,  neepoh,  v.  i.  (1)  he  stands,  holds 
himself  erect;  and,  as  implying  a  change 
of  posture.  (2)  he  rises,  erects  himself, 
Ex.  2,  4;  24,  13;  pi.  -poog,  Ex.  32,  6; 
imperat.  2d  sing,  nepaush,  ‘up’,  stand, 
Judg.  8,  20;  pi.  -pcok,  -p6k,  stand  ye, 
1  Sam.  12,  16;  Nah.  2,  8;  suppos.  noh 
neepauit,  he  who  stands,  Deut.  1,  38 
( nun-neepa ),  I  stand,  C. ).  [Cf.  Chip, 
and  Alg.  niba,  nipaia,  he  sleeps,  and 
Mass.  nuppa>,  (he  is)  dead.] 

[Narr.  yd  neepoush,  stay  or  stand 
here.  Del.  ni  pu,  he  stands;  pret.  ni 
poop;  imperat.  2d  sing,  ni  pa  ml,  Zeisb. 
Cree  nepowoo,  he  stands.] 

*neepuck  (Narr.?),  blood,  R.  W.  Per¬ 
haps  the  Pequot  (Mull. )  name.  See 
musqueheonk. 

[Abn.  neba  kkan8m,  mon  sang;  3d 
pers.  aba  kkanSm,  bagakkaiin,  sang. 
Miami  ne pe  kon  we,  blood.] 
neese,  num.  two,  El.  Gr.  14;  an.  pi. 
neesuog,  Deut.  22,  30;  inan.  pi.  nee- 
sinash,  Cant.  7,  3;  suppos.  neesit  nompe, 
when  it  is  two  times,  when  it  is 
doubled,  Gen.  41,  32  ( neese  tahshe, 

twice  as  much,  Job  42,  10). 

[Narr.  neesse.  Peq.  naez,  neese.  Del. 
ni  schi,  Zeisb.  ] 

*neeshauog  (Narr.),  eels,  R.  W. ;  nee- 
shuongok,  Stiles.  [ Neese-auog ,  they  go 
by  twos  or  in  pairs,  they  couple;  cf. 
Abn.  niss88ak,  ils  sont  mari£s.  See 
nequ  itteconnau-og.  ]  The  name  of  ‘ne- 
shaw  eel’  is  yet  retained  by  the  fisher¬ 
men  of  Marthas  Vineyard  and  perhaps 


82 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


*neesh.auog — continued, 
elsewhere  in  Massachusetts  for  the  sil¬ 
ver  eel  (Munena  argentea,  Le  Sueur). 

I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  it  origi¬ 
nally  belonged  to  the  lampreys  ( Petro- 
myzon  americanus,  Le  Sueur),  which 
may  appropriately  be  called  ‘pairers’ 
or  ‘couplers’  in  distinction  from  the 
‘single  going’  eel. 

[Peq.  neesh,  pi.  neeshuaugx,  Stiles.] 

neesin-wog,  v.  i.  (pi.)  they  lie  two  to¬ 
gether,  they  couple,  and  v.  t,  they  lie 
with,  have  carnal  connection  with, 

1  Sam.  1,  22;  sing,  neesin,  he  (or  she) 
lies  with,  Gen.  19,  33;  35,  22;  imperat. 
1st  pi.  neesintuh,  let  us  lie  together, 
Gen.  39,  7,  12;  suppos.  noh  neesuk,  he 
who,  etc.,  Lev.  20,  13;  Judg.  21,  11. 
From  neese,  two,  with  the  formative 
(sin)  of  verbs  of  lying  down.  Vbl.  n. 
neesinnooonk,  coupling,  lying  with  an¬ 
other,  Num.  31,  18. 

[Abn.  nis8sin8da,  nisSsinSk,  nous 
couchons  deux  ensemble  (de  duobus 
viris  non  male  audit,  de  viro  et  Lemma, 
male).] 

deesneechag,  nesnechag,  num.  twenty, 

El.  Gr.  14.  Adj.  pi.  an.  -  kodtog; 

inan.  - - kodtash.  From  neese  and 

nutcheg  (hand;  see  menutcheg) ,  the  sec¬ 
ond  time  of  employing  the  hand  in 
counting,  twice  [the  number  of  fingers 
on  each]  hand. 

neesukossont,  suppos.  part,  parting  the 
hoof,  Deut.  14,  6.  From  neese,  two,  and 
mxihkos,  nail,  hoof. 

neeswe,  both,  the  two,  Matt.  15, 14;  Luke 
6,  39.  See  neese. 

neetskehheau,  v.  caus.  an.  he  makes 
(him)  well,  heals,  cures:  ken-neetskeh- 
hesh,  I  heal  thee,  2  K.  20,  5;  imperat. 
neetskeli  kuhhog,  heal  thyself,  Luke  4, 
23  (nun-neelskeh,  I  heal;  neetskeli,  heal 
thou  [me],  C. ).  Vbl.  n.  neetskehuwa- 
onk,  a  cure,  Jer.  33,  6.  With  inan.  obj. 
neetskehteau,  he  makes  (it)  well,  he 
heals  or  cures  (it),  e.  g.  a  wound,  a  dis¬ 
ease,  etc.,  Ps.  103,  3. 

neetskesu,  v.  adj.  an.  (he  is)  cured,  re¬ 
stored  to  health,  Jer.  46,  11.  Vbl.  n. 
-kesuonk,  a  cure,  health-giving,  Prov. 

4  22 

T,  HU. 

neetu,  v.  i.  (1)  he  (or  it)  grows,  as  a  plant 
or  animal,  Job  8,  11;  Ps.  92,  12;  pi.  ! 


neetu — continued. 

-uog,  Jer.  12,  2.  (2)  he  is  born,  Prov. 

17,  17;  Job  5,  7;  Is.  9,  6;  cf.  neekin. 
This  word  is  not  easily  translatable; 
it  signifies  he  comes  into  life,  has  birth, 
but  it  also  (with  an  an.  subj.)  con¬ 
notes  the  coming  into  the  family  or 
tribal  relation,  domestic  life  and  growth. 
Cf.  ivetu. 

neg,  nag,  pron.  demonst.  they  (who), 
El.  Gr.  7:  wame  neg,  all  they  who, 
Lev.  11,  9, 10;  accus.  nagoh,  they  whom, 
them.  Cf.  noh,  nagum. 
negonne,  ‘adv.  of  order’,  first,  El.  Gr. 
21.  Like  nequtta  (one),  of  which  it  is 
the  ordinal,  negonne  appears  to  be 
nearly  related  to  nukkdne  (Abn.  ne- 
gannii),  old,  ancient,  and  so  first  in 
order  of  time.  See  nukkomauon&t;  nuk- 
kone;  pasuk. 

[Narr.  nec&vmi.  Abn.  nikkaiiniSi,  de- 
vant,  par  avance.  Del.  nigani,  at  the 
first,  Zeisb.] 

negonshaii,  v.  i.  he  goes  first,  he  is  in 
advance;  v.  t.  he  goes  before  (them). 
[The  characteristic  -sh  denotes  going 
swiftly,  as  in  2  Sam.  18,  27:  suppos. 
noh  negomhont,  he  who  runs  before  or 
foremost.]  N.  agent,  negonsliaen,  a 
leader  (indef.  -inin),  Acts  24,  5. 
negontcoaii,  v.  t.  he  sends  a  message  to 
(him),  i.  e.  sends  word  before  or  in 
advance  of  coming,  2  Chr.  2,  3  (nun- 
nekdnchuam,  I  send,  C.). 
negonuhkaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  goes  onward 
before  (him),  continues  to  go  before  or 
in  advance  of  [with  the  characteristic 
(-uhk)  of  progression] :  xvun-negonuhkau- 
oh,  he  goes  before  them,  John  10,  4. 

[Abn.  ne-nikkahndsse,  v.  i.  je  marche 
devant.] 

negoshkag,  =  ne  koshkag,  its  breadth. 
See  kushki. 

nehchippog.  See  neechippog. 
nehenwonche,  (1)  his  own,  their  own, 
2  Sam.  12,  3;  2  K.  18,  27;  Prov.  14,  10. 
(2)  of  himself,  of  themselves,  suasponte; 
nish  nehenwonche  nekukish,  things  which 
grow  of  themselves,  spontaneously,  2 
K.  19,  29. 

nehnekikom,  -ekugkom,  v.  t.  he  tears 

or  rends  (it),  Josh.  8,  7:  wun-nehnekik- 
om-un,  he  tears  it  in  pieces  (of  a  wild 
beast,  Mic.  5,  8);  nen  nehnekxigkom,  I 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


83 


nehnekikom,  -ekugkom — continued, 
rend  (it),  Hos.  13,  8.  With  an.  obj. 
nehnekukkaii,  he  tears  or  rends  (him), 
as  a  wild  beast  his  prey;  with  affixes 
wun-nehnekukkau-oh,  he  tears  him,  Luke 
9,  42;  suppos.  noh  nehnekukauont,  he 
who  tears  (when  tearing),  1  K.  13,  26. 
Intens.  from  a  primary  nekaeu,  with 
the  characteristic  (- uhk )  of  continued 
action.  From  the  same  primary  are 
formed  nek-ussosu,  he  cuts  or  gashes; 
neh-neksliaeu,  it  rends  or  tears;  neh-nek- 
inum,  he  tears  (it)  by  hand,  etc.  See 
the  following. 

nehnekikosu,  v.  i.  act.  he  goes  on  tear¬ 
ing,  continues  to  tear;  intin.  -osinneat, 
Jer.  15,  3;  pass,  he  is  torn;  suppos.  neh- 
negikausik,  when  he  is  torn,  Ezek.  4, 14. 
See  nehnekikom. 

nehnekinum,  v.  t.  he  rends  or  tears  (it) 
in  pieces;  with  an.  obj.  - kinail :  nun- 
nehnekinuk,  he  pulls  me  in  pieces  (as  a 
lion  tears  his  prey),  Lam.  3,  11  (nun- 
negunum,  I  tear,  C. ).  From  nek-aeu, 
with  formative  (- inum ,  -inau)  denoting 
action  performed  by  the  hand,  and 
intens.  reduplication, 
nehnekshaeu,  v.  i.  it  tears;  from  neh- 
nekaeu,  with  characteristic  of  involun¬ 
tary  or  violent  action.  As  n.  a  rent,  Is. 
3,  24. 

nehnekugkom.  See  nehnekikom. 
nehneteapco  (?),  v.  i.  he  devours,  Dan.  7, 
19;  (v.  t. )  imperat.  nehneeteapsh  weyaus, 
devour  thou  flesh,  v.  5. 
nehneyai  (?),  ‘cloven’,  Acts  2,  3. 
nehteau  (?),  v.  i.  [he  procures  food  by 
hunting  or  fishing,  etc.?] :  wanne  teag 
neldeau-co-og  (pi.  neg. ),  they  caught 
nothing  (by  fishing,  John  21,  3).  Cf. 
ncotamogqudeu,  ‘  I  go  a  fishing’;  natin- 

neham,  he  seeks  for. 

7  ’  < 

[Abn.  ne-natehi  ka,  je  vais  chercher 
de  la  mangeaille.  ] 

nehtippaeu,  natip-,  v.  i.  it  is  covered 
with  water;  pi.  -pactsh,  they  (inan. )  are 
covered,  etc.,  Gen.  7,  19,  20;  [suppos. 
netippog,  —neechippog,  dew?]. 

[Marginal  note. — "Wrong;  see  ogqueh- 
chi ( hogkit  ogqunnedt'!) .] 

nehtoe,  adv.  and  adj.  skilful  [ly],  2  Chr. 
2,  8;  nohtde  and  ndhtoe,  v.  J,  intens. 
nunnehtde,  1  K.  5,  6.  The  base  (related 
to  wahteau,  he  understands)  signifies 


nehtoe — continued, 
knowledge  or  skill  acquired  by  practice. 
The  primary  verb  ( nehteau ,  nohtdaut) 
I  have  not  found  in  Eliot, 
nehtonum,  v.  t.  he  handles  (it)  dexter¬ 
ously  or  skilfully,  he  is  practiced  in 
the  use  of  (it);  pi.  -umwog,  they  han¬ 
dle,  i.  e.  know  how  to  use  (swords, 
Ezek.  38,  4);  suppos.  noh  nohtonuk,  he 
who  handles  (a  sickle,  Jer.  50,  16);  pi. 
neg  nohtonukeg,  they  who  (know  how 
to)  handle  (shields,  spears,  etc.),  1 
Chr.  12,  8;  2  Chr.  25,  5.  From  nohtde , 
with  skill,  and  the  formative  ( num )  of 
action  of  the  hand. 

[Del.  nita,  I  can,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  10.] 
nehtuhtau.  See  netuhtdu. 

*neimpauog  (Xarr. ),  thunder,  It.  W. 
See  neempau. 

neit  [ne,  with  locat.  affix],  then,  at  that 
time,  Judg.  8,  21,  22;  Luke  22,  36. 
nek.  See  neek. 
nekin.  See  neekin. 

nekittomashik  (?),  suppos.  where  it 
parts  or  divides:  adt  neekittomashik  may, 
‘  at  the  parting  of  the  way  ’ ,  Ezek.  21 , 21. 
Cf..  adt  neesinash  nogkishkauadtummuk 
mayash,  ‘where  two  ways  met’,  Mark 
11,  4.  [From  nequtta,  where  they  be¬ 
come  one  (?).] 

*nekus,  adv.  there  (?),  C. 
nemehkuh,  ‘adv.  of  likeness’,  so,  El.  Gr. 
22;  but  in  his  translation  it  is  used  as  a 
conjunction:  nemekeh,  so  (accordingly), 
Gen.  37,  14;  nemehkeh  neit,  so  then, 
1  Cor.  7,  38. 

nemompaai  (?),  v.  i.  ‘he  has  taken  a  bag 
of  money  with  him’,  Prov.  7,  20. 
nemunnum,  v.  t.  he  takes  (it)  in  or  with 
his  hand,  Ex.  24,  6;  Is.  40,  15;  Matt. 
14,  19;  pi.  -umwog,  they  take  (it),  Josh. 
4,  8;  imperat.  2d  sing,  nemunush;  pi. 
-nunuok;  with  an.  obj.  nemunau,  he 
takes  (him),  Josh,  2,  4.  Cf.  maumunni, 
it  is  taken  away;  tohq-unnum,  he  catches 
or  takes  hold  of  it,  etc.  The  formative, 
-annum  fan.  obj.  -unau),  denotes,  gen¬ 
erally,  action  performed  by  the  hand; 
more  exactly,  physical  action  per¬ 
formed  directly  upon  the  object  with¬ 
out  the  intervention  of  an  instrument 
or  agent, 
nen.  See  neen. 


84 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


ne  naj,  let  that  be  so,  so  lie  it.  See  nan. 

[Narr.  eudtch  or endtcli  keen  anawdyean, 
[let  it  be  as  you  command,]  ‘your  will 
shall  be  law.’] 

nenan,  the  same  (thing),  Phil.  2,  2.  See 
nan. 

ne  nogque,  ‘that  way-ward’,  El.  Gr.  21; 
toward  that.  See  nogque. 

*nencohque,  adv.  so,  C.  Of.  anmhque. 
See  nogque. 

nepattuhquonk.  See  neepattnnkquonk. 

nepaus,  -pauz,  n.  (l)the  sun,  Gen.  19,  23; 
37,  9;  Josh.  10,  12,  13;  Ps.  89,  36.  (2) 
a  month,  Ex.  12,  2;  Rev.  22,  2;  pi.  (an.) 
-zaog,  - zsaog :  neesuog  nepauzaog,  two 
months,  Judg.  11,  37.  Of.  kesuk,  nane- 
pamhadt. 

[Narr.  nippadus,  -pdivus,  the  sun; 
pausuck  npauus,  one  month.  Abn. 
kizSs,  le  soleil;  nibadSsse,  il  6claire,  il 
marehe.  ] 

nepauzshad,  n.  the  moon.  See  nane- 
paushadt. 

nepeunk,  n.  a  bush,  Ex.  3,  2,  3:  ut  ne- 
peunkquamit,  in  a  bush,  Acts  7,  30;  Luke 
20,  37. 

nepun,  n.  (the  latter  part  of)  summer, 
Gen. 8,  22;  Jer. 8, 20.  Of.  sequan.  “The 
earing  of  their  corn  [the  Virginians 
call]  nepinough,  the  harvest  and  fall  of 
the  leaf,  taquitock.” — Capt.  J.  Smith’s 
Virginia,  b.  2,  p.  28.  Adv.  and  adj.  ne- 
punnde,  in  or  of  summer. 

[Narr.  niepun  and  quaqusquan,  sum¬ 
mer.  Abn.  nipene,  l’etc  passe;  nipen, 
l’et4  present;  nipeghe,  l’et4  prochain; 
nipemSi,  pendant  l’ete.  Cree  nepin;  sup- 
pos.  nepeek.  Chip,  ne'bin.  Del  .nipen, 
Zeisb.  Of.  Abn.  mibi,  leaf.  Lescarbot 
gives  Souriquois  [Micmac]  nibir  betour, 
when  spring  comes;  lit.  when  the  leaf 
comes,  p.  697  (repr.  in,  671). 

*nequitteconnau-og  (Narr. ),  n.  pi.  eels, 
R.  W.  [literally,  ‘they  go  one  by  one’, 
or  ‘singly’,  i.  e.,  are  not  seen  in  pairs. 
Of.  neeshauog;  and  see  Narr.  Club  ed. 
of  Williams’  Key,  note  251];  nequttika , 
an  eel,  C. 

nequt,  num.  one,  El.  Gr.  14  (see  Pick¬ 
ering’s  Notes,  xliv-xlvi):  nequtta  talishe 
(1+5),  six,  Job  5,  19;  nequtta  tahshin- 
chag,  sixty,  2  Sam.  2,  31.  Cotton  makes 
this  distinction  between  nequt  and  pasuk 
(q.  v.):  “  nequt,  a  thing  that  is  past: 


nequt — continued. 

pasuk,  a  thing  in  being,”  which,  though 
not  absolutely  correct,  is  perhaps  ety¬ 
mologically  well  founded.  Xequt  ap¬ 
pears  to  lie  nearly  related  to  negonne, 
first  in  order,  and  to  nukkone  (another 
form  of  the  same  word),  old,  or  left 
behind;  perhaps  also  to  nekin,  it  is  born 
or  begins  to  be.  The  primary  mean¬ 
ing  is  that  which  begins  a  series:  one, 
as  a  beginning  of  numeration,  while 
pasuk  signifies  one  by  itself,  a  unit. 

[Narr.  nqu'vt.  Peq.  nuquut,  Stiles. 
Aim.  pezekS,  one;  nekSdam,  six;  neg8da- 
’teg8e,  one  hundred,  etc.;  nekStsiSi, 
uniquement.  Mi  cm.  nekSt,  un,  une  fois; 
adv.  seulement,  Rasies.] 
nequtchippai,  n.  the  portion  or  share  of 
one  person,  a  share,  a  part,  Prov.  17,  2. 
From  nequt  and  chippe. 
nequttekesukquashonat,  (infinit.  as) 

n.  one  day’s  journey :  ail - ,  he  goes 

on  one  day’s  journey,  1  K.  19,  4. 

[Narr.  nquittakeesiquockat,  one  day’s 
walk.  ] 

ne-sahteag,  as  n.  its  length  (see  sohteau, 
it  extends) :  a/iaeu  nesahteag,  on  its  two 
ends,  i.  e.  on  the  two  sides  long-wise, 
Ex.  25,  19. 

nesausuk,  num.  seven,  Mark  8, 5;  usually 
with  tahshe  or  ad  talishe:  nes&usuk  talishe, 
seven,  Ezek.  45,  23;  an.  pi.  -tahsuog, 
ibid. 

[Peq.  nezzdugnsk,  Stiles.  Narr.  enada. 
Abn.  taribaSails.  Cree  neesh  vdssik  or 
teypuckoop.  Chip,  nyvidssvri,  Bar. ;  nizh- 
wasswi.  Del.  ni  schasch,  Zeisb.] 
nesnechag.  See  neemeechag. 
netassu,  v.  adj.  (as  n. )  a  domestic  ani¬ 
mal;  pi.  netassuog,  ‘cattle’,  Gen.  6,20; 
Ps.  148, 10  ( netas ,  C. ).  From  neetu  and 
(the  base  of)  assamaii,  he  feeds  him: 
house-fed  animals. 

[Narr.  netasfiog,  cattle;  “this  name 
the  Indians  give  to  tame  beasts,  yea, 
and  birds  also  which  they  keep  tame 
about  their  houses.” — R.  W.  95.] 
netatup,  -ppe,  adv.  like,  so,  El.  Gr.  22; 
Luke  22,  31;  in  such  manner,  Matt.  5, 
12;  neane,  .  .  .  netatuppe,  as  .  .  .  so, 
Prov.  26,  21.  For  ne  labuppe,  it  is  equal. 

[Narr.  netdtup,  ‘it  is  all  one.’] 
neteag  [  =  ne  teag],  this  or  that  thing:  yeu 
mohsag  neteag,  ‘this  great  thing’  (mat- 


trumbuli.] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


85 


neteag — continued. 

ter,  fact),  Dent.  4,  32  ( neteag  nogkodtu- 
muk,  a  thing  left,  C.  172). 

[Del.  medhacke,  ‘matter’,  Zeisb.] 
netomp,  my  friend.  See  weetomp. 
netompas,  my  sister.  See  U'eetompas. 
netuhtou,  nehtuhtau,  v.  cans.  inan.  he 
learns  (it),  acquires  skill  in  (it):  nun- 
netuhtou-un,  I  learn  it,  Gen.  30,  27;  nurn- 
inahche  netuhtop  (pret.),  I  have  learned 
(it),  Phil.  4,  11;  pi.  nehtuhtauog,  Deut. 
31,  12;  -t6og,  they  learn,  are  skilled 
in,  Dan.  1,17.  Ybl.  n.  -toonk,  -tauonk, 
learning,  skill,  Dan.  1,  17;  John  7,  15. 
N.  agent,  -toen  (indef.  -tdenin),  a  skil¬ 
ful  man,  2  Chr.  2,  13. 
neuantam,  v.  i.  and  t.  inan.  he  grieves,  is 
sorrowful,  he  grieves  for  (it),  1  Sam. 
20,  34;  imperat.  of  prohib.  ahque  neuan- 
tamcok,  do  not  grieve,  Gen.  45,  5;  pret. 
-amup,  -amop,  I  was  grieved.'  Ybl.  n. 
-amoonk,  grief  [grieving],  sorrow,  Prov. 

15,  13;  Is.  53,  3.  See  nolitimwinneat. 

[Xarr.  n’nowantam,  I  am  grieved  for 

you.] 

newutche  [ne  wutche,  that  from],  adv. 
for,  from,  because,  El.  Gr.  22;  there¬ 
fore,  Eccl.  2,  1;  because,  Is.  7,  5; - 

yeu,  for  this  cause,  because  of  this, 
Eph.  3,  14  ( nauwitch ,  thence,  C. ).  Cf. 
nciwhutche,  therefrom. 

[Del.  newentschi,  Zeisb.] 

*neyanat,  last  year,  C. 
neyane.  See  neane. 

*neyhom  (Narr.),  a  turkey;  pi.  -om- 
mduog. 

[Abn.  nehenie  (and  ehem8) ,  coq.] 
*nickommo  (Narr. ),  a  (solemn)  feast  or 
dance. 

nikkiimme,  nuk-,  easily,  James  3,  17; 
with  an.  subj.  nikkumesu,  Matt.  11, 
30;  suppos.  (?)  nukkummat:  anue  nuk- 
kummat,  more  easily,  ‘sooner’,  Luke 

16,  17;  uttoh  ne  nukkummat,  ‘whether  it 
is  easier’  (to  say,  etc.),  Mark  2,  9;  nuk- 
kummatta,  ‘rather  than’,  (this)  ‘and 
not’  that,  preferably  to,  Prov.  8,  10. 

ninyeu,  nunneyeu,  n.  urine,  2  K.  18, 
27;  Is.  36,  12. 

nippe,  nuppe,  n.  water,  Deut.  23,  4; 
Judg.  5,  25;  Ps.  78,  16,  20;  pi.  -peash, 
Ps.  105,  29.  From  a  root  ’pe,  ’pi  (not 
found  separate),  with  the  directive  and 
determinative  ne.  In  compound  words 


nippe,  nuppe — continued, 
the  suppos.  ’ png  is  employed,  as  in  son- 
kippog  [; *onqui-pog~\ ,  cool  water,  i.  e. 
water  when  cool.  See  -pog. 

[Peq.  nupp,  nupph,  Stiles.  Quir. 
nip’p’,  Pier.  22.  Narr.  nip.  Abn .  nebi, 
eau;  tekebi,  eau  froide.  Cree  rappee  (in 
comp,  -appuvoy,  ‘  liquor  ’ ,  liquid) .  Chip. 
nebeh,  J. ;  ne'bi,  Sch.  Del.  in’ hi,  Zeisb. 
(and  me  nup  peek,  a  lake  or  pond).] 
nippisse,  nips  (dim.  of  nippe,  small 
water),  a  pool  or  pond,  John  5,  2,  4,  7, 
as  adj.  and  adv.  nuppisse  nippe,  water  of 

the  pool;  - nippeash,  waters  of  the 

pool,  Is.  22,  9,  11;  pi.  -sash,  ponds,  Is. 
19,  10  (nippis,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  5,  2). 

[Narr.  nipeicese,  ‘some  water’  (for 
drinking);  nips,  a  pond.] 
nippissepog,  nup-,  n.  a  pond  or  small 
lake,  Neh.  3,  16:  en  nuppissepag-wut, 
‘into  a  standing  water’,  Ps.  107,  35; 
‘into  the  lake’,  Luke  8,  33.  From  nip¬ 
pisse  and  -pog. 
nips.  See  nippisse. 

nish,  pi.  of  ne,  these  or  those  (inan.),  El. 

Gr.  7 ;  Luke  15,  16. 
nish.  See  nisliwe,  three, 
nishkeneunkque,  -ungque,  (it  is)  un¬ 
clean,  filthy,  Lev.  5,  2;  1  Tim.  3,  3,  8; 
suppos.  -unkquok,  when  it  is  unclean, 
Lev.  5,  2;  ne - ,  that  which  is  un¬ 

clean,  filthy,  ‘abominable’,  Jer.  44,  4; 
Lev.  7, 21.  With  an.  sub],  nishkeneunk- 
qussu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  unclean,  (one 
who  is)  unclean,  etc.,  Lev.  11,  5;  12,  2; 
Job  15,  16;  suppos.  -usslt,  Lev.  5,  3. 
Ybl.  n.  -ussuonk  (an.),  uncleanness, 
Lev.  5,  3;  Col.  3,  5.  With  inan.  subj. 
nishkeneunkquodlau,  it  is  unclean  or 
filthy.  Adj.  and  adv.  -odtde,  Zech.  3,  3, 4. 

[Del.  nis  ksu,  nasty,  Zeisb.] 
nishkenon  [v.  imp.  it  drizzles],  as  n. 
fine  rain,  drizzle,  ‘mist’,  Acts  13,  11; 
‘vapor’,  James  4,  14.  N.  collect,  nish- 
kenunk,  ‘small  rain’,  Deut.  32,  2.  Cf. 
sokanon,  it  rains. 

[Chip,  niskddad,  the  weather  is  very 
bad,  Bar.  532.  Del.  niskelaan,  foul, 
rainy  weather,  Zeisb.] 
nishketeau,  v.  caus.  inan.  obj.  he  makes 
(it)  unclean,  defiles  (it);  pi.  -eauog, 
Jude  8. 

nishketeauunat,  v.  act.  todefile,  to  make 
unclean:  nishketeauog,  they  defile  (it), 


86 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


nishketeauunat — continued. 

Jude  8;  ahque  nishkhikcok,  do  not  de-  ; 
file  yourselves,  Lev.  18,  24;  yeush  wun- 
nish  kukqunash ,  these  things  defile  (him ) , 
Mark  7,  15. 

[Del.  niskiton,  he  dirties,  bewrays 
(it),  Zeisb.  Gr.  160.] 
nishnoh,  each  one,  everyone  (an.),  Lev. 

11,  15;  Is.  6,  2;  (inan.)  Ps.  119,  101. 
*nishquektnneat,  to  rage,  C.  206;  nun- 
nishquet,  I  rage,  ibid.  205.  Cf.  nashquttin, 
a  tempest. 

*nishquewam :  nen  nunmshquewam ,  I 
chide  or  scold;  nishquemittinneat,  to  be 
chid,  C.  185.  See  auskomuwau. 
nishwe,  nish,  num.  three,  El.  Gr.  14; 
Ex.  21,  11;  nishweu,  1  Cor.  13,  13;  pi. 
an.  nishuog;  inan.  nishwinash,  shwinash, 

1  Chr.  21, 10.  More  exactly  nish,  three ; 
nishwe,  adj.  (inan.)  the  third,  Rev.  6,  5; 

2  K.  19,  29;  (an.)  Dan.  5,  7;  Rev.  4,  7; 
and  adv.  thirdly,  2  Cor.  12,  28:  nashwe 
kodtumoo,  the  third  year,  Deut.  26,  11; 
nishwu,  “adv.  of  order”,  thirdly,  El. 
Gr.  21;  suppos.  (an.)  nashcoit,  when  he 
is  third,  he  who  is  third,  Rev.  16,  4,  = 
naslicout,  Rev.  14,  9,  =nasheucout,  Matt. 
22,  26;  nishwudt  nompe,  three  times,  at 
the  third  time,  Ex.  23,  14,  17;  Ezek. 
21,  14.  Cf.  nashaue,  between. 

nisohke,  adv.  all  the  while,  so  long  as, 
=  ne  sohke,  1  Sam.  25,  7 :  nisohke  poman- 
tog,  ‘all  the  days  of  his  life’  (so  long 
as  he  may  live) ,  2  K.  25,  30;  tohsahke 
ohkeook,  ‘while  the  world  standeth’, 

1  Cor.  8,  13. 

[Cree  soke,  extremely,  very  greatly; 
mdosuk,  always,  Howse.] 
nissim,  I  say.  See  ussindl. 
n  naj ,  let  it  be  so.  See  nan. 
nnih,  v.  i.  it  is  so,  it  is  like  or  the  same 
as  (with  an.  subj.  neanussu,  q.  v.):  ne- 
anussit  wosketomp,  nnih  um-menukesu- 
onk,  as  is  a  man  so  is  his  strength,  Judg. 

8,  21;  monk6  nnih,  it  was  so,  Gen.  1,  7; 
nnih,  ‘it  came  to  pass’,  Gen.  6,  1;  38, 1; 
Matt.  7,  28;  ne  yeuyeu  nnih,  that  now  is 
(so),  Eccl.  3,  15;  uttoh  woh  yeush  en 
nnih,  how  can  these  things  be  (so)? 
John  3,  9;  suppos.  nnag:  nnih  mahche 
yen  nnag,  ‘it  came  to  pass  after  this’, 
i.  e.  it  was  so  after  this  was  so,  2  Sam. 
13,  1;  pret.  nniyeup,  it  was  so,  Eccl.  3, 
15;  pi.  yeush  nniyeupash,  these  things 


nnih — continued. 

were  so,  Is.  66,  2;  ne  mos  nnih,  it  must 
needs  be  so,  Mark  13,  7.  See  neane, 
unne. 

[Del.  leu ,  ‘true’,  Zeisb.  Gr.  173;  ‘it  is 
so’,  Zeisb.  Voc.  9.] 

[N ote. — ‘  ‘  nnih  not  separable  from  vnn i.  ”] 

nnih,  (it)  ‘was  so’,  Gen.  1,  7;  ‘it  came  to 
pass’,  Gen.  6, 1;  38, 1;  Matt.  7,  28;  ‘is’, 
Eccl.  3,  15;  =unne,  q.  v.  Apparently 
a  verb  substantive  from  nan  or  neane, 
literally  ‘it  (was)  so’,  or  ‘it  (is)  so’: 
ncowdog  nennih,  they  said  these  things 
were  so,  Acts  24,  9;  uttoh  woh  yeush  en 
nnih,  how  can  these  things  be  (so)? 
John  3,  9;  nnih  mahche  yen  nnag,  ‘it 
came  to  pass  after  this’  (it  was  so  after 
this  was  so),  2  Sam.  13,  1;  ne  mahche 
Anagkup,  ne  yeuyeu  nnih,  that  which 
hath  been  is  now,  Eccl.  3,  15;  ne  pish 
dnak  mahche  nniyeup,  that  which  is  to 
be  hath  already  been,  ibid.;  yeush 
nniyeupash,  these  things  have  been,  Is. 
66,  2;  nniyeup,  ‘it  came  to  pass’  (was 
so),  Neh.  4,  12;  ne  mos  nnih,  it  must 
needs  be  so,  Mark  13,  7;  woh  nniyeuash, 
(all  things)  ‘are  possible’  (may  be  so) , 
Mark  10,  27  ( nenih ,  that  is,  C.  181;  ne 
ennih  or  nemehkuh  ne  (conj. )  so  that,  C. 
234).  See  dunag. 

[Narr.  etu  or  nniu,  is  it  so?  R.  W.  29; 
nni,  eiu,  it  is  true,  ibid.  63.] 

[This  second  definition  of  nnih  appears  in 
the  unrevised  portion  of  the  manuscript  be¬ 
tween  the  term  nishk  and  P,  and,  although  it 
repeats  to  some  extent  the  references  contained 
in  the  first  (revised)  definition,  it  is  here  in¬ 
serted  in  full.  The  first  definition  of  nnih  oc¬ 
curs  in  the  revised  manuscript,  where  it  follows 
the  term  *nidc6mmo.] 

*nnin  (Narr.),  man;  pi.  nninnuog,  R.  W., 
who  also  writes  enin,  man,  and  pi.  nin- 
nuock,  a  “general  name  belonging  to 
all  natives”.  Related  to  ne,  neen  (I), 
nanwe,  and  unne  (of  the  kind  or  spe¬ 
cies),  the  radical  meaning  of  nnln  or 
nninnu  is,  ‘he  is  like  myself’,  or  ‘of 
the  same  kind’.  This  word  could 
properly  have  no  place  in  Eliot’s  trans¬ 
lation.  It  is,  however,  once  or  twice 
introduced,  as  in  Mark  10,  6:  ninnuoh 
(accusat. )  kah  squa,  ‘male  and  female’, 
i.  e.  man  and  woman.  The  Indians 
restricted  its  application  to  men  of  their 
own  race  or  like  themselves.  (See 
nanwe. ) 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


87 


*nnin — continued. 

[Quir.  ren,  pi.  rbiawawk.  Aim.  aren- 
ahbe,  homme;  ned-aren-ahdSe,  je  ])arle 
Abnaqui.  Chip,  mini,  Bar. ;  eninnee,  J. 
Cree  ethbvu,  homo,  an  Indian.  Shawn. 
ee  len  ee,  man;  len  ah  wai,  an  Indian. 
Micm.  In8i,  homo.  Del.  lenno,  man; 
lenape  [=Abn.  arenaiibe],  a  Delaware, 
vir;  lenni,  a  man,  Zeisb.  (see  nanwe); 
lin  ni  le  na  pe,  ‘Indians  of  the  same 
nation’,  Zeisb.  S.  B.  70.] 
no  (?),  adv.  and  demonstr.  pron.  (?)  at 
that  (place),  that;  yeu  uhquaeu,  ...  no 
uhqudeu,  on  the  end  on  this  side,  .  .  . 
on  the  end  on  that  side,  Ex.  37,  8;  no 
pajeh,  until  (that),  Matt.  11, 13;  18,  22; 
=  noh  pajeh,  Is.  5,  8  (n<5  pajeh,  until, 
C.  234) .  See  ndoosukomunneat,  noohqueu. 
*no,  adv.  far  off.  (The  idea  of  motion  is 
associated,  going  far  off  or  to  a  distance; 
noadt,  at  afar  off,  at  a  distance,  is  used 
when  distance  in  time  or  place  is  ex¬ 
pressed  absolutely. ) 

*no,  for  noli,  nahoh,  or  nagoh  (?) ,  Luke  23, 
28;  no  aush,  go  (to  him),  Matt.  18,  15. 
noadt,  noadtit,  nooadt,  adv.  afar  off, 
Ex.  2,  4;  24,  1;  in  old  time,  Josh.  24,  2; 
Neh.  12,  46;  Ezra  4,  15;  Mic.  7,  14: 
ndcotahtah,  remove  it  far  from  me,  Prov. 
30,  8  ( nauwut ,  noadt,  far,  C.;  noadtit,  a 
great  way  off,  ibid. ) .  See  noohqueu. 

[Narr.  naiiwot,  a  great  way;  n&ivwatick, 
far  off  at  sea,  R.  W.  76.  Del.  lawat,  long 
ago,  Zeisb.] 

noadtuck,  adv.  a  long  time  (El.  Gr.  21). 
noahtuk,  nddhtuk  [noev-tuk] ,  the  mid¬ 
dle  of  the  river,  Josh.  12,  2;  13,  9,  16. 
noappit,  noahpit,  the  Highest,  the 
Most  High,  Ps.  18,  13;  46,  4;  (he  who 
is)  afar  off,  Prov.  27, 10;  suppos.  vocat. 
pi.  noappeoaish,  ye  that  are  [dwell] 
afar  off,  Is.  33,  13. 
noe.  See  noeu. 

noetipukok,  nouttipukok,  n.  mid¬ 
night,  1  K.  3,  20;  Ex.  11,  4;  pajeh 
noeutipukkok,  till  midnight,  Judg.  16,  3; 
ndetipukodaeu,  at  midnight,  Judg.  16,  3 
\noeu-poh-kenae-kod,  the  middle  of  the 
dark  hours  or  time] . 

[Narr.  nanashowatippocat,  R.  W.  67. 
Del.  la  wit  pi  kat,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  44.  Abn. 
nahcoitebi  kat,  Rasies.  ] 
noeu,  noe,  adj.  in  the  middle,  the  midst, 
Ex.  15,  8;  Judg.  16,  29:  en  noeu,  in  the 


|  noeu,  noe — continued. 

midst,  Prov.  23,  34;  Matt.  10,  16,  =ut 
noeu,  Ps.  78,  28;  noeukommuk,  ‘in  the 
midst  of  the  hall’  (i.  e.  inclosed  place), 
Luke  22,  55 ;  wushou  ndeu  Samaria  kah 
Guide,  went  through  the  midst  of  Sa¬ 
maria  and  Galilee,  Luke  17,  11;  umtch 
noeu  asinnekdussehtu,  from  the  midst  of 
the  bush,  Ex.  3,  2;  ut  ndeu  adtanohke- 
tearnuk,  in  the  midst  of  the  garden, 
Gen.  2,  9.  See  nashaue. 

[Abn.  nanSi8i,  le  milieu,  au  milieu. 
Del.  lelawi,  half  way  (?),  Zeisb.  Gr.  176; 
the  middle,  half,  Zeisb.  Voc.  20.  Chip. 
nawagarn,  ‘in  the  middle  of  a  lake, 
bay,  of  a  river,  etc.’;  nawaii,  center,  in 
the  center,  middle,  in  the  middle; 
ndwaiiwan,  it  is  the  middle,  the  center; 
nawakwa,  ‘in  the  midst  of  a  forest’; 
navcakwe  (from  naokive),  ‘it  is  mid-day 
or  noon’;  nawabik,  ‘in  the  midst  of  an 
object  of  metal’;  naw,  nawa,  nawi,  “in 
composition,  signifies  in  the  middle,  in 
the  midst  of”,  Bar.] 
nogkishkauonat.  See  nogkushkaudnat. 
[nogkohkaeihhuunat,  v.  t.  to  lend:] 
namohkaeihhuunat  pish  kenogkoh  kou- 
weh,  thou  shalt  lend  to,  Deut.  15,  6 
(- ogguhkoue ,  Deut.  28,  12);  noh  nogoh- 
koulieoncheh,  that  which  is  lent  to,  1 
Sam.  2,  20.  Vbl.  n.  nogohkodnit,  -kouhu- 
adt  (after  noh),  he  who  lends,  a  lender, 
Is.  24,  2;  Prov.  22,  7.  See  namohkaeik- 
heau. 

[nogkohkouunat,  v.  t.  to  borrow:]  nog- 
ohkou,  he  borroweth,  Ps.  37,  21;  matta 
pish  kenogkohkocoh,  thou  shalt  not  bor¬ 
row,  Deut.  15,  6;  nogkohkauunah,  it  was 
borrowed,  2  K.  6,  5;  nogkohkouaen-in, 
a  borrower,  Is.  24,  2,  =nogkuhkau- 
waen-in,  Prov.  22,  7.  See  namohkau. 
nogkus.  See  menogkus,  the  belly, 
nogkushkauonat,  nogkusk-,  nog- 
kishk-,  v.  t.  an.  to  meet  (anyone), 
Jer.  51,  31;  Matt.  25,  1;  kenogskunk- 
qunat,  to  meet  thee,  2  K.  5,  26;  wun- 
nogskau&nat,  to  meet  him,  2  K.  5,  21;  2 
Sam.  19,  24;  wunnogskauoh,  he  met  him, 
1  K.  18,  7  ( wunne  nogkishkoadtuonk, 
‘well  met’  (as  a  salutation),  C.  225). 

[Narr.  nokuslcauatees,  meet  (thou) 
him;  nockuskauatUea,  let  us  meet;  neen- 
meshnockuskav),  I  did  meet.  “They 
are  joyful  in  meeting  of  any  in  travel, 


88 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


nogkushkauonat,  etc. — <•< mtinued. 
and  will  strike  fire  eitlier  with  stones 
or  sticks,  to  take  tobacco,  and  discourse 
a  little  together.” — R.  W.  75.  Cree 
nugge-ekowdyoo,  he  meets  him.  Chip. 
ndhgexhkoodahdeicug,  they  meet  one  an¬ 
other,  Howse  85.] 

nogque,  (prep.)  toward,  Cant.  7,  4;  yeu 
nogque,  hither,  2  K.  2,  8  (see  yodi) ;  en 
nogque,  toward  (the  east,  Zech.  14,  4). 
From  nauondt,  to  see  (?) :  n6k,  behold 
ye;  muskesuk  nogqueon,  ‘when  the  eye 

saw  me’,  Job  29,  11;  - neh  nogqut, 

the  eye  which  saw  him,  20,  9;  nohndg- 
queh,  who  seeth  me  [whom  I  am  in  the 

presence  of],  Gen.  16,  13;  -  nog- 

quean,  when  he  seeth  thee,  Ex.  4,  14; 

-  nogqueon,  when  it  sees  me,  Job 

29,  11;  howan  kenogkumun,  who  seeth 
us,  Is.  29,  15;  matta  kenogkamn,  he  sees 

us  not,  Ezek.  8, 12  ( - vmnnaumcoun, 

9,  9) ;  matta  nogkrn,  it  does  not  behold 
him,  Job  20,  9.  Hence,  “to  the  sight 
of.”  It  can  hardly  be  the  contracted 
form  of  ne  ogque.  See  ne  nogque;  nuh- 
quainat. 

[Del.  loquel,  see  thou;  pi.  loqueek,  see 
ye,  Zeisb.  Gr.  174.] 

nogquenumunat,  v.  t.  to  yield  or  de¬ 
liver  up  (inan.  obj.):  ahque  nogquenu- 
ma>k,  do  not  ye  yield  up  (inan.  obj.), 
Rom.  6,  13. 

nogqueonat,  v.  t.  an.:  nogquegk,  yield 
yourselves  up  (to  him),  Rom.  6,  13. 

*  nogquissinneat,  v.  i.  to  appear,  C. 
180:  nunnogquis,  I  appear;  -f-  sCimun, 
we  appear,  ibid.;  ne  ogguhse  nogquok, 
which  appeareth  for  a  little  time,  James 
4,  14.  See  anogkenat;  anmhque;  anuk- 
quok. 

nogqussuonk,  n.  appearance  or  looks, 
C.  180;  woskeche  nogqussuonk,  apretence, 
ibid. 

[Cree  nok-oom,  he  is  visible;  nok-ioun, 
it  is  visible,  Howse  114.] 
noh,  nagum,  pers.  pron.  3d  sing,  he,  she, 
him,  her  (El.  Gr.  7);  noh  is  also,  and 
perhaps  in  strictness  always,  a  demon¬ 
strative  pronoun:  this  (man),  he  who 
(El.  Gr.  7).  See  *nahog.  In  Luke  3, 
23-38,  it  is  used  for  the  Greek  rov  ( with 
viov  understood) , 1  the  son  of  ’ ;  nen  nnoh 
( nen  ne-noh  or  nan-noh),  I  am  he  (that 
or  the  same  he),  Is.  41, 4;  ut  noh,  in  him, 


noh,  nagum — continued. 

C.  178;  nashpe  n/tgum,  with  him;  ut 
nagum,  to  him,  ibid.  178,  231. 
*nohhamiimunat,  v.  t.  to  sail  to  (to  go 
by  water?)  =  nohhamundt :  en  nohhani an, 
to  sail  to,  Acts  20,  16;  nultinhamumun, 
-homumun,  we  sailed  to,  Acts  27,  4,  7; 
nahhamwog,  they  sailed  to,  Acts  13,  4; 
kod  nuhhug,  he  was  about  to  sail  to, 
Acts  20,  3;  mdnunnohhomog,  when  we 
sailed  slowly. 

[Del.  imhimen,  to  go  down  the  water 
(river,  creek);  nahihilleen,  to  sail  down 
the  water;  nallahhemen,  to  sail  up  (the 
water,  river),  Zeisb.  Gr.  242.] 
nohkog  [ = nukonde'] ,  by  night,  in  the 
night,  Job  5,  14:  ne  nohkog,  in  that 
night,  Dan.  5,  30.  See  noetipukok;  nuk- 
kondeu;  nukon. 

nohkononat.  See  nmkondnat. 
nohkou,  n.  the  right  hand  ( noh  kounuk, 
that  which  carries  (?);  from  kenum.imu- 
ndt ) .  See  viuttinnohkdu;  allied  to  menuh- 
keu,  strong. 

nohnogkiae  meenan,  a  stammering 
tongue,  Is.  32,  4;  nahnagkide,  stammer¬ 
ing  (ly),  Is.  33,  19.  See  menan. 
nohnompit,  adv.  oftentimes,  Job.  33,  29. 

From  nompe. 
nohnushagk,  farewell. 

[Note. — Definition  not  completed.] 
nohshamwehteunk  (suppos. ),  when  it 
is  ‘compacted’  (united  firmly?),  Eph. 
4,  16. 

*nohtimwinneat,  to  sob  or  sigh:  nunnoli- 
tumup,  I  sob  or  sigh,  C.  209.  See  neu- 
antam. 

nohtinaii.  See  nahtinau. 
nohtoe,  skilful,  skilled,  2  Chr.  2,  7;  neh- 
tde,  v.  8;  nohtoe,  nuhtoe,  v.  7;  nehtuhto  (?) 
v.  14;  nunn-,  skilfully,  1  K.  5,  6. 
nohtomp,  in  comp,  words,  one  who  leads 
or  directs:  nohtompeantog  (q.  v.),  one 
who  leads  in  prayer,  a  minister;  noh- 
tompuhpequodt  (q.  v.) ,  one  who  leads  in 
music,  a  chief  musician, 
^nohtompeantog,  n.  ministers,  C.  213; 
but  sing,  a  minister,  Rawson,  Nash. 
Men.,  title-page;  ‘abishop’,  1  Tim.  3,2. 
nohtompuhpequodt,  n.  a  chief  musi¬ 
cian,  a  player  on  instruments  of  music 
(title  to  Ps.  75  and  77) ;  pi.  nohtompuhpe- 
quodclieg,  Ps.  87,  7,  =  nolddepequasheg, 
Gen.  4,  21. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATIC'K-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


89 


nohtonukqus,  n.  a  brother  (?):  nunnoh- 
tonugqus,  my  brother,  Gen.  20,  13;  mt- 
nohtonugqusoh,  herbrotlier,  Gen.  24,  53, 
55;  noli  wunnoMonukqusoh  (constr. ), 
whose  brother,  Acts  11,  2;  nohtonukqus, 
my  brother,  v.  21;  kenohtonukqus,  thy 
brother,  v.  23.  [Employed  only  by 
females  or  to  express  the  relation  of  a 
brother  to  a  sister.  See  ueetuksquoh. 
In  the  translation  of  John’s  gospel 
printed  with  the  Massachusetts  Psalter 
(1709),  u-etahtu  is  substituted  for  wun- 
nolitonukqussoh  of  Eliot.]  Cf.  weernat; 
weetomp. 

nohtonumunat,  v.  t.  to  handle(?),  to 
carry  in  the  hand(?),to  use  habitually, 
to  be  skilled  in  the  use  of:  nehtomunuog 
togkodtegash ,  they  handle  swords,  Ezek. 
38,  4;  noli  nohtonuk,  sickle,  he  who 
handleth  the  sickle,  Jer.  50,  16;  neg 
nohtonukeg,  they  who  handle  (shield, 
spear,  etc.),  1  Chr.  12,  8;  2  Chr.  25,  5. 
See  nohtoe. 

nompaas,  adj.  male,  Xum.  3,  15;  5,  3; 
31,  17;  Matt.  19,  4;  pi.  nompahog,  Ex. 
13,  15;  nomposhim,  a  male  animal, 
Deut.  7,  14;  pi.  - icussog ,  Ex.  13,  12. 

[Xarr.  enewashim,  R.  IV.  96.] 
nompakou,  nump-,  n.  a  jewel,  a  pre¬ 
cious  thing,  Prov.  11,  22;  Ezek.  16,  12; 
a  ‘treasure’,  Matt.  13,  44;  pi.  -f-  unash, 
Prov.  10,  2;  Gen.  24,  53. 
nompatauunat,  v.  t.  to  put  in  the  place 
of,  to  substitute  (one  thing  for  another), 
1  Sam.  21,  6. 

nompe,  adv.  again,  Gen.  26,  18;  instead 
of,  Gen.  4,  25;  Judg.  15,  2;  Xum.  8,  16 
( =  wutch  nompe,  v.  18);  repeatedly,  ex¬ 
pressing  with  a  numeral  the  number 
of  repetitions  or  ‘times’:  nishwudt 
nompe,  ‘three  times’  (to  the  third 
time),  Xum.  22,  28,  32;  nesausuk  tah- 
shit  nompe,  seven  times,  Lev.  8, 11 ;  14,  7; 
mcochekut  nompe,  oftentimes,  Luke  8, 
29;  freq.  nonompu,  nohnompit  (q.  v. ); 
noh  nompeyit  ne  teag,  ‘  he  who  repeateth 
a  matter’,  Prov.  17,  9;  sun  nen  nunnom- 
pin  God,  ‘Am  I  in  God’s  stead?’  Gen. 
30,  2.  See  nampcoham. 

[Del.  lappi,  again,  Zeisb.  Gr.  171; 
‘once  more’,  ibid.  175.  Abn.  nahbi, 
reciproquement.  ] 

nompennumunat,  v.  t.  to  restore,  to 
render  back:  nompennush,  restore  thou 
(it),  Judg.  11,  13. 


nompoaeu,  nompoae,  adv.  early  in  the 
morning,  Xeh.  4,  21;  Hos.  13,  3;  Prov. 
27,  14;  Ps.  127,  2;  early  on  the  mor¬ 
row,  Ex.  32,  6. 

nomposhim,  adj.  male,  Deut.  15,  19;  pi. 
-u-og,  Gen.  32, 14:  pish  nompaiyeuoo  kah 
squaiyeua ~>,  ‘they  shall  be  male  and  fe¬ 
male’,  Gen.  6, 19..  Cf.  *nnln;  squash  im. 

[C’ree  napayoo,  man,  vir;  ndpdywoo, 
he  is  (a)  man,  Howse  17  (rather,  he  is 
male).] 

nompuhkeik,  adv.  on  the  morrow,  1  K. 
3,  21;  Esth.  2,  14;  =na  nompuk,  Acts 
10,  9;  =  na  nompunk,  Acts  20,  15. 
nomsho--,  v.  i.  to  drift,  or  be  driven  be¬ 
fore  the  wind(?) :  nomshdog,  they  ‘were 
driven’,  Acts  27,  17;  nunnomshomun, 
‘we  let  her  drive’,  v.  15.  [From  noh- 
ham,  he  sails,  with  sh’  of  violent  mo¬ 
tion.] 

nomunkquag-,  nomungquag-,  n.  a  heap, 
Gen.  31,  46,  51,  52;  Ruth.  3,  7;  num- 
wonkquau,  Deut.  13, 16;  Josh.  7,  26;  nurn- 
munkquae,  heaped,  Cant.  7,  2;  ncinom- 
wonkquaeu  nano  nunkquash ,  ‘  heaps  upon 
heaps’,  Judg.  15,  16.  From  numirde, 
full  of.  See  numwonkquttauun&t. 
nomwausseonk:  usseup  amomwausse- 
onk  Jehovah,  ‘he  executed  the  justice 
of  the  Lord’,  Deut.  33,  22. 
nonche:  noli  nonche  pabuhtanumadt, 
‘thou  art  come  to  trust’  (condit.),  Ruth 
2,  12;  nonche  uunasscomeog,  ‘if  ye  be 
come  to  betray  me’,  1  Chr.  12, 17.  See 
*  nont. 

nonkane.  See  nunkane. 
nonompu,  adj.  instead  of,  Is.  55,  13. 
Cnonsiyeu,  all  alone,  C.  232.  See  nussu. 
*nont,  used  by  Cotton  sometimes  for  the 
verb  to  be,  often,  apparently,  as  an  ex¬ 
pletive  (see  nont  below) :  nen  nont,  I  be; 
ken  nont,  thou  art;  nohne,  he  is;  nenih, 
that  is,  C.  181;  kenauun  yeu,  we  are; 
kenauna,  ye  are;  n&gna,  they  are,  ibid. ; 
nagurn  nont,  he  was;  nenauun  nee,  we 
were;  kenau  ne,  ye  were;  ndg  ne,  they 
were,  ibid.;  napeh  nont  ne  unnioog,  O 
that  we  were  (such),  ibid.;  nont  kuppe- 
yomp,  thou  didst  come,  p.  185;  nont 
wame  nunnuppumun,  we  must  all  die, 
p.  188;  nont  nooivonteap,  I  did  dig,  ibid. ; 
mukkilchogquissog  nont  puhpuog,  boys 
will  play,  p.  204;  nont  paxicee  nuppaoan, 
thou  must  shortly  die,  p.  237;  nont 
woh  sampatau,  he  must  confess  (his 


90 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bvlleti.n  25 


*nont — continued. 

sins),  p.  252;  newag  kisnont  kussampoo- 
antamunanonate,  ‘we  must  therefore 
acknowledge’,  C.  Math.  Notit.  Ind.55; 
so,  in  title  to  Ind.  Laws,  nish  nashpe 
nananuacheeg  kusnunt  sasamatahamwog, 
‘by  which  the  magistrates  are  to  [i.  e. 
must]  punish  ’ ,  etc. ;  nont  woh  sampooau-, 
he  must  confess,  C.  252. 
nont,  only:  webe  nont  God,  ( who  can  .  .  .) 
but  God  only?  Mark  2,  7 ;  pamk  nont 
God,  ‘there  is  but  one  God’,  Ind. 
Primer,  19,  31;  pish  nagum  nont 
kanvausmm,  him  only  shalt  thou  serve, 
Matt.  4,  10. 

[Narr.  pausuck  vaunt  manit,  there  is 
only  one  God,  R.  W.  114.] 
nontaua-hettit.  See  *atauntowash;  wut- 
tdntauunat,  to  climb. 

nontsipamohettit  [  =  nonche-sippam  +] . 
See  missippano. 

*nontweantamunat,  to  wish:  nunnont- 
wedntam,  I  wish,  C.  216.  See  kodtan- 
tam,  he  desires. 

*noohkeyeue,  adv.  softly,  C.  230. 
*noohkie.  See  ncohki. 
noohteauunat,  v.  i.  to  be  far  off;  inan. 
subj.  n66hteau,  it  is  far  from  us,  Is.  59, 
11. 

noohtuk.  See  noahtuk. 

*noonapuock  \=namappuog']  (Narr.), 
‘they  have  not  room  one  by  another’, 
R.  W.  65. 

*no6natch  (Narr.),  a  deer:  “nodnatch,  or 
attuck  ntiyu,  I  hunt  venison”,  R.  W. 
143;  noughitch,  nogh-ich,  deer,  Stiles 
(Peq.);  [a  doe  with  a  fawn(?),  “when 
it  gives  suck.”]  See  ahtuk. 
*noosuppauog  (Narr.),  beavers,  R.  W. 

See  tummimk.  Cf.  *adsup,  raccoon, 
nooosukomunneat,  naco-,  nauus-,  v.  i. 
to  be  at  a  distance,  to  be  far  from, 
Lam.  3,  17:  kenacosukom,  thou  art  far 
from  (it),  Is.  54,  14;  matta  kendcosuka- 
moo,  thou  art  not  far  from  (it),  Mark 
12,  34;  naoosukonqueog,  (it)  is  far  from 
us,  Is.  59,  9;  nocosukongqush,  be  it  far 
from  thee,  Matt.  16,  2;  ndoosukdk,  ‘get 
ye  far  from  (him)  ’,  Ezek.  11,  15;  ayeu- 
onk  vmssaume  naaosukoman  (and  naco- 
sukongquean) ,  ‘if  the  place  be  too  far 
from  thee’,  Deut.  12,  21;  14,  24.  See 
noohqueu  (anuckquaqne,  R.  W. ). 


nooosukomunneat,  etc. — continued. 

[Del.  na  schachki,  adv.  (?)  so  far, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  174.] 

nopadtinayeu(?),  adv.  south  westward, 
Acts  27,  12  [ tannushin  en  ndpadtinayeu 
and  vmtcheksuau,  “itlieth  to  the  south¬ 
west  and  northwest”,  A.  V.;  “looking 
northeast  and  southwest”,  Rev.  Yer. ; 
(“looking  down  the  southwest  and 
down  the  northwestward”,  Greek); 
“toward  the  southwest  and  by  west 
and  northwest  and  by  west”,  L.  Tom- 
son,  1596.];  nopatunniew,  eastward  (or 
northeastward)  (?) ,  Mar. Yin.  Rec.  1685. 

[Narr.  nopdtin,  the  east  wind,  R.  W. 
83.] 

nosweetauonat,  nooswet-,  nosweht-, 

v.  adj.  an.  to  serve,  Deut.  10,  12;  to 
obey,  Prov.  30,  17;  2  Cor.  10,  5;  nos- 
wehtamun&t,  with  inan.  obj.  to  obey  the 
words  of,  commands  of,  etc.,  1  Sam.  8, 
19;  nooswetauonadut,  to  serve  them, 
Deut.  4, 19;  nosweetash,  obey  thou,  Gen. 
27,  8;  nooswetah  nen,  yield  yourself  to 
me,  C.  216;  nooswetamcok,  obey  ye,  Deut. 
13,  4;  nosivehtok,  obey  ye  (them,  an.), 
Eph.  6, 1;  nooswetamilnate,  to  obey;  ken 
nooswetah,  obey  thou  me;  nooswehtaw 
manit,  obey  God,  C.  202. 
noswehtamoonk,  ncoswetamcoonk,  n. 
obedience,  1  Sam.  15,  22;  mat  ncosweh- 
tamdonk,  disobedience,  2  Cor.  10, 6  ( ncos - 
wetamooonk,  C.  202). 
noswehtauonat.  See  nosweetaudnat. 
*nottomag,  mink.  See  Judd’s  Hadley, 
355.  Cf.  Del.  gunnamochk,  Zeisb. 
(  —  quinndmaiig),  otter  (see  his  nkeke). 
nouttipukok.  See  noetipukok. 
*nowweta  (Narr.),  no  matter,  R.  W.  54. 
ncoadt.  See  ndadt. 

ncoche,  for  na  each,  adv.  thenceforth, 
therefrom,  from  that  time.  Often  used 
interchangeably  M'ith  kooche,  kutche ;  but 
while  both  are  inceptives,  ncoche  seems 
to  appropriately  mark  the  time  and 
kutche  the  occasion  of  beginning  of 
action,  as  wutche  does  the  cause  of 
action.  [Note. — On  further  examina¬ 
tion  I  do  not  find  this  distinction 
well  founded.  See  coch.  ]  yeu  kesukok 
ncoche  kummishsesh,  ‘this  day  will  I 
begin  to  magnify  thee’,  Josh.  3,  7; 
ncoche  wekitteau,  he  began  to  build; 
neg  nagig  ncoche  vmttamtohkonduh,  they 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


91 


ruDch.e — continued, 
began  to  mock  him,  Luke  14,  30,  29; 
yev  nooche  ussenaout,  this  they  began  : 
to  do.  [matter  nmche  peyoh,  ‘I  am  not 
come’,  Matt.  9,  13;  naochi  Jehovah,  ‘I 
am  the  Lord’s’  (i.  e.  I  proceed  from 
ttfe  Lord),  Is.  44,  5,  in  which  places 
nmche  is  perhaps  used  for  nen  coch.'] 
See  tahnmche,  causelessly,  ‘in  vain’,  and 
kutche. 

[Del.  nutschi,  at  the  beginning,  Zeisb. 
Gr.  177.] 

*nroch.um,  I  blame;  from  untchumonate, 
to  blame,  C.  182. 

noochum-wesuonk,  n.  tenderness,  weak¬ 
ness,  Deut.  28,  56. 

ncochumwetancowaonk,  n  co  c  h  u  m  - 
wehtahwhuttuonk,  n.  a  wound;  pi. 
-ongash,  Prov.  26,  22;  27,  6. 

ncDchumwi,  adj.  weak  (El.  Gr.  13),  Yum. 
13,  19;  primarily,  weak,  because  in,  its 
beginning  (from  nmche):  nmchumwe 

vju  nnepog,  -  moskehtue,  the  tender 

herb,  Deut.  32,  2;  Job  28,  27;  pi.  nm- 
chumidyeuash;  an.  nmchvmwem,  (he  is) 
weak  (El.  Gr.  13),  tender,  Gen.  33,  13; 

1  Chr.  22,  5;  noh  nmchumwesit,  he  that 
is  tender,  Deut,  28,  54,  56;  he  that  is 
lame,  Prov.  26,  7;  pi.  Matt.  11,  5  ( nm~ 
chlmwe,  maimed,  C.  172;  nmchumvA, 
tender,  ibid.  175;  nmchimme,  weak,  ibid. 
176). 

[ncodsquaonat,  v.  act.  an.  to  seduce,  to 
commit  fornication  with:]  nmdsquao- 
nont,  ‘seducing’,  Ex.  22,  16.  See  nan- 
wunnmdsquaau. 

*ncDhchumwesue,  adv.  weakly,  C.  230. 

ncohki,  nrokiyeue,  adj.  soft,  Prov.  25, 
15;  Job  41,  3;  pi.  inan.  nmkkiyeuash, 
Ps.  55,  21;  an.  nrnhkem,  tender  (soft,  '• 
as  a  young  animal),  Gen.  18,  7  ( nooh - 
keshak&nash,  soft  wool,  C.  175;  noohkie 
monag,  limber  cloth,  ibid.  172). 

nrohkik  [that  which  is  softened  or  made 
soft]:  “Xocake,  as  they  call  it,  which 
is  nothing  but  Indian  com  parched  in  | 
the  hot  ashes;  the  ashes  being  sifted 
from  it,  it  is  afterwards  beat  to  pow-  , 
der.” — Wood.  It  is  used  by  Eliot  for 
‘meal’  (1  Chr.  12,  40),  ‘flour’  (Let;. 

2,  4,  5,  7;  24,  5),  and  ‘ground  corn’ 
(2  Sam.  17,  19).  nmkhikanehteush, 


ncohkik — continued. 

‘grind  thou  meal’,  Is.  47,  2.]  See 
nanahkineg;  n u nnoh kin num . 

[Marginal  note. — “  From  a  word  which 
means  'to  sift',  sifted.  Cf.  sieve.  From 
nawfceu?”] 

[Narr.  '‘nokehiek,  parched  meal,  .  .  . 
which  they  eat  with  a  little  water,  hot 
or  cold”,  R.  AY.  33;  pishquehick,  un¬ 
parched  meal,  p.  36.  Del.  lo-cat,  flour, 
meal,  Zeisb.  Toe.  9  (cf.  lo  ka  hel  la,  to 
let  it  drop,  p.  44).] 

nrohqueu,  nrohque  \_no  uhquaeu.  See 
no;  ndmsukomunneat ] :  unnmhqueu,  so 
far  as,  at  such  a  distance,  Acts,  28,  15; 
na  nmhque,  so  far  distant,  Ps.  103,  12; 
wussaume  noohk,  if  it  be  too  far  dis¬ 
tant,  ‘if  the  way  be  too  long  for  thee’, 
Deut.  14,  24  ( uttoh  urmuh ku hquat,  how 
far?  C.  228).  Cf.  anmhque;  nuhquainat; 
wehque. 

[Narr.  ton  mickquaque,  how  far?  R.  AY. 
72  (how  much,  137);  ton  anuckquaque, 
how  big?;  yd  anuckquaque,  so  far,  ibid.] 
ncokeontamunat,  v.  t.  to  descend  to  or 
upon:  nmkeontam,  (he)  came  down 
(upon  the  mount),  Ex.  19,  20;  wv.nnm - 
keontamun,  he  descended  on  (it),  Ex. 
19,  18;  nmkontauoog,  they  descended 
(upon  it,  i.  e.  a  ladder),  Gen.  28,  12. 
ncokinat,  v.  i.  to  descend,  to  go  down: 
nmkeu,  he  descended,  Ex.  34,  5;  (from 
heaven)  Matt.  28,  2;  she  went  down, 
Gen.  24,  16;  nmkmp,  he  descended 
(pret. ),  Eph.  4,  9;  nmnmkeog ,  they  shall 
descend,  John  1,  51;  nmch  nmkem  kesuk- 
qut,  ‘I  came  down  from  heaven’,  John 
6,  38;  noh  nmkit,  he  who  descends,  or 
descended,  Ps.  133,  3;  Eph.  4,  10;  nm- 
kemo,  -mco,  (pass.)  it  was  let  down,  Acts 
10,  11;  11,  5;  Rev.  21.  10;  nmkitch,  let 
him  descend  or  come  down,  Mark  15, 
32;  nmkinuk  u'unnutchegash,  when  he 
let  down  his  hands,  Ex.  17,  11.  From 
nmkinum. 

[Del.  nahik,  nahivA,  down,  below; 
(whence)  nahoochicen,  to  go  down  or 
below,  Zeisb.  Gr.  180.] 
ncokinumunat,  v.  t.  to  pull  down,  Jer. 
18,  7;  to  lower  (inan.  obj.)  with  the 
hand,  to  pull  down;  ncokinum,  she  let 
it  down,  Gen.  24,  18;  pieh  nmkinnum- 
u'og,  they  shall  take  (it)  down.  Num. 
4,5;  nmkinnummk,  ‘raze  it’,  Ps.  137,  7. 


92 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BI  LLETIN'  25 


nrokohteauunat,  to  soften  or  make  soft: 
naokohteau,  he  softens  (it),  Job  23,  16. 
See  naohki. 

nrokompanonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  let  or  lower 
(one)  down,  as  by  a  cord,  etc.:  trun- 
nookompanuh,  she  let  them  down  (by  a 
cord),  Josh.  2,15;  [nuri]na>kompanit,  I 
was  let  down  (from  the  wall),  2  Cor. 
11,  33. 

ncokononat,  nobk-,  v.  t.  an.  to  cast 
down,  to  throw  down  (an.  obj.):  mit- 
tiimohkonuh  ohkeit,  he  cast  him  down 
to  the  ground,  Dan.  S,  7;  tcunnaokuh- 
konuh,  he  cast  them  down  (from  the 
rock),  2  Chr.  25,  12.  Cf.  penohk&nau. 
See  unndhteamundt. 

nrokshinat,  v.  i.  to  cast  one’s  self  down: 

naokshau,  she  fell  down,  John  11,  32. 
nrokuhkonauonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  cast  or 
throw  down  from  a  high  place:  tcun- 
nookuhkonduh,  they  threw  her  down, 

2  K.  9,  33;  mittinuhkonauh,  they  cast 
him  (into  the  sea),  Jonah  1,  15;  inin- 
ncokuhkonuh,  he  east  them  down,  2 
Chr.  25, 12.  Cf.  penohk&nau. 
nronamontukquoh.wh.6nat,  v.  t.  an.  to 
owe  to,  to  be  indebted  to:  pasuk.  nao- 
namontukquohwhau,  one  owed  (him  so 
much),  Luke  7,  41.  See  unnontukquoh- 
irhonat. 

nronau,  nronro,  cheek.  See  manamau, 
(m’namau). 

nrone:  name  quthumaoonk,  scant  measure, 
Mic.  6,  10. 

nrononat,  v.  act.  an.  to  give  suck,  to 
suckle,  1  K.  3,  21:  v-unaonuh,  she  gave 
him  suck,  1  Sam.  1,  23;  ncondog,  they 
give  suck,  Lam.  4,  3. 

[Cree  noonu,  he  sucks,  Howse  81.] 
nronontamunat,  v.  t.  to  suck,  to  obtain 
by  sucking,  to  imbibe  ( naoninneat ,  C. 
211) :  pish  kenaonontam  u-ohpanagutiao, 
thou  shalt  suck  the  breasts,  Is.  66,  16 
(in  this  place  Eliot  has  given  to  this 
verb  the  meaning  elsewhere  appropri¬ 
ated  to  naonundt,  and  vice  versa;  see  ; 
example  under  naonundt);  naonantam, 
he  shall  suck  up,  Job  20, 16;  nconontam-  1 
ic oh,  they  shall  suck  up,  Job  39,  30 
( mukkoies  nconontam,  a  child  sucks,  C. 
211).  Cf.  munnontam,  he  smells.  See 
naonundt,  and  *  meninnunk,  milk, 
nronro.  See  noonau. 


nronronae,  nronrounae,  adj.  flaming, 
Is.  29,  6;  F.zek.  20,  47;  Nah.  2,  3:  nco- 
noode  nootau,  flaming  fire,  ‘fiery  flame’, 
Dan.  7,  9. 

nronrouneau,  n.  flame,  Judg.  13,  20;  Job 
15,  30;  nam.amd.ut,  in  the  flame,  Judg. 
13,  20. 

nronuk,  n.  a  suckling,  one  who  sucks  or 
is  suckled,  Deut.  32,  25;  Jer.  44,  7; 
Lam.  4,  4.  See  namontamundt;  naonundt. 
nronukae,  adj.  sucking:  naonukde  muk- 
kies,  a  sucking  child,  Xum.  11, 12.  See 
naonundt. 

[Xarr.  nunnese,  a  baby,  Stiles;  noon.ni 
nondnnis,  a  sucking  child;  munnunnug, 
milk;  icunnunndgan-ash,  breasts,  R.  W. 
126.  Peq.  nuzaus,  ‘sucklings  of  men 
and  beast’,  Stiles.  Del.  no  ne  tschik 
(pi.),  suckling  babes,  Zeisb.  Voc.  25.] 
nronumunat,  v.  i.  to  be  unable:  naona- 
num,  I  can  not,  Luke  11,  7;  16,  3;  nat¬ 
rium,  he  was  not  able,  he  could  not, 
Xum.  14,  16,  =nconunum,  Deut.  9,  28; 
naonanumumun,  we  are  not  able,  Ezra 
10,  13;  wunnconuh,  they  (inan.)  could 
not,  Ezek.  31,  8;  unheau  dmaoohkau- 
dnat,  he  could  not  drive  (them)  out, 
Judg.  1,  19  ( noonat ,  ‘to  be  wanting,  or 
defective’,  C.  214). 

[Xarr.  nondnum ,  nodnshem,  I  can  not, 
R.  W.  30.  Del.  nol  hand,  lazy,  Zeisb.] 
nronunat,  v.  t.  to  suck:  (nunnanmndt ,  I 
to  suck,  Job  3,  12,  with  prefix  of  1st 
pers.;)  nunnaon,  I  suck,  C.  211;  pish 
kenam,  thou  shalt  suck  (the  milk),  Is. 
60,  16;  pish  nconu'og,  they  shall  suck, 
Deut.  33,  19;  neg  namontogig,  they  who 
suck  (the  breasts),  Joel  2,  16  ( noonu - 
nutche,  a  sucking  child,  Is.  49,  15,=  no- 
ndnese,  R.  W.  45).  See  namontamundt. 
nroonat,  nrowonat,  v.  i.  to  say  (with 
reference  to  the  thing  said),  Luke  14,  7. 
It  is  used  by  Eliot  as  synonymous  with 
the  irregular  verb  ussinat,  to  say,  but 
the  latter  appears  to  have  been  used 
when  attention  was  to  be  called  to  the 
speaker  or  the  person  spoken  to.  Cf. 
annoo,  he  says  to;  kenamau,  he  speaks 
with  authority;  kuttw,  he  speaks,  utters 
speech ;  ketcokau,  he  goes  on  speaking; 
kehketcokau,  he  goes  on  talking;  uttind- 
nat,  to  say  to;  nancau  .  .  .  Jehocah  toh 


TKUMBCM.] 


X ATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


ncodnat,  ncowonat — continued. 

dnukque,  ne  nussin,  he  said  .  .  .  ‘What 
the  Lord  saith  [may  say]  to  me,  that 
will  I  speak’,  1  K.  22,  14  (cf.  Num.  24, 
13);  ncowau,  he  said,  Gen.  27,  35;  1  K. 
8, 15;  nooirop,  he  said,  1  K.  8, 12;  2  Sam. 
13,  28  ( anroirop ,  he  said  to,  2  Sam.  13,  35; 
u nnau,  he  said  to,  or  saith  to,  ibid.); 
?! cowaog,  they  say  or  said,  Is.  41,  7; 
nrmrctsh,  say  thou,  Prov.  20,  22;  Luke 
7,  7;  ncowagk,  say  ye,  Lev.  11,  2  ( unndk , 
speak  veto,  ibid. ) ;  nhque  kutche  ncowagk, 
do  not  begin  to  say,  Luke  3,  8;  ncoadt,  if 
he  say,  Gen.  24,  14;  ncowaan,  if  thou 
savest,  Prov.  24, 12  ( unnoowdnat ,  to  say, 
(’.'207). 

[Quir.  ruumn,  to  speak,  Pier.  52.  Del. 
ht-e-u,  he  says,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  9,  20;  lu-eep, 
he  said  (pret. );  lu-e,  say  on,  tell.] 

noosh,  my  father.  See  ooshe. 

ncosquodtamunat,  ncosquat,  v.  t.  to 
lick :  pish  ncosquottamwog,  they  shall  lick 
(thy  blood),  1  K.  21,  19;  ncosquodtog, 
when  he  licks  (grass),  Num.  22,  4; 
ncodsquamdog  wame,  they  lick  up  all, 
Num.  22,  4;  freq.  namoosquodtamundl, 
-quatamundt,  to  lick  often  or  habitually; 
pish  na>na>squadtamwog  ( -squatamwog ) 
puppissai,  they  shall  lick  the  dust,  Mie. 
7,  17;  Ps.  72,  9;  Is.  49,  23;  ( ncotau ) 
nconcosquodlam  nippe,  the  fire  licked  up 
the  water,  1  K.  18,  38.  See  mosq. 

noosukauonat  [=  asukaudnat  (?);  cf. 
asuhkaiiau] ,  v.  t.  an.  to  follow,  to  pursue: 
vmnnoosukauoh,  he  followed  them,  Luke 
22,  54;  ncosukauont,  pursuing,  Judg.  4, 
22;  sun  woh  nunncomkdu,  shall  I  pursue 
(them)?  1  Sam.  30,  8;  ncomkau,  pursue 
thou  (them),  ibid. 

noosuttahhcowaonat.  See  ncoswuttah- 
whaudnat. 

ncosuttabwhaudnat.  See  naoswuttah- 
whaudmat. 

*ncoswenat,  v.  i.  to  yield;  nunnoosweem, 
I  yield,  C.  216. 

noosweonk,  n.  yielding,  submission, 
Eccl.  10,  4. 

*noDswetamcoonk.  See  noswehtamdonk, 
obedience. 

ncoswetauonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  yield  to,  to 
serve.  See  nosweetaudnat. 

ncDswuttahhouwaen-in,  n.  a  pursuer, 
Lam.  1,  6. 


93 

ncoswuttahwhauonat,  nrosuttah-, 
noDsuttahhoDwadnat,  etc.,  v.  t.  an.  to 

follow  after,  to  pursue:  noosuttahwhau, 
he  pursued  after  (him),  2  Sam.  2,  19; 
nwsuttahhoDwaog,  they  pursued,  Judg. 
8,  4;  nunncosulitahwhdog,  I  will  pursue 
them,  Ex.  15,  9;  neg  ncosicuttahukqued- 
gig,  they  which  pursue  (are  pursuing) 
you,  Is.  30,  16;  kencosinUtahikqunat, 
(he)  to  pursue  thee,  1  Sam.  25, 29.  Cf. 
omskaudnat. 

ncot.  See  mancot,  a  basket. 

ncotamog-quaen,  ncotamogquomaen, 
n.  a  fisher,  one  who  fishes,  pi.  -j-  nog, 
Is.  19,  8;  Ezek.  47,  10;  Luke  5,  2;  nco- 
tamdgicaendog,  Jer.  16,  16  (cf.  omae- 
nuog,  Ezek.  47,  10);  ponashabpaenuog, 
fishers  (with  nets),  Matt.  4,  18;  naltaoh- 
quinnuaenin,  pi.  -\-nuog,  C.  159.  See 
*aumatii. 

ncotamdgquaeu,  adj.  of  or  belonging  to 

a  fisherman:  -  hogkcoonk,  ‘fisher’s 

coat’,  John  21,  7. 

ncotamdgquam,  ‘I  go  a  fishing’,  John 
21,  3:  nag  pish  wunncotamdgquonduh, 
they  shall  fish  them  [take  them  by 
fishing],  Jer.  16,  16. 

nootamogquaonk,  n.  a  draught  of  fish, 
Luke  5,  9. 

nootamogquomaen.  See  ncotamogquaen. 

nootamcoonk,  n.  hearing,  2  Iv.  4,  31; 
tialche  ncotamuonk,  a  quick  hearing, 
C.  163. 

nootamunat,  v.  t.  to  hear,  Ezek.  12, 
2:  melitauogivash  ncotamcomcout,  ears  to 
hear  with,  Deut.  29,  4;  nunncdtam,  I 
hear,  1  Sam.  2,  23  (C.  194);  ncotam,  he 
hears  or  heard,  v.  22;  ncotamunap,  he 
heard,  Ps.  78,  21;  ncoiamivog,  they  hear 
or  heard,  Matt.  11,  5;  imperat.  ncotasli, 
hear  thou,  Deut.  33,  7  ( ncotah ,  hear  thou 
me,  1  K.  18,  37;  ken  ncotah,  C.  194); 
ncotamcok,  hear  ye,  Is.  42,  18;  Deut. 
6,  4 ;  ncotiegk,  hear  ye  me,  2  Chr. 
29,  5 ;  hearken  ye,  2  Chr.  18,  27 
( kenaotamumu'co ,  ye  hear,  C.  194;  nm- 
toadtinneat,  to  be  heard,  ibid. ) ;  with  an. 
obj.  ncotdnat,  to  hear  a  person  (see  ex¬ 
amples  in  imperative  above) ;  kenwtah, 
thou  hearest  me,  Ps.  17,  6;  meldauog 
nootiti  (subj.),  when  the  ear  heard  or 
hears  me,  Job  29,  11. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


P4 


notau.  ncoteau,  n.  lire,  Ps.  105.  39: 
Prov.  30,  16;  Gen.  22.  6.  See  chikkxna- 
SKiog. 

[Quir.  ronf  and  gout.  Pier.  22.  Xarr. 
m dttapsh  ydteg,  sit  by  the  fire,  R.  W.  30; 
note,  ydfe,  ehickot,  squtta ,  fire;  noiawese 
and  ehieiautairete,  a  little  fire,  ibid.  47, 
48.  Peq.  yeirt,  Stiles.  Abn.  skStdi, 
skdlar.  feu.  Rasies.  Del.  luteu,  it  burns; 
an.  rilum,  I  bum.  Zeisb.  Gr.  162,  Voc. 
20.] 

nmtimis.  n.  an  oak  tree,  2  Sam.  18,  9; 
Is.  44,  14. 

[Xarr.  pavgdi Uem isk.  R.  W.  89.] 
ncotinat,  t.  i.  to  lift  or  take  up  a  burden. 
ncDtinonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  lift  as  a  burden; 
an.  obj.  ncotinop  mppekontu,  I  drew  him 
out  of  the  water,  Ex.  2, 10. 

[Xarr.  nidutdsh,  ‘take  it  on  your 
back',  R.W.  51.  [Cree  ne  ndtdiv,  I 
fetch  him.  Howse  52.] 
nowantamcbe.  See  neuantam,  he  grieves, 
ncowaonk.  n.  a  saying  (that  which  is 
said,  Deut.  1,  23;  1  Sam.  18,  8):  nutiin- 
nancaonk,  my  saying,  Gen.  4,  23;  nutiin- 
nwi'xiorganash,  ‘mv  commandments’, 
Ex.  16,  28. 

nowesuomk,  my  name,  Is.  42,  8.  See 

toesuonk. 

nowonat.  See  neodnat. 
*nquittaqunnegat  (Xarr.),  one  day. 

See  neqvi;  -quinne. 

nuhhog,  nuhog,  my  body,  Matt.  26,  36; 

myself.  See  nnthhog  ( m'hog ). 
nuhhogkat,  unto  me,  Is.  6,  6;  Cant.  7, 
10. 

nuhkuhkaudnat,  v.  t.  an.  obj.  to  come 
upon,  to  overwhelm,  Ex.  14,  26;  pish 
n'lhkuhkauau  sortimoh,  ‘he  shall  come 
upon  princes’,  Is.  41,  25. 
nuhkuhkonmnat,  v.  t.  to  cover  over,  to 
envelop,  to  overwhelm:  nuhkuhkom,  it 
covered,  Ex.  14,  28;  40,  34;  aninnuh- 
k'd-komun,  it  covered  it.  Ex.  24,  15, 16. 
From  nmkinai. 
nukog.  See  nuhhog. 
nuhquainat.  unuLhquainat,  v.  i.  to  look, 
todirect  the  eye,  without  reference  to  an 
object  i  cf.  nadtauudmpu,  he  looks  for  a 
purpose,  he  looks  in  order  to  see  some¬ 
thing  which  is  or  is  not  within  sight): 
nuttinuhquain  nogque ,  I  look  toward  (it), 
Jonah  2,  -  L  nogque  |;  nuhquaSog,  they 


nuhquainat.  etc. — continued, 
looked  or  faced  (to  the  north,  etc.  ),1K, 
7,  25;  toh  icutch  nuhquaedg  kesukquieu, 
why  do  you  look  toward  heaven?  Acts 
1, 11.  Y.  t.  noh  nogqueh,  he  who  sees  me, 
Gen.  16,  13;  unuhqudeu,  ahadsukqueu, 
‘he  looked  this  way  and  that  way’, 
Ex.  2, 12.  The  compounds  are  numer¬ 
ous,  as  ompamuliquaenat,  to  look  back 
or  behind;  sohhmquainat  ( sonkcohq -),  to 
look  out  from,  to  look  forth;  ushpuh- 
quainat  (asp-,  ishp-,  sp-),  to  look  up¬ 
ward,  etc.  From  ( naumunat )  naum,  to 
see;  -uhqu&e,  to  that  side,  in  that  direc¬ 
tion  (?).  See  no,  noadt;  *pdnikqud; 
icompu.  (Cf.  kuhkinassinneat,  to  take  a 
view,  C.  214.) 

nukkeemoo,  it  was  shaken,  Ps.  18,  7;  pi. 
inan.  -\-ash,  they  were  shaken,  ibid. 
See  mmnukkunumunat. 
nukkies,  yes.  See  nux. 
nukkodtumunat,  v.  t.  to  leave  behind, 
to  abandon,  to  forsake  (inan.  obj.), 
Prov.  13,  14;  16,  17;  Dan.  9,  5;  ne  teag 
nogkodtumuk,  a  thing  left,  C.  172.  With 
an.  obj.  nukkononat  (q.  v. );  nukodtu- 
munat,  to  leave,  C.  199;  nunnukodtum, 
I  leave,  ibid. 

[Xarr.  nickdttash,  leave  or  depart;  pi. 
n ickdttammoke,  nickcdiamutta,  let  as  de¬ 
part,  R.  W.  55.  Cree  nugga-tum,  he 
fetcheth  him,  Howse  42.] 
nukkomauonat  [liegonne-auonat'],  to  be 
first,  in  advance:  nukkomau,  he  came 
first  to  ...  ,  John  20,  4. 
nukkonaeu,  adv.  by  night,  in  the  night, 
Ex.  13,  21;  Ps.  32,  4;  42,  8;  105,  39. 
See  nohkog. 

[Xarr.  ndukocks  nokan-ndwi,  by  night, 
R.  W.  70.] 

nukkone  \_=  negonne,  first],  adj.  old,  an¬ 
cient,  of  old,  Ecel.  1,  10  (‘original’, 

‘old’,  C.  173) :  - seip,  ancient  river, 

Judg.  5,  21;  -  qunnonou,  old  lion, 

Is.  30,  6;  -  mayash,  the  old  ways, 

Job  22,  15;  nukkonadehu,  the  ancient 
mountain,  Deut.  33,  15;  yeush  nukkon- 
eyeuukish,  ‘these  are  ancient  things’,  1 
Chr.  4,  22;  ayimup  negonne  nukkdneye- 
uui,  ‘he  hath  made  the  first  old’;  ne 
negonneayeumli,  ‘that  which  waxeth 
old’,  Heb.  8,  13. 

[Abn.  negahnie,  c’est  une  vieille  cou- 
tume;  negahni  arenahbdk,  les  anciens; 


TP.CMBU  I.I.] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


95 


nukkone — continued . 
nikkahniSi,  devant,  par  avance;  nenik- 
kahnSsse,  je  marche  devant,  Rasies?,  558, 
559.  Del.  n’chowiyeyu,  it  is  old,  Zeisb. 
Gr.  165.] 

nukkononat,  v.  t.  an.  to  leave,  to  go 
away  from,  to  abandon,  to  forsake, 
Deut.  12, 19;  pass,  noli  nussu  nukkonau, 
he  alone  is  left,  Gen.  44,  20;  pish  nuk¬ 
konau,  he  shall  leave  (them),  Mark 
10,  7;  Eph.  5,  31;  nukkonog,  if  ye  turn 
away,  Xum.  32, 15;  toh  wutch  nukkondg, 
why  have  ye  left  (him),  Ex.  2,  20; 
ahque  nukkosseh  (an.  suffix),  do  not 
thou  leave  me,  Ps.  27,  9;  nukkonant 
(part.),  leaving,  Gen.  2,  24;  ‘depart¬ 
ing  from’,  abandoning,  Jer.  3,  20  (see 
nukkodtumundt) ;  nukkonittuog,  they  de¬ 
parted  from  each  other,  Acts  15,  39 
( nukkonittinneat ,  to  be  left,  C.  199). 

[The  Xarragansett  form  appears  to 
have  been  (nukkodtehdnat)  nickatshonat 
for  the  v.  an.,  though  the  first  of  the 
following  examples  may  be  traced  to 
nukkononat:  mat  kunnickansh,  I  will  not 
leave  you;  ahquie  kunnickkatshash,  do 
not  leave  me;  tawhitch  nickatshiian, 
why  do  you  forsake  me?  R.  W.  75. 
(This  form  has  the  characteristic  sh  of 
disastrous  or  undesirable  action.)] 

nukkukquiinneat,  v.  i.  to  be  old,  with 
reference  to  a  measure  of  duration  or 
existence:  kconenukkukquiinneat,  to  be 
in  a  full  (good  old)  age,  Job  5,  26  (see 
-quinne  and  kodtumivohkom) ;  toh  unnuk- 
koohquiyeu  noh  nonksq,  how  old  is  that 
girl?  C.  240. 

nukkukquiyeuonk,  age:  iruttin  - - ,  1  .. 

K.  14,  4. 

nukkummat :  uttoh  ne  nukkummat, 
‘whether  it  is  easier’  (to  say,  etc.), 
Mark  2,  9. 

nukkummatta  (?),  ‘rather  than’  (it),  in 
preference  to  (it),  ‘and  not’,  Prov.  8, 
10.  Cf.  kuttumma,  unless.  See  nik- 
kumme. 

nukkumme.  See  nikkumme. 

nukoh..  See  ko. 

nukon,  n.  night,  Gen.  1,  5,  16;  pi.  nuko- 
7iash,  nuhkonash,  Job  7,  3;  nukkon  -f 
ash,  C.  164.  From  rmkinat,  to  descend, 
to  go  down;  or  from  nukkononat,  to 
leave,  to  go  away  from  (?)  the  sun,  gone 
down  or  having  left  (?).  See  nohkog. 


|  nukquodtut.  See  nunnukquodtut. 
nukquttegheim,  an  only  child,  son  or 
daughter:  u'unnukquttegheonuh  okasoh, 
the  only  one  of  her  mother,  Cant.  6,  9; 
nunmikquttegheun,  my  only  child,  Luke 
9,  38. 

nummatappinneat,  v.  i.  to  seat  one’s 
self,  to  sit  down:  nummatappu,  he  sat 
down,  Ruth  4,  1;  Luke  14,  28;  num- 
matappuog,  they  sat  down,  Ruth  4,  2; 
Luke  22,  55;  nummatapsh,  sit  down,  Is. 
52,  2  ( nummattdpUnat ,  to  sit;  nunnum- 
m&ttap,  I  sit;  appv,  he  sits,  C.  209) .  See 
appin;  cf.  .Abnaki  (Rasies,  ‘asseoir’, 
p.  388). 

num-meecb.  See  meechu. 
nummekitchonont,  (one)  having  a  flat 
nose,  Lev.  21,  18  (neneque  mutchan,  flat 
nose,  C.  170). 

nummishe,  I  .  .  .  greatly,  1  Thess.  3, 10; 
Heb.  12,  21;  =  mishe,  with  prefix  of  1st 
person. 

nummisses,  -ssis,  my  sister.  See  urn- 

missies. 

nummittamwos,  -wus,  my  wife.  See 
mittamvms. 

*nummontuhquahw huttuonk,  n.  a 

debt,  C.  203. 

*nummoohqu6nat,  ‘  to  sup  up  pottage’, 
etc.,  C.  211;  pish  nummnhquaog,  they 
shall  sup  up  pottage,  I  lab.  1,  9. 
num-muttummashum  may,  ‘I  run  in 
the  way’  (‘of  thy  commandments’), 
Ps.  119,  32,  =  num-mvttummaomashonr 
tam  may,  Mass.  Ps. 

numpakou.  See  nompakou,  a  jewel, 
numwabpanumunat  (?),  v.  t.  to  fill  (one 
thing  with  another):  numw&ban  kutas- 
kon  pummee,  fill  thy  horn  with  oil, 
1  Sam.  16,  1;  numwabpanumcok,  fill  ye 
(barrels  with  water),  1  K.  18,  33; 
numwapogkunnumwog  vmnnonkash,  they 
filled  the  troughs  (with  water),  Ex.  2, 
16;  numicoquom  uppmthonchormut,  she 
filled  her  pitcher,  Gen.  24, 16. 
numwae,  adj.  full  of,  filled  with,  Xum. 

22, 18;  24, 13;  Judg.  6,  28;  fully,  C.  228. 
*numwamechimehk6nat,  to  fill  [to 
make  full  with  food  (?)],  C.  191:  ntinnum- 
n-amechimehteam,  I  fill  [I  am  filled,  I  be¬ 
come  full  of  food(?)],  ibid, 
numwameechum,  I  am  full,  he  is  full 
(of  food),  Prov.  30,  9. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


96 

numwapagod,  (a  place)  full  of  water, 
2  K.  3,  17. 

numwap [pinneat  (?)],  v.  i.  to  fill  up,  to 
make  full  (of  an.  obj.):  nag  pish  num- 
wapuog,  they  shall  fill  (thy  houses,  i.  e. 
thy  houses  shall  be  full  of  them),  Ex. 
10,  6. 

numwohtauunat  ( numv'ohtimt ,  1  Thess. 
2,  16),  v.  t.  and  i.  to  fill  up,  to  make 
full,  to  be  full  (inan.  subj.):  num- 
wohteau,  it  filled  (the  whole  earth), 
Dan.  2,  35;  it  is  full,  Ps.  26,  10;  pish 
numwohteau,  he  shall  fill  (the  world), 
Is.  27,  6;  ivunnuniwolitauun  nmtau,  he 
filled  it  with  fire,  Rev.  8,  5;  numwoh- 
toush,  fill  thou  (thy  hand),  Ezek.  10, 2; 
asquarn  numwohtano,  it  is  not  yet  full, 
Gen.  15, 16;  numwohtaj,  let  (it)  be  filled, 
C.  191. 

numwonkquau,  n.  a  heap.  From  nan- 
omivonkquaeu.  See  nomunkqu&g. 

numwonkquttauunat,  v.  t.  to  heap  up, 
Eccl.  2,  26;  numwonkquottou,  he  heaps 
up,  Ps.  39,  6;  freq.  nandmongquodtauu- 
nat,  to  heap  up  abundantly  or  to  make 
great  heaps,  Ps.  39,  6;  Job  27,  16.  See 
nomunkqu&g. 

nunae,  adj.  dry  (?).  Found  only  in  Eliot 
in  compound  words.  See  nunobpe. 

nunassenat,  v.  t.  to  make  dry,  to  dry 
(from  nunae-ussenat) :  pish  nunnunas- 
sum,  I  will  dry  up  (the  waters),  Is.  42, 
15;  44, 27 ;  nunn&hsum  sepuash ,  he  drieth 
up  the  rivers,  Hag.  1,  4.  Cf.  ivunninab- 
pehtau-un,  he  maketh  it  (the  sea)  dry, 
Hag.  1,  4.  See  nunobpe;  nunnobohteat- 
eou. 

nunkane,  nonkane,  adj.  light  (not 
heavy),  Num.  21,  5;  2  Cor.  4,  17;  ( nun - 
kon)  Matt.  11,  30;  anue  nunkinwog  onk, 
‘they  are  lighter  than’,  Ps.  62,  9 
( nonkki  we&nun,  a  light  burden;  non- 
ganne,  lightly,  C.  172,  228). 

[Narr.  n&ukon,  light;  kunnauki,  you 
are  light,  R.  W.  55,  =  kunnaukon,  p.  75. 
Del.  langan,  Zeisb.  Gr.  173.] 

nunkomp,  n.  a  young  man,  El.  Gr.  9;  pi. 
nunkompaog,  Is.  40,  30;  dim.  nunkom- 
paes,  nunkompaemcs  (El.  Gr.  12):  ash 
nunkompaean,  when  thou  wast  young, 
John  21,  18  ( nonkup  or.  nonkumpaes,  a 
boy,  C.  156).  Cf.  vmsken. 

nunkquaash  [ = numwonkguash] ,  heaps; 
suppos.  nano  (?),  q.  v.  Cf.  mutt&nnunk, 
etc. 


nunksqua,  nunksq,  n.  a  girl  (El.  Gr.  9), 
a  young  woman,  Gen.  24,  14,  16;  Deut. 
22,  15,  28  ( nonkkishq ,  vtisskisqua,  a  girl, 
C.  157 ) ;  penompae  n unkqs,  a  virgin,  Deut. 
22,  23  (see  penomp) ;  pi.  nunksquaog,  Ps. 
148,  12;  wunnunksquomog  (obj.  -moh), 
her  maids,  Ex.  2,  5;  nunksquahettit,  ‘in 
their  youth’  (subj.),  when  they  were 
girls,  Ezek.  23,  3;  dim.  nunksquaes, 
nunksquaemes  (El.  Gr.  12). 

[Del.  long-ochqueu,  a  brisk  young 
woman,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  43.] 

*nunnapi.  See  nunobpe,  dry. 
nunnaumon,  my  son:  ken  nunnaumon, 
yen  kesukok  noonaumon  kuhhog,  ‘Thou 
art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten 
thee,  ’  Heb.  1 ,  5.  See  wunnaumonuh. 
*nunne  nogkishkoadtuonk,  ‘ wellmet’ 
(as  a  salutation),  C.  225.  See  nogkush- 
kauonat. 

nunneukontunk,  nunnuk-,  n.  an  im¬ 
age  or  idol,  2  Chr.  34,  4,  7 ;  Mic.  1,  7  ( nin - 
nuk&ntonk,  C.  155). 
nunneyeu,  n.  urine.  See  ninyeu. 
nunnippog,  -ipog,  ‘freshwater’,  James 
3,  12.  See  nippe;  -pog. 
nunnobohteaou  \_=nanabpi  (?)] :  nunno- 
boliteaouut,  on  dry  ground,  Ex.  15,  19, 
i.  e.  made  dry  (?),  or  dry  by  nature  (?); 
Josh.  3,  17,  =nabohteaouut,  Ex.  14,  16, 
22  ( nunnapohteaiyeuut ,  ‘in  dry  places’, 
Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  105,  41);  wutch  nunnoboh- 
teaouut,  ‘from  the  dust  of  the  earth’, 
Gen.  2,  7  ( nunnopohteai ,  dry  ground, 
Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  107,  35).  See  nunobpe. 
nunnobohteateou,  -teaiyeuteop,  he 
dried  up  (the  waters),  made  dry  land, 
Josh.  4,  23;  5, 1  ( nunnoppohteaiyeuehteau 
tohkekamuash,  he  dries  up  the  springs, 
Mass.  Ps. ,  Ps.  107,  33) .  See  nunobpe; 
nunassen&t. 

nunnohkinnum,  nannah-,  v.  t.  he  sifts 
(it),  Is.  30,  28:  nunnannahkinnum,  I 
sift  (it),  Amos  9,  9;  nanndhkinumuk, 
when  it  is  sifted,  ibid.;  nanahkineg,  a 
sieve,  Is.  30,  28.  Cf.  ncohkik,  from  pri¬ 
mary  nohkeu  (?). 

nunnukkunumunat,  v.  t.  to  shake 
(inan.  obj.):  nunnukkunum,  (he  or  it) 
shook  (it),  made  it  shake,  Heb.  12,  26; 
pass,  nunnukkemco,  it  was  shaken,  Ex. 
19,  18  ( nukkeemao ,  Ps.  18,  7). 
nunnukkushonat,  nannukshonat, 
nunnukqushonat,  v.  i.  to  tremble,  to 
shake:  nunnunnukkushom,  I  quake  (for 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


nunnukkushonat,  etc. — continued, 
fear),  Heb.  12,  21;  nunnukkushomp,  I 
trembled,  Hab.  3,  16;  nunnuksheau,  it 
trembled,  2  Sam.  22,  8;  nunnukshaog, 
theytrembled,  Ex.  19, 16;  1  Sam.  14,  15; 
nunnukshau  mishenukshaonk  mcocheke, 
‘he  trembled  very  exceedingly’,  Gen. 
27,33;  nunnukkushont,  -qushord  (part.), 
trembling,  Mark  5,  33;  Acts  9,  6; 
matta  woh  nanukkushonog  (?),  ‘which 
cannot  bemoved’(?),  Heb.  12,  28  (nun- 
nukkisshdnat,  to  tremble  or  tingle,  C. 
213;  nunnukklshshom,  I  shake,  p.  208; 
-kishom,  I  tremble;  uooweyaus  nunnukis- 
shau,  my  flesh  trembleth,  p.  213). 

[Del.  nun  gach  tschi,  I  shake  for  cold, 
Zeisb.  Voc.  25.] 

nunnukontunk.  See  nunneukotunk. 
nunnukquappineat,  v.  t.  to  be  in  dan¬ 
ger:  nunnukquoppu  en,  he  is  in  danger 
of,  Matt.  5,  21,  22,  =  nukquoppu,  Mark 
3,  29. 

nunnukque,  adj.  and  adv.  dangerous, 
perilous,  2  Tim.  3,  1. 
nunnukquodtut,  adv.  in  peril,  in  dan¬ 
ger  (  =  nukquodtut) ,  Lam.  5,  9;  Rom.  8, 
35;  2  Cor.  11,  26:  ndnukquok,  when  it 
is  dangerous,  Acts  27,  9  [both  suppos. 
forms,  but  used  as  nouns,  as  in  Rom.  8, 
35].  Cf.  nana[h]konchiyeu-ut. 
nunnukqushonat.  See  nunnukkushonat. 
nunnukqussenat,  v.  i.  to  take  heed,  to 
act  cautiously  ( nunnukqussinneat,  to  be¬ 
ware,  C.  182):  matta  nunnukqussu,  he 
took  no  heed,  2  K.  10,  31;  nunnukqus- 
sish  ( kuhhog ),  take  heed  to  thyself, 
Ex.  34,  12;  Deut.  4,  9;  12,  30;  ( nuksush ,) 
Ex.  10,  28;  nunnukqussek,  take  ye  heed 
(to  yourselves),  Deut.  11, 16;  27,  9;  Jer. 
9,  4;  Matt.  16,  6;  nunnukqussiich,  let  him 
take  heed,  1  Cor.  10, 12;  nashpe  nunnuk- 
qussit,  ‘by  (his)  taking  heed’,  Ps.  119,  9 
(nen  nunnukqus,  I  beware,  C.  182;  nun- 
nukqussuontash  kehtah,  beware  of  the 
sea,  p.  232). 

nunnukqussuonook  (from  v.  t.  an.),  be¬ 
ware  ye  of  (an.  obj.),  —wabesuonook, 
Phil.  3,  2. 

*nurmukqussuontamunat,  v.  t.  to  be¬ 
ware  of  (inan.  obj.):  nunnukqussuontash 
keitah,  beware  of  the  sea,  C.  182,  232. 
nunnukshae,  adj.  trembling,  which 
trembles,  Deut.  28,  65;  2  Cor.  7,  15 
( ninukshae ,  C.  176);  mat  nunnukqushe 
kuttaoun,  boldness  of  speech,  2  Cor.  7,  4. 

B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 7 


97 

nunnukshaonk,  n.  trembling  (through 
fear),  1  Sam.  14,  15;  Job  4,  14. 
nunnutcheg,  my  hand.  See  menutcheg 
( m’nutcheg ). 

nunobpe,  adj.  dry,  Nuin.  6,  3  ( nunndpi , 
C.  169) :  nanabpi,  nanabpeu,  dry  land  (as 
distinguished  from  water  or  land  cov¬ 
ered  by  water),  Gen.  1,  9,  10  ( =  naboh - 
teai,  Hag.  2,  6);  nunnobohke,  ‘theearth’, 
dryland,  Prov.  30,  16;  ayim  ketoh  nun- 
nobiyeuut,  ‘he  made  the  sea  dry  land’, 
Ex.  14,  21;  nunnappesish,  be  (thou)  dry, 
Is.  44,  27. 

[Narr.  nnappi,  dry;  nndppaquut,  dry 
weather,  R.  W.  82.] 

nunohkomuk,  n.  a  landing  place  (a 
‘shore’),  Acts  27,  39;  John  21,  8,  9; 
Jonah  1, 13:  ketahhanne  unnunohkomuk, 
the  seashore,  Jer.  47,  7. 
nunohtae,  adj.  dry  (that  which  has  be¬ 
come  dry  or  is  made  dry): - mehtug, 

dry  tree,  ‘dry  stubble’,  Is.  56,  3;  Job 
13,  25;  pi.  -aash,  Josh.  9,  5;  Ezek.  37,  2; 
nunohtaut,  in  that  which  is  dry  (i.  e.  in 
a  dry  tree,  Luke  23,  31);  nunohtaeu, 
Ezek.  37,  4;  Hos.  9,  14. 
nunohteauunat,  v.  i.  to  become  dry,  to 
dry  up:  nunohteau,  it  is  (become)  dry, 
Josh.  9,  12;  nippeash  .  .  .  nunohtaash, 
the  waters  dry  up,  Job  12,  15;  nunah- 
top,  it  was  dry,  Judg.  6,  40;  nunohtaj, 
let  it  become  dry,  Judg.  6,  39;  nun- 
nohsit(1),  if  it  be  dry,  Judg.  6,  37.  Cf. 
nunnowwa  (Xarr. ),  harvest  time,  R.  W. 
92. 

nuppe,  diminutive  nuppisse.  See  nippe, 
water;  nippisse,  a  pool  or  pond, 
nuppissepog.  See  nippissepog. 
nuppoh,  nuppohwhun,  n.  a  wing  (not 
found  except  in  the  constructive  or  ob¬ 
jective  nuppoh,  nuppohwhunoh,  with 
prefix  of  3d  person):  nuppohwunau, 
winged,  having  wings,  Is.  6,  2;  yauin- 
nepuhwhunau,  having  four  wings,  Ezek. 
1,  6.  See  wunnuppoh,  ivunnuppohwhun. 
[Allied  to  nuppunat  and  nepaus(?) .] 
nuppoo,  nuppcoe,  adj.  (he is)  dead,  Judg. 
4,  22;  1  Sam.  24,  14;  pi.  an.  nuppcoog, 
Ps.  88,  5,  10. 

nuppcoe,  nuppoongane,  adj.  deadly, 
producing  death,  Mark  16,  18;  James 
3,  8;  Rev.  13,  3. 

nuppcoonk,  n.  death,  Gen.  21,  16;  Ex. 
10,  17;  Job  5,  21;  2  K.  4,  40. 


98 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


*nuppcopassinneat,  ‘  to  wither  or  pine 
away  (as  a  tree)’,  C.  216;  mehtuk  imp- 
pa>ta,  a  tree  withers,  ibid. 

nuppunat,  v.  i.  to  die,  Eccl.  3,  2;  1  Cor. 
9,  15  ( nuppunat ,  C.  237 ).  The  literal  or 
primitive  meaning  of  this  verb  is  per¬ 
haps  to  go  away,  or,  rather,  to  sleep.  It 
is  probably  allied  to  nuppoh,  a  wing  or 
wings.  The  Indian  languages  abound 
in  euphemisms  for  expressing  death, 
“so  terrible  is  the  King  of  Terrors  to  all 
natural  men.”  “They  abhor  to  mention 
the  dead  by  name,  .  .  and  amongst 
States,  the  naming  of  their  dead  Sa- 
chims”  is  one  ground  of  war,  R.W.  161. 
nuppco,  imp,  he  dieth  or  died,  Job  14, 
10;  21,  23;  Is.  59,  5;  Gen.  23,2;  Ezek. 
24,  18;  nen  nupup,  I  died  .  .  .  Gen. 
30,  1;  48,  21;  Rom.  7,  9;  pish  imp,  he 

shall  die,  Ezek.  18,  4,  20;  - kenup, 

thou  shalt  die,  Gen.  2,  17;  nuppun,  he 
dieth,  Eecl.  3, 19;  nuppuk,  nupuk,  when 
he  dies  or  is  dead,  he  may  die,  Eccl.  3, 
19;  Rom.  7,  2;  2  Sam.  3,  33;  n oh  next 
nupuk,  who  died  there,  2  Sam.  10,  18; 
napukeg,  nupukeg,  pi.  the  dead,  Eccl. 
4,  2,  =  napunutchig,  Xum.  16,  48  (pish 
nunnup,  I  shall  die;  nont  name  nenup- 
piimun,  we  must  all  die,  C.  188). 

[Alg.  nipai-.  Chip,  niba,  he  sleeps 
(Bar. ) ;  nibo,  he  dies.  (The  Chip,  prefix 
ni  (Bar.)  denotes  a  ‘going  away’, 
change  (?)  of  place  or  posture;  cf. 
nepau,  to  rise  up. )  Narr. :  Roger  Will¬ 
iams  usually  employs  the  verb  kitonck- 
quei[aat\  (q.  v.),  to  die,  and  has  nipw't, 
maw  [nuppco,  amaeu  (?)],  ‘he  is  gone’; 
nippitch  exco,  let  him  die  [a  sentence: 
let  him  be  put  to  death];  ni  pint  t  itch, 
let  them  die,  R.  W.  122;  micheme- 
shaxci,  he  is  gone  forever,  p.  160;  yo 
apapan,  he  that  was  here;  maucha&hom, 
the  dead  man;  pi.  mauchauhomuock, 
=  chepeck;  chepKissotam,  the  dead  sa¬ 
chem;  chepasqudw,  a  dead  woman;  sa- 
chimatipan,  ‘he  that  was  prince 
[sachem]  here’,  p.  161.  Cree  nippu, 
he  is  dead;  nippoic,  he  sleeps,  Howse  31. 
Del.  mboiici,  mortal;  mboagan  death, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  104.] 

nupweshanonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  persuade: 
wunnepieeshannh,  he  persuaded  him,  2 
Chr.  18,  2;  sunnummatta  .  .  .  kenup- 
vxshanukww,  doth  not  (he)  persuade 


nupweshanonat — continued, 
you,  2  Chr.  32,  11;  nupweshandmun,  we 
persuade,  2  Cor.  5,  11  (nupireshashsoo- 
unat,  to  persuade,  C.  204;  nunnup- 
xceshan,  I  persuade,  p.  203). 
nupweshassowaonk,  n.  persuasion, Gal. 

5,  8  ( nupweshassoowaonk ,  C.  204). 
nupwoaonk  (?),  n.  a  riddle,  Judg.  14, 
12-15;  a  proverb,  Prow  25,  1  (nupwd- 
waonk,  C.  163);  ‘a  mystery’,  1  Cor. 
13,  2.  See  napwaoacheg;  siogkcowaonk. 
[nupwoshwonat(?),]  tochoke:  nupvosh- 
u'dog,  they  are  choked  (with  cares), 
Luke  8, 14;  nisli  uhpoosumcomcoasli,  these 
(inan. )  choke  (it),  Mark  4,  19  ( nup - 
pashooti  wulche  weyaus,  I  am  choked 
[with  flesh],  C.  185;  passhoonninneat, 
to  be  choked,  ibid.;  n u kkeh chtguabes 
pemiixneat,  I  am  choked  with  a  halter, 
ibid.).  See  kechequabinau. 
nushae,  adj.  slain,  killed  (dead  by  vio¬ 
lence),  Js.  22,  2. 

nushaonk,  n.  slaughter,  Is.  27,  7;  Jer. 

12,  3;  a  killing,  Heb.  7,  1;  Is.  22, 13. 
nushehteaen,  n.  a  murderer,  Deut.  35, 
28;  1  John  3,  15;  shehteden,  ‘bloody 
man’,  Ps.  5,  6. 

[Narr.  kemineiachick,  pi.  murderers, 
R.W.  117.] 

nushehteaonk,  n.  murder  (abstract), 
Luke  23,  19;  killing,  Hos.  4,  2;  pi. 
-ongash,  Matt.  15,  19;  Mark  7,  21;  sheh- 
teaonk,  Rom.  1,  29. 

nushehteauunat,  v.  i.  to  commit  mur¬ 
der,  to  be  a  murderer:  noh  nashteohp , 
‘who  had  committed  murder’,  Mark 
15,  7;  nushehteaog  ul  mayvt,  they  com¬ 
mit  murder  in  the  way,  Hos.  6,  9; 
kenushteomwm,  you  commit  murder, 
Jer.  7,  9;  nushehteuhkon,  -teahkon,  thou 
shalt  not  kill,  Deut.  5, 17;  Matt.  5,  21; 
‘thou  shalt  do  no  murder’, Matt.  19, 18 
( nunnishteam ,  I  kill;  nunnishteap,  I  did 
kill,  C.  196). 

[Narr.  kemineanluock,  they  murder 
each  other.  R.  W.  76.] 
nushonat,  v.  act.  an.  to  kill,  Deut.  9,  28; 
Esth.  3,  13;  Acts  9,  24  ( nunishonat ,  C. 
196) ;  pass,  nushitt inneat,  to  be  killed, 
Esth.  7,  4;  but  nushau,  nushaog  (3d 
pers.  sing,  and  pi.),  are  used  indiffer¬ 
ently  for  the  active  or  passive  voice, 
he  or  they  slew  or  were  slain  (see  nush- 
uhkonat):  nunmish,  I  slew  him,  1  Sam- 


tkumbull] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


99 


nushonat — continued. 

17,  35;  2  Sam.  1,  16;  'nush,  kill  thou, 
Judg.  8,  20;  Acta  10,  13;  nushon  (?), 
lie  murders  (them),  Pa.  10,  8;  he  slew, 
Judg.  15,  15;  nushook,  kill  ye,  Luke  15, 
23;  nushehteuhkon,  -ahkon,  thou  shalt 
not  kill,  Deut.  5,  17;  Matt.  5,  21;  pish 
nunnush,  I  shall  slay,  Gen.  27,  41;  nush- 
ont,  nashont  (part.),  slaying,  Gen.  4, 
15;  Ex.  21,  14;  nushau,  nusheau,  he 
slew,  1  Sam.  17,  36;  Ex.  2,  12;  2  Chr. 
25,  3;  he  was  slain,  Dan.  5,  30;  wun- 
shouh,  (it)  slew  them,  Dan.  3,  22,  =  nah 
vmnnushoh ,  Luke  13,  4;  pish  nushau, 
he  shall  be  put  to  death,  Ex.  21,  12, 
15,  16,  etc.;  mos  nusheau,  he  must  be 
killed,  Rev.  13, 10;  nushaog,  they  slew, 
Gen.  49,  6;  Judg.  3,  29;  pish  nuslioog, 
they  shall  be  slain,  Ezek.  26,  6;  nush- 
6og  (as  part,  pi.),  slain,  they  who  are 
slain,  Ezek.  26,  6;  32,  21,  23-25;  Is. 
22,  2;  noli  nashomuk,  who  was  slain, 
Judg.  20,  4;  pass,  pish  nunnushit,  I  shall 
be  slain,  Prov.  22,  13;  oosqheonk  nashit, 
the  blood  of  the  slain,  Num.  23,  24;  neg 
nushitcheg,  the  slain,  Ezek.  32,  20. 

[Narr.  niss,  kill  him;  pi.  nlssoke,  R. 
W.  122.] 

nushuhkonat,  v.  act.  i.  to  kill,  to 
make  slaughter  ( nishelikonat ,  to  kill, 
C.  196):  togkodteg  kodtinnumnuun  nush¬ 
uhkonat,  ‘the  sword  is  drawn  ...  for 
the  slaughter’,  Ezek.  21,  28  (to  go  on 
killing,  to  kill  as  a  business,  k’  pro¬ 
gressive). 

nussequnneat  [nussu-sequnneaQ,  v.  i. 
to  remain  alone:  nen  webe  nussequnit, 
‘I  only  remain’,  1  K.  18,  22;  nen  webe 
nussequnneanii,  I  only  am  left,  1  K.  19, 
14.  See  sequnau. 

nussin,  nuttin,  I  say.  See  ussin&t. 

nussu,  nusseu,  adj.  an.  alone  (solus), 
Ex.  18,  18;  24,  2;  Deut.  33,  28;  Matt. 
18, 15;  nose,  Job  9,  8:  nunnusse,  I  alone, 
Is,  63, 3;  nahse  .  .  .  nusseu,  alone ...  by 
myself,  Is.  44,  24;  nohsiit,  if  she  be 
‘desolate  ’  (as,  a  widow),  1  Tim.  5,  5 
( nunndnsiup ,  I  was  alone;  nomsiyeue 
(and  ‘  wukse  ’ ) ,  all  alone,  C.  167;  non- 
siyeu,  ibid.  232). 

[Narr.  kunnishishern,  are  you  alone? 
nnishishem,  I  am  alone;  pausuck  naunt 
man'll,  ‘there  is  only  one  God’;  naiigom 
naunt,  He  alone  (made  all  things,  etc.), 


nussu,  nusseu — continued. 

R.  W. ,  31, 1 14, 115.  Del.  nechoha,  adv. 
alone,  Zeisb.] 

[unjnussu,  (he  is)  shaped,  etc.  See 
under  U. 

nutcheg,  hand.  See  menutcheg  ( m’uut - 
cheg). 

nuttaihe,  pi.  an.  nuttaiheog;  man.  nul- 
taiheash,  mine,  (is)  mine,  Gen.  26,  20; 
Mai.  3,  17;  Ezek.  35,10.  See  ivuttaihe. 

nuttaihein,  ours,  (is)  ours.  See  wut- 
taihe. 

nuttin,  nussin,  I  say.  See  ultinonat. 

nuttiniin:  nen  nuttinniin  urn  nuttinniin, 
for  ‘I  am  that  I  am’,  Ex.  3,  14;  ne- 
wulche  ne  nuttiniin  (‘ ne  nuttunniin  ’ , 
Mass.  Ps. ),  ‘for  so  I  am’,  John  13,  13; 
qut  matta  ne  nuttinniein,  ‘but  it  is  not 
so  with  me’,  Job  9,  35;  yeu  mo  nuttin- 
aiin,  thus  I  was,  Gen.  31,  40;  yeunuttin- 
aiin,  thus  I  have  been  (and  am),  v.  41; 
woh  nuUinni  onatuh  ne  matta  dniyeu,  ‘  I 
should  have  been  as  though  I  had  not 
been’,  Job  10,  19  ( nen  nutiinne-aiin  nen 
nuttinne-aiin,  ‘I  am  such  as  such  sis  I 
am’,  or  ‘I  myself  remain  or  continue  to 
be  such  as  I  myself  remain’  [ nuttinne - 
aiin= I  am  such  as  (I)];  nuttinni,  I  am 
become;  \_nuttinni]yumun,  we  are  be¬ 
come;  unniinat,  to  become,  C.  181 ).  See 
unnaunneat.  Cf.  wuttinniin. 

[Del.  n’telli,  I  (do,  say,  etc.)  thus 
or  so;  k’telli,  thou  (dost,  sayest,  etc. ) 
thus  or  so;  w’lelli,  he,  etc.,  Zeisb.  Gr. 
177.] 

nuttinne,  even  I,  Neh.  4,  13;  ego  ipse, 
Ezek.  38,  23. 

nux,  adv.  yea,  yes,  verily  (El.  Gr.  21); 
verb  subst.  nuxyeucoutch,  let  it  be  yea, 
James  5,  12;  nuk,  yes,  Stiles  (Narr.). 
“nux,  as  it  is  commonly  written,  but 
should  rather  be  nukkies,  in  two  sylla¬ 
bles”,  Exp.  Mayhew.  See  *6. 

[Micm.  e,  ‘oui’;  lok  (=nok),  ‘bien’, 
Maill.  29.  Abn.  ‘ga  signif.  atiirmita- 
tem:  niga,  oui,  c’est  cela’,  Rasies  553; 
nikki,  c’est  cela  merne,  p.  555.  Chip. 
e  nange  ka,  yes,  certainly;  e  nange,  O 
yes,  Bar.  476.  Del.  ekee,  ay!  Zeisb. 
Illin.  “Rad.  naga,  nagala,  vox  feminis 
propria,  assurement,  vraiment;  7iissi 
naga,  oui  vraiment,  je  le  dis.” — Grav. 
MS.] 


100 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


o 


*6, 60  (o  nasal ) ,  yea,  yes ;  “hut  there  being 
another  Indian  word  of  the  same  signi¬ 
fication,  viz.,  nux,  .  .  .  the  former  is 
scarce  ever  used  in  writing.” — Exp. 
Mayhew.  (du,  well,  it  is  well,  C.  227.) 

oaas,  6aus,  howaas,  n.  an  animal,  a 
living  creature,  Gen.  2,  19;  7,  4;  Lev. 
11,  47  ( Adas  [otto.?],  C.  171);  pi.  owaasi- 
neg,  Is.  13,  21;  odsineg,  Ezek.  1,  14;  -oa- 
dsineg,  v.  19  ( odasineg ,  creatures,  C.  171; 
oowaasineg,  p.  56):  nishnoh  oaus  vmn- 
nahnahshont,  ‘every  thing  that  hath 
breath’,  Ps.  150,  6;  nishnoh  oaas  pdmon- 
tog,  every  thing  that  liveth,  Ezek.  47, 
9;  nishnoh  oaas  pish  pomaniam,  every 
thing  shall  live,  ibid. ;  oaas  momonchin, 
creeping  thing,  Lev.  11,  20,  21;  wuske 
odas,  a  new  creature,  Gal.  6,  15.  Cf. 
w6ou,  w6u  (an egg);  aoch  (forth,  outof); 
aoshe,  father;  iveyaus,  flesh.  Largely  used 
in  compound  words,  especially  in  the 
names  of  animals.  The  termination 
-'em  of  the  animate  form  of  adjectives 
(El.  Gr.  13)  is  derived  from  oaas;  so  nom- 
paas,  male  ( =  ne-omp-oaas ,  man-ani¬ 
mal);  mukquosh  (mogkeoaas) ,  great  ani¬ 
mal,  wolf;  musquasms,  musquash,  red 
animal,  muskrat. 

[Abn.  adaasak,  les  animaux,  Rasies. 
Del.  au  tee  sis,  a  beast,  pi.  -f  sac,  beasts; 
au  we  yey  is,  wild  1  least,  wild  creature, 
Zeisb.] 

*oadtehteaonk,  n.  payment,  C.  203. 

oadtehteauunat,  v.  t.  to  pay,  as  a  debt, 
a  vow,  etc.;  to  make  payment  of:  oad- 
lehteaou,  he  pays  (tribute),  Matt.  17,  24; 
coadtehleau,  Jonah  1,  3;  pish  kuldadleh- 
team,  thou  shalt  pay  (money),  1  K.  20, 
39;  dadlehleash,  pay  thou  (thy  vow), 
Eccl.  5,  4. 

oadtuhkonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  pay  to,  Deut. 
23,  21;  Esth.  4,  7:  kutoadtuh  kousli,  I 
will  pay  thee,  Num.  20,  19;  oadtuhkou, 
-kau,  pay  thou  to  (him  or  them),  2  K. 
4,  7;  Ps.  50, 14;  nen  nutoadtuhkauoog,  (in 
that  case)  I  will  pay  you,  i.  e.  if  you 
agree  (subj.),  Esth.  3,  9;  oadtulikah,  pay 
thou  me,  Matt.  18,  28  ( oadtuhkah  eyeu, 
pay  me  now,  C.  203).  See  adloaii. 

*oadtuhkossuwahu6nat,  v.  t.  an.  to 
cause  to  be  paid  [to],  C.  203. 


oaus.  See  ddas. 
obbohquos,  n.  See  vppdhquds. 
obohquaonk,  n.  a  covering,  Ex.  26,  7. 
See  appuhqnom. 

*ockqutchaun  (Xarr. ),  “a  wild  beast  of 
a  reddish  hair  about  the  bigness  of 
a  pig,  and  rooting  like  a  pig;  from 
whence  they  give  this  name  to  all  our 
swine”;  pi.  +nug;  R.  W.  95;  the 
woodchuck  (Arctomys  monax)  (?). 
Cf.  ogkoshquog  (‘conies’  ?),  El.  From 
dgushau,  agqshau  ( agveshau ),  he  goes 
under,  roots  or  burrows.  See  ogkoochin 
(agv’e-ivutchau) ,  he  conies  from  under. 
Cf.  ogkoochin. 

[Mod.  Abn.  ag-asku;  K.  A.  Del.  gosch 
go  schak  (pi.),  hogs,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  17.] 
ogguh.se,  adj.  little  [small  in  quantity 
or  amount],  Prov.  24,  33:  anue  ogguhse, 
much  less,  Prov.  17,  7.  Dim.  ogguhse- 
mese  nippe,  a  (very)  little  water,  Gen. 
24,  17;  iogguhsemese,  ‘by  little  and 
little’,  Deut.  7,  22,  —oogguliseseu,  Ex. 
23,  30  ( ogkosse ,  adv.  little,  C.  233). 
ogguhsoadtu,  of  little  worth,  Prov.  10, 
20. 

ogguhsuog,  an.  pi.  few,  Deut.  26,  5; 
Matt.  7,  14;  inan.  pi.  ogguhsinash,  a  few 
things,  Matt,  25,  21,  23;  ogguhsesinasli 
(dimin.),  Gen.  47,  9:  ogguhsequinogok, 
in  a  few  days  [at  the  end  of  a  few  days] , 
Dan.  11,  20  (ogkosscbog,  few,  C.  169). 
[For  ogkem  (?)  and  ogkesem  (?).] 
ogkemonat,  agkemonat,  v.  t.  an.  to 
number  or  count  (an.  obj.):  ogkem, 
number  ye  (the  people),  Num.  26,  2; 
‘take  the  sum  of’,  Num.  4,  22;  ogke- 
mcok,  Num.  1,  2;  agkemehetleupoh,  they 
numbered  (them),  Num.  26,  65;  nag  og- 
kemutcheg,  agkemutcheg,  they  who  were 
numbered,  Num.  26,  51,  57. 

[Cree  u'cke-mayoo,  he  counts  him, 
Howse  43.] 
ogkesu. 

[Note.— Definition  not  given.  See  ogguhse; 
ogkem  mi<U:  ogketamfindt  ] 

ogketamunat,  v.  t.  (1)  to  number,  to 
count,  to  take  the  sum  of:  nashpe  ogke- 
tamundt,  by  count,  ‘according  to  a  cer¬ 
tain  number’,  Deut.  25,  2  (inan.  obj.); 
ogketam,  he  counts,  Job  31,  4;  ogkelaj 


TRUMBULL] 


N ATICK-ENG LISH  DICTIO N A HY 


101 


ogketamunat — continued. 
ne  adtahsik ,  let  him  count  the  number 
of,  Rev.  13,  18;  ogketam,  he  has  num¬ 
bered,  Dan.  5,  2(5.  (2)  to  read  (0.  208); 
ogketam,  he  read,  Josh.  8,  34;  ogketam  up 
matta,  he  read  not,  v.  35;  ogketash,  read 
thou,  Jer.  36,  6;  noli  ogketog,  he  who 
reads,  Matt.  24, 15. 

[Narr.  aketash,  pi.  akdtamdke,  count 
or  reckon  (it),  ‘tell  my  money’;  akesuog, 
‘they  are  telling  of  rushes’;  natkhimin, 
I  am  telling  or  counting;  “for  their 
play  [gaming  with  rushes]  is  a  kind  of 
arithmetic”;  ntaquie  akesamen,  1  will 
leave  play  [1  cease  counting],  R.  W. 
136,  145,  146.  Del.  achkindamen,  to 
count,  to  read,  Zeisb.] 

-ogkod,  pi.  -\-tash;  an.  -ogkussu,  pi.  }-og. 
*ogkodchinat,  to  be  ashamed,  C.  180, 
=  akodchin&t.  See  akodchu. 
*okodchue,  adv.  with  shame,  ‘modest¬ 
ly’,  C.  229;  mat  okodchiie,  shamelessly, 
ibid.  230.  See  akodchu. 
*ogkodchuonk,  n.  shame,  C.  159.  See 
akodchu-onk. 

ogkome,  -mai,  prep,  beyond.  See  ong- 
kome. 

-ogkon.  See  dhkon. 
ogkoshquog,  n.  pi.  ‘conies’,  Prov.  30, 
26.  Cf.  mdhtukqu&s-og.  In  Lev.  11,5, 6, 
“cony”  and  “hare”  are  transferred 
from  the  English.  See  agushau;  *ock- 
qutchaun. 

ogkcochin,  hogkcochin,  v.  i.  it  depends 
or  is  suspended  from,  he  is  suspended 
from,  2  Sam.  18,  9,  10.  Cf.  agushau,  he 
goes  under;  agwe-ivoushau,  he  hangs 
under.  See  waashau. 

[Narr.  ledg  go  augwhdttick,  what 
hangs  there?;  yo  augwliattous,  hang  it 
there,  R.  W.  56.  Chip,  agddjin,  lie 
hangs  or  is  on  high,  Bar.  180.  Cree 
u'ckooche-mayoo,  he  suspends  him  in 
water  [?],  Howse  43;  cf.  u'ckootom,  he 
hangs  it  up,  p.  47.] 

ogkoowau,  he  seemed  to  (them),  Gen. 
19,  14  [visus  est?]. 

ogquamush:  puppissi  .  .  .  ne  ogqua- 
mushonk,  the  dust  which  cleaveth  to 
you,  Luke  10,  11.  Cf.  onkhumunat,  to 
cover. 

ogquanumunat,  v.  t.  to  liken  or  com¬ 
pare  one  thing  with  another;  an.  og- 
quanumdnat,  to  liken  one  person  to 


ogquanumunat — continue!  1 . 
another:  ahque  ogquAnum,  ‘count  me 
not’,  do  not  liken  me  to,  I  Sam.  1,  16; 
howan  ogquanumdg,  to  whom  will  ye 
liken  (him),  Is.  40,  18;  inan.  ogque- 
neunlcquodt,  -quot,  it  is  like  (it  may  be 
likened  to),  Matt.  13,  31;  20,  1;  22,  2. 
The  verb  substantives  from  ogque  and 
ogquenneunk  and  their  derivatives  are 
variously  formed  and  with  no  uniform¬ 
ity  of  application:  pish  vutogqunneunk- 
queh,  I  will  liken  him  to,  Matt.  7,  24; 
uttoh  icoh  nutogquontamun,  to  what  shall 
I  liken  (it),  Matt.  11,  16;  kultogquv- 
neauaii,  do  ye  make  it  like  (him),  ‘com¬ 
pare  it  unto’  (him),  Is.  40,  18. 

[Del.  k’delgiqui,  so  as  thou,  thou  art 
like;  w’ddgiqui,  so  as  he,  he  is  like, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  172,  173.] 

ogqufe,  agque,  wuttogque,  like  to,  in 
the  same  manner  as,  Is.  40,  22,  24,  31; 
ne  ogquk,  like  it,  Dent.  4,  32.  See  ugque- 
neunkquok;  nogque;  ogkanrau. 

[Del.  linaquot,  elinaquot,  ‘so,  so  as’, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  172.] 

ogqueneunk,  agqueneunk,  n.  likeness, 
similitude,  Dent.  4,  16,  17,  18:  agque- 
neunkquok,  that  which  is  like  to,  =  og¬ 
queneunk  quodt ,  Matt.  13,  31;  22,  2.  The 
2d  pers.  subj.  pres,  of  the  verb  used  for 
the  concrete  noun. 

ogqueneunkqussu,  adj.  an.  (he)  is 
likened  or  made  like  to,  Matt.  7,  26; 
13,  24. 

ogqueneunkqussuonk,  n.  the  making 
like  in  appearance,  a  similitude,  Is.  40, 
18;  parable,  Matt.  15,  15;  22,  1. 

ogquidnash,  pi.  n.  islands,  Is.  40,  15. 
See  ahquedne;  niunndh. 

ogqunneat,  v.  i.  to  wear  clothes,  to  he 
clothed,  Jer.  4,  30;  !  Pet.  3,  3;  see 
hogkoo.  ogqunnumdnat,  v.  t.  to  put  on, 
to  ornament  the  person  with,  1  Pet. 
3,  3,  =ne  Aqut,  ‘which  was  on  him’, 
which  he  wore,  Gen.  37,  23,  =ne  fig- 
quit,  1  K.  11,  30;  aqut  silver,  (when  he 
is)  clothed  with  silver,  Ps.  68,  13;  has- 
habponak  agquit,  clothed  in  linen,  Dan. 
12,7  (sea  agquit;  hogkoo) ;  nag  dgqutcheg, 
they  that  wear,  1  Sam.  22,  18  ( ogquin - 
neut,  to  put  on,  C.  204;  nutdgquanneh- 
huenn  (causat. ),  1  clothe;  wuttogquanne.h- 
huonat,  to  clothe;  umttogquannehhiltin- 
neat,  to  be  clothed,  ibid.  185). 


102 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


ogqunneat— continued. 

[Narr.  ocquash,  put  on  (clothes),  R.W. 
107.] 

ogqunneg,  n.  a  shield,  Deut.  33,  29;  Is. 
22,  6;  pi.  -\-ash,  1  Chr.  13,  34.  From 
ogqunneat. 

ogqunneunkqussinneat,  v.  t.  to  make 
in  the  likeness  of,  to  make  like  to,  Gen. 
5,  1  ( nuttogqueneunks  samvunumuk,  I 
seem  to  be  weary,  C.  208) . 
og'quodchuau  en  wadchuut,  he  went 
up  into  the  mountain,  Matt.  5,  1;  14, 
23;  Mark  6,  46;  ogquodchuau  wadchuut, 
‘he  went  up  into  a  mountain’,  Matt. 

5,  1. 

ogquodtum,  v.  t.  ‘  he  garnished  ’ ,  ‘  over¬ 
laid’  ( wetu ,  t he"h ouse)  with  (it),  2  Chr. 

3,  6,  7;  umt-ogquodtum-un,  he  overlaid 
it  with,  v.  4,  5. 

ogquonkquag,  n.  ‘rust’,  Matt.  6,  19. 
ogquonkshae,  adj.  moldy;  pi.  -shaash, 
Josh.  9,  5;  verb  subst.  ogquonkslieau,  it 
was  moldy,  v.  12. 

ogquonkshunk,  n.  ‘mildew’,  1  K.  8,  37; 
lit.  mold.  (Elsewhere  than  here  ‘mil¬ 
dew’  is  transferred.) 

*ogquos,  togquos,  a  twin;  pi.  -^-mog,  C. 
176. 

[Narr.  tackqiuwock,  twins,  R.  W.  45.] 
ogqushki,  adj.  wet,  moist  (by  dew  or 
rain,  og),  Dan.  4,  33:  wenomineash  .  .  . 
en  o'gqushke,  grapes  .  .  .  moist,  Hum. 

6,  3.  Verb  subst.  ogqushkaj,  let  it  be 
wet,  Dan.  4,  15;  iogkusishoma),  it  ‘dis¬ 
tills’  (like  dew),  Deut.  32,  2  (cf.  og- 
quehchippanukquog,  they  are  wet  (with 
showers),  Job  24,  8);  kutogqutchippan- 
ukquog,  they  wet  thee  (with  dew),  Dan. 

4,  25.  Cf.  nuchvppog.  See  umttogki; 
*ockqutchawn. 

[Peq.  wuttuggio,  wet  (i.  e.  it  is  wet) ; 
waughtdggachy,  ‘deer,  i.  e.  wet-nose’, 
Stiles.] 

*ogwantamunat  (?),  to  perceive:  ogquon- 
tamooadtinneat,  to  lie  perceived,  C.  203; 
ogquantamunat,  to  suppose  or  imagine, 
ibid.  211. 

*ogwhan  [Narr. ),  a  boat  adrift,  R.  W.  99. 
ogwu.  See  agvm. 

ohguhsheoog,  he  minisheth  them, 
makes  them  few,  Ps.  107,  39. 
*ohhomaquesuuk,  a  needle  or  pin,  C. 
161  [for  ohkom-  (?)]. 

ohhontseonat.  See  ontseu. 


ohkas,  =  6kax,  mother, 
ohke,  n.  the  earth,  land,  Gen.  1,  10;  Ps. 
78,  69:  ut  ohkeil,  on  the  earth,  Lev. 
11,  2  {ohke,  ground,  C.  160);  a  country, 
region,  2  K.  3,  20;  ut  olikeit,  in  the  land, 
1  K.  8,  37;  nutohket,  to  my  country, 
Gen.  24,  4;  kutok,  thy  land,  Ex.  34,  24; 
pi.  ohkeash,  countries,  Gen.  26,  3,  4; 
weenohke,  the  grave,  Prov.  30,  16. 
From  the  same  radical  as  okas  (mother), 
coshe  (father), wo6u  (an  egg),  etc.;  ‘that 
which  produces’  or  ‘brings  forth’. 
Like  okas  (q.  v. ),  the  form  is  passive. 
Cf.  Greek,  yea,  pry,  Egyp.  kaui  (fern.); 
ka,  a  hull;  kua,  the  phallus (?). 

[Narr.  afike  and  sanaukamuck,  earth 
or  land;  mttauke,  nissavmdwkamuck,  my 
land;  wuskdukamuck,  new  ground,  R. 
W.  89.  Del.  hack),  Zeisb.  Voc.  8.] 
ohkehteaen-in,  n.  a  sower,  one  who 
sows,  Matt.  13,  3,  18. 
ohkehteaunat,  ahkehteaunat,  v.  t.  to 
plant,  Eccl.  3,  2:  ohkehteau  tanohket- 
eaonk,  he  planted  a  garden,  Gen.  2,  8; 
ohketeaog  ohteuhkonash,  they  sow  the 
fields,  Ps.  107,  37;  pish  iveenominneoh- 
keteauauog,  they  shall  plant  vineyards, 
Is.  65,  21  ( =pish  ohkehteaog  weenomin- 
neohtekonash,  Zeph.  1,  13);  pish  kutoh- 
keteam,  thou  shalt  sow,  Mic.  6,  15;  ne 
ahketeaop,  that  which  thou  sowest,  1 
Cor.  15,  36,  37;  pass,  ne  ahketeamuk  up, 
that  which  was  planted,  Eccl.  3,  2; 
ahketead(t),  subj.  when  he  sowed,  Matt. 
13,  4;  noh  ahketeadt,  he  that  sows,  v.  37 
( ohkeelikonat ,  to  sowor  plant;  nuttohkeeh- 
team,  I  sow  or  plant;  ahquompi  kuttoh- 
keteam  kuttanni,  when  do  you  sow  your 
rye?  C.  209).  See  ohteuhkonat. 

[Narr.  aukeeteadmen  (and  quttaune- 
mun),  to  plant  corn;  aukeeteaurnitch, 
‘  planting  time  ’  (let  him  plant) ;  aukeeted- 
hettit,  ‘  when  they  setcorn  ’ ;  nummautau- 
keeteadrnm,  ‘I  have  done  planting’, 
R.  W.  91-92.] 

*ohkeieu,  adj.  below,  C.  168. 
ohkeiyeu,  adv.  toward  the  earth  (El.  Gr. 
21);  ohkekontu,  out  of  the  ground,  Gen. 
2,  9.  See  agwu. 

[Narr.  aukeeaseiu,  ‘downward’,  R. 
W.  52.] 

*ohkeommrosog,  bees,  C.  156.  See  aoh- 

keomco;  massonog. 


TRl'MBULI.] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


103 


oh.keon.og-k  [ohke-ivonog,  earth  hole],  n. a 
cave:  olikeonogkepd,  in  caves  of  the  earth, 
Heb.  11,  38,  =  ohkeonogquehtu,  Job  30, 6. 
ohkoon,  n.  a  skin  (dressed  or  prepared 
for  use;  cf.  askon,  oskon,  'tvuskon),  Lev. 
13,46,48,  56;  15,  17.  From  ogqunne&t, 
to  cover,  to  clothe;  cf.  hogkao,  he  clothes 
himself;  ivuskon ,  i.  e.  wuskeohkcon,  a 
new  or  undressed  skin. )  Cf.  mdnctk. 
ohkconie,  adj.  made  of  skins:  badgerde 
ohkaonie,  made  of  badger  skins,  Xum.  4, 

10,  12,  14;  ne  teague  mattagunne  wiskq , 
‘anything  (vessel  or  bottle)  of  skin’, 
Lev.  13,  59,  =teague  hohkamie  wiskq, 
v.  58,  =  ohkaonie  u-iskq,  v.  57,  =  teag- 
quodtag,  v.  48,  =  matlagune  vnshq,  v.  49, 
=  ivame  ne  ohkconaijeucok,  v.  51;  holxkco- 
nie  auwohteaonk,  all  that  is  made  of 
skins,  Num.  31,  20.  See  ogqunneat. 

ohkcounimk,  n.  collect,  skins;  skins  of 
badgers,  Ex.  35,  23;  cf.  sheepsoskunk, 
goatsoskunk,  sheepskins,  goatskins,  Heb. 

11,  37. 

ohkq,  n.  a  worm.  See  cohk. 
ohkuk,  ohkuhk,  ahkuhq,  n.  an  (earth¬ 
en)  pot  or  vessel,  Job  41,  20,  31;  2  K. 
4,  39,  40,  41;  pi.  -\-quog,  Mark  7,  4: 
nippee  hassune  cihkuhquog,  water-pots  of 
stone,  John  2,  6  ( ohkuke ,  a  kettle,  C. 
161). 

[Narr.  aucuck,  a  kettle;  mishquockuk, 
a  red  (copper)  kettle,  R.  W.  36.  ] 
ohkukquteaen-in,  n.  a  potter,  a  maker 
of  pots,  Jer.  18,  6. 

ohpantu,  ‘hetreadethon’  (walks upon), 
inan.  obj.,  Job  9,  8. 
ohpequan,  shoulder.  See  mohpegk. 
ohppeh,  ‘I  may  cast  a  snare’;  (or  sup- 
pos.?)  media  woh  ohppeh,  ‘not  that  I 
may  cast  a  snare’,  1  Cor.  7,  35.  Cf. 
cippeh. 

[Marginal  note.— “  Wrong.”] 

~*ohqu.ae,  C.  235,  =  uhquae  (on  the  other 
end),  q.  v. 

ohquanumonat,  v.  i.  an.  to  forsake.  See 
ahquanumau. 

ohquanumunat,  v.  i.  to  be  loathsome. 
See  lihqiianumonat. 

ohquanupam,  on  the  shore  or  margin  of 
the  sea,  Ex.  14,  30,  =ohquanu  kehtah- 
hannit,  Mark  2,  13;  ohke  .  .  .  ohquan- 
shin  may  ketahhannit,  ‘land  by  the  way 
of  the  sea’,  Matt.  4,  15. 


ohquassoaen,  -enin,  ‘an  austere  man’, 
Luke  19,  21,  22. 

ohqueneunkqus,  adj.  terrible.  Seeunk- 
queneunkqussue. 

ohquontamoonk,  indignation,  2  Cor.  7, 

11. 

-ohtae,  -ohtag,  -ohteau,  in  compound 
words,  that  which  is  of  (or  which  has) 
the  quality  or  nature  of,  or  belonging  to. 

ohtaeu,  ‘  he  croucheth  ’ ,  Ps.  10,  10. 

ohtauunat,  ahtauunat,  v.  t.  to  possess, 
to  have  (in  possession),  Gen.  23,  9; 
Judg.  18,  9;  Neh.  9,  15;  Amos  2,  10 
( ahtbuunat ,  to  have,  C.  194;  ahteauu- 
nat,  to  spare  or  preserve,  ibid.  210; 
ohto,  he  hath  (it),  Mass.  Ps. ):  noh 
ivadchanont  wunnaumoniineuh,  ohtau 
pomaniamoonk,  ‘he  that  hath  the  Son 
hath  life’,  1  John  5,  12;  noh  .  .  . 
matta  ejhtoou  pomaniamoonk,  ‘he  hath 
not  life’,  ibid.;  neg  ohtunkeg  ohke, 

‘  who  were  possessors  of  lands  ’ ,  Acts  4, 
34;  nuiahtomun  .  .  .  wetu,we  have  .  .  . 
a  house,  2  Cor.  5, 1;  ohtauunndt  ohke,  to 
inherit  the  land,  Ex.  23,  30;  noh  olitunk , 
the  owner  (suppos.),  Prov.  1,  19;  howan 
ohtunk,  who  hath?  Prov.  23,  29;  Ex.  24, 
14;  neteaguas  ohtunk  ketatteamnug,  ‘any¬ 
thing  which  is  (belongs  to)  thy  neigh¬ 
bor’,  Ex.  20, 17.  It  is  this  verb  in  the 
intransitive  form  ( ohteau )  which  Eliot 
has  most  frequently  employed  to  sup¬ 
ply  the  want  of  the  verb  of  existence 
(see  Du  Ponceau’s  notes  to  Eliot’s 
Grammar,  xxi-xxix,  and  Pickering’s 
Supplem.  Observ.,  xxx-xliv).  Thus, 
ayeuonk  .  .  .  ohteau  wutlat  Kirjalh-jea- 
rim,  ‘the  place  is  behind  Kirjath-jea- 
rim’,  Judg.  18,  12;  ohteau,  it  is,  it  was, 
Ex.  40,  38;  Matt.  6,  30;  pish  ohteau,  it 
shall  be,  Gen.  17, 13;  Matt.  6,  21;  ohtag, 
(that)  which  is,  Matt.  5,  14;  pish  oh- 
taash  (inan.  pi.),  they  shall  be,  Deut. 
6,  6;  ohtop,  it  was,  John  1,  1;  kutah- 
tauun,  thine  is,  Matt.  6,  13;  ahtoou  ah- 
toonk,  he  ‘hath  any  inheritance’,  Ejih. 
5,  5;  ahtoog,  they  had  (brick,  etc.), 
Gen.  11,  3;  nuppcoonk  ohteau  ohkuhqut, 
there  is  death  in  the  pot,  2  K.  4,  40; 
na  ohtu,  nah  ohta,  there  are  (there  is?), 
C.  Math.  Not.  Ind.  52  ( nutahtou,nutohto , 
nuttohto ,  I  have.  I  possess  (it) ;  kutahtoup, 
thouhadst;  nohaldou,  he  has;  nuttahto- 


104 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


ohtauunat,  ahtauunat — continued. 
man,  we  have;  kuttahtomwoo,  ye  have; 
ting  ahtoog ,  they  had,  C.  194,  226). 

[Del.  olhatlon  or  : imitation ,  he  has  or 
possesses,  Zeisb.  Gr.  158;  hattau,  ‘he 
has,  it  has,  it  is  there’,  ibid.  162;  hatteu, 
Zeish.  Voc.  18.] 

*ohteak.  See  *ohleuk. 

-ohteau.  See  -ohtde. 
ohteoonk,  ahtoonk,  n.  a  possession: 
umtohtuonk,  their  possession,  Gen.  47, 
11;  vmtch  ahldonk,  ‘for  a  possession’, 
Lev.  14,  34;  machemohtag  ahtoonk,  an 
everlasting  possession,  Gen.  17,  8. 
ohteuhkonat,v.  i.  to  sow  or  plant  a  field, 
Matt.  13,  3;  Lev.  26,  5;  Is.  28,  24:  | 
ohteuhkaum ,  is  sown,  1  Cor.  15,  43,  44. 
See  ohkehteaunat. 

ohteuk,  ohteak,  n.  a  field,  Matt.  13,  38, 
44;  land  which  is  cultivated  or  inclosed, 
or  to  which  the  idea  of  ownership  or 
individual  possession  attaches  (from 
ohtauunat  or  oldde,  and  ohke ) ;  pi.  ohteuh- 
konash,  Ps.  107,  37;  John  4,  35  ( ahteuk- 
kdnash,  C.  160);  tout  ohteakonit,  in  his 
field,  Matt.  13,  31;  ut  ohteakonit,  in  the 
field,  Ex.  23, 29;  utwoskeche ohteakonit,  in 
the  open  field,  Num.  19,  16;  Lev.  14,  53 
( ahteuk ,  soil,  a  field,  C.  160).  See  ohke. 
oh.toh.tosu,  (is)  removed,  Job  14, 18.  See 
ontahtauundt. 

ohtomp,  ahtomp,  n.  a  bow,  2  K.  13,  16; 

Ps.  78,  57:  w onkinnau  wutohtompe,  he 
bends  his  bow  (hath  bent,  Lam.  2,  4) ; 
kutahtomp,  thy  bow,  Gen.  27,  3;  ohtomp 
kah  kouhquodtash,  bow  and  arrows,  2  K. 
13, 15;  pi.  vmtohtompeh,  ivutahtompeoooh , 
their  bows;  Jer.  51,  56;  1  Sam.  2,  4;  oh- 
tompeilcheg,  those  who  carry  bows,  bow¬ 
men,  Jer.  4,  29;  noh  kdnunnont  ahtom- 
peh,  he  that  handleth  the  how,  Amos. 

2,  15;  noh  nohtulitunkeg  kah  pcotunkan-  \ 
oncheg  ohtompeh,  who  handle  and  bend 
the  bow,  Jer.  45,  9.  [ ohlde-omp ,  that 

which  belongs  to  a  man  (?)].  See  om- 
pategash ;  wonkinonat. 

[Abn.  tahbi.  Peq..  n’teump,  nut- 
teumpsh,  (my)  bow:  Towaunnemaudno 
waudgunurn  n’  teump  neegau  nuckhegunt; 
moh-che  mussyums  mochin  leautum  eyeiv 
teatum  gyncliums,  ‘  I  wish  I  had  my  bow 
and  arrows:  I  think  I  would  [now] 
shoot  you’  (‘eyeiv,  now;  teatum,  I  think; 
moh-che,  I  will;  moche  saugnumbe,  I’ll 


ohtomp,  ahtomp — continued, 
certainly;  gynchews,  I  kill’ ),  Stiles.  Del. 
hat  in  pe,  Zeisb.  Voc.  18.  Micm.  ahpee. 
Montagn.  achaape.  Skoffie  mishtasap- 
pee.  Chip,  mitigwab.  Powh.  atlanp,  a 
bow;  attonce,  arrows,  J.  Smith.] 
oiohquashadt  (?),  when  he  was  walking 
along  by  (or  near),  Matt.  4, 18,  =  paum- 
wushadt,  Mark  1,  16. 

okas,  ohkas,  cokas,  n.  mother;  con¬ 
struct.  okasoh,  Gen.  21,  21;  Matt.  10,  35, 
37:  ohkasoh  Jesus,  the  mother  of  Jesus, 
John  2,  1;  ndkas,  ncokas,  my  mother, 
Matt.  12,  48;  Luke  8,  21;  kokas,  kmkas, 
thy  mother;  Mark  3,  32;  Luke  8,  20; 
Eph.  6,  2;  pi.  nokasunonog,  our  mothers, 
Lam.  5,  3;  okasinneunk,  mothers,  (col¬ 
lect.  )  all  motherhood,  Mark  10,  30  (wut- 
tookdsin,  a  mother ;  ivdtchehwau,  her 
mother,  C.  162).  From  the  radical  6u, 
co,  with  a  termination  marking  the 
nomen  patientis,  as  ooshe,  each  does  the 
nomen  agentis.  Perhaps  the  same  word 
(with  animate  termination),  as  ohke, 
earth. 

[Narr.  okdsu,  a  mother;  ndkace,  nich- 
whaiv,  my  mother,  R.  W.  44.] 
okauau,  he:  negut  cokauau,  he  has  one 
wife,  1  Tim.  3,  2. 

okummes  (?)  [=6kas-ummiste  ?] ,  aunt, 
father’s  brother’s  wife:  kokummes,  ‘thy 
aunt’,  Lev.  18,  14;  kokummus,  thy  grand¬ 
mother,  2  Tim.  1,  5  (wuttookummissin, 
a  grandmother,  C.  162). 

[Del.  mu  cho  mes,  grandfather  (ait 
femina?),  Zeisb.  Voc.  23.] 
om,  n.  a  hook  (and  line),  Matt.  17,  27.  See 
*aumaui. 

[Del.  aman,  fish-hook,  Zeisb.] 
omacheg,  n.  pi.  fishers:  neg  omdeheg,  they 
who  (fish  with  a  hook)  ‘cast  angle’, 
Is.  19,  8. 

omaen,  n.  a  fisherman;  pi.  omaenuog, 
Ezek.  47,  10.  Cf.  ncotamogquaen. 
omaenat  (?),  to  fish.  See  *aumafu. 
*6mmis,pl.  -\-suog,  herring,  C.  159.  See 
aumsd-og,  ‘a  fish  somewhat  like  a  her¬ 
ring’,  R.  W.  102.  See  *munnaivhatteaug. 

[Pencil  note. — “Dim.  of  aumaaog  ?:  for 
aummtsu,  depreeiative  aumixh.  See  note  in 
R.  W.  114.”] 

*omogpeh,  adv.  almost,  C.  233;  ut  6mog 
ivame,  generally,  ibid.  225,  228.  Cf. 
momanch,  at  times,  now  and  then. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


105 


omohk[inat?],  v.  i.  to  rise  up,  to  rise 
from  sleep  ( omuhkenate ,  to  arise,  C.  | 
180):  omohkeu  nompodeu,  he  rose  early  j 
in  the  morning,  Ex.  24,  4;  omohku,  1 
K.  3,  20;  omohkeog  nompode,  they  rose 
early,  Ex.  32, 6;  1  Sam.  29, 11;  omohkeon 
(subj.),  when  I  arose,  1  K.  3,  21;  noh 
omohkit  nompdae,  he  who  rises  early, 
etc.,  Prov.  27,  14;  omlcish,  arise  thou, 
Gen.  19,  15;  omokemoo  kah  nepomoo,  it 
arose  and  stood  upright  (pass,  form, 
‘was  arisen’  and  ‘was  stood’),  Gen. 
37,  7  ( nuttomuhkem ,  I  arise;  nuttomuk- 
kemun,  we  arise,  C.  180). 

[Abn.  ahmikkS,  je  me  leve,  a 
somno.  ] 

omohkmonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  raise  up,  an. 
obj.;  omohkineh,  raise  thou  me  up,  Ps. 
41,  10. 

[Abn.  Sclahmikenan,  je  le  fais  lever, 
je  le  leve  de  terre.] 

omp,  n.  man.  This  word  is  nowhere 
found  by  itself,  and  perhaps  was  al¬ 
ready  obsolete  when  Eliot’s  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  the  language  was  commenced ; 
but  its  recurrence  in  compound  words 
suffices  to  fix  it  as  the  dialectic  name 
appropriated,  in  accordance  with  Indian 
usage,  to  the  favored  race,  whose  men 
were  all  viri,  while  those  of  other  tribes 
or  nations  were  contemptuously  re¬ 
garded  as  even  less  than  homines — 
missinnuog,  or  captives.  (See  miasm-, 
missinnin.)  From  this  root  come,  ap¬ 
parently,  nompaas  ( ne-omp-odas ,  the 
man  animal),  a  male;  wosketomp  (wos- 
kehuae-omp,  hurtful  or  bloody  man),  a 
warrior,  or  ‘brave’,  one  who  bears 
arms  (see  note  below);  rnugquomp 
( mogke-omp ,  great  man),  a  captain; 
nunkomp  ( nunkon-omp ,  light  man?),  a 
young  man,  not  grown  up;  penomp 
(penoive-omp  ?,  a  stranger  to  man,  nes- 
cia  viri?),  a  virgin;  omskauonat  (for 
omp-),  to  conquer,  to  put  to  flight; 
and,  perhaps,  ompehtedonk  ( omp-ohtde , 
that  which  belongs  to  man  or  to  the 
conqueror),  tribute. 

[Note. — Regarding  wosketomp  the  compiler 
notes:  “This  is  wrong,  but  I  can  not  fix  the 
true  meaning  of  wosket-."  This  is  followed  by 
a  note  in  pencil:  “  Perhaps  not  wrong.  1883.”] 

ompachissin,  ‘the  top  of  it  [a  ladder] 
reached’  (to  heaven),  Gen.  28,  12. 


ompamuhquaenat,  v.  i.  to  turn  one’s  self 
around,  to  turn  back,  to  look  behind 
one:  ompamuhquaeu,  ‘  he  turned  back ’ , 
2  K.  2,  24;  alique  ompamuhquaish,  do' 
not  thou  look  behind  thee,  Gen.  19, 17; 
ompdmuliquaeoh,  she  looked  back,  v. 
26;  matta  ompamuhquaeog,  they  look 
not  back,  Jer.  46, 5;  ompamuquaehtauau, 
v.  t.  he  looked  back  at,  Jer.  13,  16.  See 
nuhquainat. 

*ompana[enat?],  v.  i.  to  lift  one’s  self 
up,  to  rise  up  (as  opposed  to  nauwaenatr 
to  bow  down):  ompanaeu,  he  lifted 
himself  up;  ompanaoop  (pret.),  Mass. 
Ps.,  John  8,  7;  ompanait,  when  he  lifted 
himself  up,  v.  10. 

*ompateg,  pi.  -{-ash,  tveapons,  Mass. 
Ps.,  John  18,  3,  =  auwohteaongash  (?),, 
El.  See  auwohleau. 

*ompattamunat,  ‘ to  wear  clothes  out’; 
mahtompattarndnat,  to  wear  out;  num- 
mahche  ompattam,  I  did  wear;  nag  volt 
ompattamwog,  they  would  wear,  C.  215. 
See  auwohkon. 

ompatussinat,  to  lean  upon  ( ompatis - 
sinninat,  C.  199) :  noh  ompatussin  wek,  he 
leans  on  his  house,  Job  8,  15;  ompa- 
tussinwog,  they  lean  on  (him),  Mic.  3, 
11;  ompatussuk,  if  he  lean  (or  leaning) 
on  it,  2  K.  5,  18;  18,  21;  John  13,  23; 
ompatissunco  kah  anwohhou,  ‘the  stay 
and  the  staff  ’ ,  Is.  3,1;  ompatissiennmonk , 
the  stay,  ibid. 

ompehteae,  ompeteae,  adj.  of  tribute;. 
-teaguasli,  tribute  money,  Matt.  17,  24. 

ompehteaonk,  ompwet-  ( ompeteaonk , 
C.  203),  n.  tribute,  Gen.  49,  15;  Num. 
31,  28;  Matt.  17,  24,  25;  ‘toll’,  Ezra 
4,  20:  omp-ohtde,  omp-ohtedonk,  that 
which  belongs  to  men,  i.e.  masters  (?). 
See  omp.  [“ ompeht  .  .  .  donk,  an  old 
Indian  word  that  signifies  obedience 
by  giving  any  .  .  .”,  C.  155  (partly 
illegible  in  his  manuscript).]  See  om- 
wunndonk. 

ompenat,  v.  i.  to  be  loose,  unbound, 
free,  1  Cor.  7,  27:  ompean,  if  thou  be 
loosed  (or  free)  from,  ibich;  noh  om- 
peneau  watch,  she  is  loosed  from  (the 
law),  Rom.  7,  2. 

ompeneausu,  adj.  (was)  loosed,  Mark 
7,  35;  pi.  an.  -\-og,  Dan.  3,  25. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


10(5 

-ompeneonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  loose  or  unbind 
an.  obj.  ( ompinne&nat ,  to  release,  Luke 
23,  20);  =  ponanauonat  (see  ponanau) : 
wutdmpinneuh,  he  loosed  him  (from 
bonds),  Ps.  105,20  [-neouhior -neuh(?)~\; 
Acts  22,  30;  ompinneau,  he  looseth  (the 
prisoners),  Ps.  146,  7;  ompinneuk,  loose 
ye  him,  Matt.  21,  2;  kidompenimanu- 
naout,  ‘I  (to)  release  unto  you’,  i.  e. 
I  to  cause  to  be  unbound  to  you, 
Matt.  27,  21;  ompin  (?),  loose  thyself, 
Is.  52,  2. 

•ompenumunat,  v.  t.  to  loose,  to  unbind, 
Rev.  5,  2:  ompeneum,  he  looseth  (the 
bonds),  Job  12,  18;  ompenim  nuppe- 
munneat,  he  has  loosed  my  cord,  Job 
30,  11;  ompinimunash,  they  are  untied, 
loosed,  Is.  33,  24. 

[Narr.  aumpanish,  untie  this;  aum- 
paniimmin,  to  imdo  a  knot,  R.  W.  54.] 
-ompetag,  -ak,  adv.  afterward,  after 
that,  Josh.  24,  5;  Ps.  73,  24;  Neh.  6, 10; 
Mark  4,  28:  vmtch  ompetak,  for  the  time 
to  come,  the  future,  Is.  42, 23  ( ‘shortly ’, 
C.  230). 

ompeteae.  See  ompehieae. 
ompeteaonk.  See  ompehtedonk. 
-ompontinnumunat  magcoonk,  to  send 
an  offering  (or  tribute, homage),  1  Sam. 
6,  3:  nigh  ompontinumciuogish  wutch 
magooonk,  which  things  ye  return  him 
for  an  offering,  1  Sam.  6,  8. 
ompcochanumunat  ( ompcochenat ,  v.  i.  ? 
to  roll,  C.  206):  wutompcoehanumaont 
qussuk,  to  roll  away  the  stone,  Gen. 
29,  8  [i.  e.  to  remove  the  obst ruction (?), 
ompenumundt  and  wutche  (?)  ]. 
*ompcochenat,  v.  to  roll,  C.  206. 
*omppuwussueonknunkquat,  n.  vice, 
C.  165. 

ompsk,  ompsq,  in  compound  words,  a 
stone  or  rock ;  equivalent  in  some  cases 
to  qussuk,  in  others  to  hassun.  See  ke- 
nompsq  (a  sharp  stone,  under  kenai), 
wanashquompskqut  (the  top  of  a  rock), 
togvjortkanompsk  (a  millstone,  under 
togguhwonk),  kxmohkoi-ompsk  (a  high 
pointed  rock),  etc.  Not  used  in  Eliot’s 
Bible  except  in  compound  words;  but 
missitche  ompsqut  ( obj . ) ,  ‘  a  great  stone  ’ , 
is  in  Samp.  Quinnup.,  p.  156.  The  pri¬ 
mary  meaning  seems  to  be  an  upright 
(ornpae)  rock  or  stone  ( p’sk ).  Eliot  has: 


ompsk,  ompsq — continued. 
pasipskkodt-ut  [ pahsu-p’sk ],  ‘in  a  cleft 
of  the  rock  ’,  Ex.  33, 22;  agwepassompsko- 
dehtu,  ‘under  the  [cleft  upright]  rocks’, 
Is.  57,  5;  voxkeche  piskuttu,  (from)  ‘the 
top  of  the  rocks’,  Num.  23,  9;  ut  attaa- 
che pishkodtut,  ‘on  a  crag  of  the  rock’, 
Job  39,  21;  kenugke  pumipskquehtu,  (of 
river  courses)  ‘among  the  rocks’,  Job 
28,  10;  kussampskuiyeuut,  ‘on  (high) 
rocks’  (or  on  a  high  rocky  place),  Jer. 
4,  29;  chippipskut,  ‘upon  a  rock’  under 
water,  Acts  27,  29;  mamossompsquehtu, 
in  ‘gravel’  (?),  Is.  48,  19;  wutch  woske- 
chepiskquttu,  ‘from  the.  top  of  the 
rocks’,  Num.  23,  9  (sing,  woskechepiskq, 
on  the  top  of  a  rock,  Ezek.  24,  7). 
ompskot,  n.:  nequt-omjjskot,  ‘a  penny’, 
Matt.  22,  19;  Mark  12,  15;  Rev.  6,  6 
( ornpskod ,  a  penny,  C.  203;  ompskotash, 
pence,  Ind.  Laws,  ii,  p.  3).  Cf.  nequt- 
ompskinaushettit,  ‘of  a  span  long’  (pi.); 
nequt  omskinausu  ne  sahleag,  ‘a  span 
shall  be  the  length  of  it’,  Ex.  28,  16. 

[Narr.  nequittdmpscat,  1  penny  (that 
is,  a  penny’s  worth  of  ivdmpan ;  prob¬ 
ably  a  measure  of  length);  neesaumscat, 
2  pence;  yowdmscat,  4  pence;  qutta- 
tashadmscat,  6  pence  ( =  quttauatu,  qudt - 
tuatu;  neen  =  2  qudltiuUues,  =  12  pence, 
or  a  shilling);  piuckquat  (10  quattua- 
tues),  60  pence,  =  quttatashincheck  aum- 
scal,  =nquittdmpeg,  or  nquitnishcatisu, 
1  fathom  of  their  stringed  money; 
neesaumpaugatuck,  2  fathoms  =  10  shil¬ 
lings,  etc.;  neesaumsqussayi,  2  spans  of 
vjdmpan;  yoivompscussayi,  4  spans,  etc., 
R.  W.  128,  135.] 
ompsq.  See  ompsk. 

[-ompu:  enwompu,  he  looks.  Cf.  Chip. 
ont  wauh,  to  see.  ] 

*ompuwussuonk,  n. :  aiontogkoie  ompu- 
wussuonk,  craft  or  guile,  C.  165. 
ompweteaenu-in,  n.  a  tributary,  Lam. 

1,  1;  pi.  ompeteaenuog,  Judg.  1,  30. 
ompweteaonk.  See  ompehtedonk. 
ompwunnaonk.  See  omumnndonk. 
ompwunnit:  noh  ompwunnit,  ‘a  raiser 
of  taxes’,  an  imposer  of  tribute  (?), 
Dan.  11,  20. 

ompwunnonat,  v.  t.  to  pay  tribute  to, 
Mark  12,  14;  Luke  23,  2:  pish  kutdmp- 
wunnukquog,  they  shall  be  tributaries 
[pay  tribute]  to  you,  Deut.  20,  11; 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


107 


ompwunnonat — continued. 
wutompunukoouh,  they  were  tributaries 
to  them,  Judg.  1,  33;  wutompwunuh, 
(he)  gave  him  presents,  paid  tribute, 

2  K.  17,  3. 

omskauonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  prevail  over, 
to  put  to  flight:  pish  omskauw&og,  they 
shall  chase,  put  to  flight,  Lev.  26,  8; 
omskosu,  he  jirevailed  in  battle,  was 
the  conqueror,  Ex.  17, 11;  wutomskauoh , 
he  chased  him,  Judg.  9,  40. 

omwunnaonk,  ompw-,  n.  tribute  (paid 
or  referred  to  the  payer),  Num.  31,  37, 
38,  39.  See  ompehteaonk. 

onag.  See  dunag. 

onat,  auonat,  v.  t.  to  go  to  a  place  or 
object,  Eccl.  7,  2;  Jer.  37, 12.  See  ex¬ 
amples  under  ail,  to  which  add  ontuh, 
let  us  go  to,  1  Sam.  11,  14;  Luke  2,  15; 
ongq,  go  ye,  Matt.  21,  2;  Josh.  2,  16. 
Cf.  oomunat. 

onatuh,  adv.  as,  like,  Ps.  78,  15,  27,  65; 
onatuh  .  .  .  netatuppe,  as  .  .  .so, 
Prov.  26,  9  (construed  with  the  suppos. 
mood  for  unnetoh,  as  though,  as  when),  i 
Caus.  verb  subst.  onatuheyeuco  ( ‘  he  took 
on  him’),  he  made  himself  like,  Heb. 

2,  16. 

onch,  conj.  yet,  notwithstanding  that, 
Ex.  9,  17;  Eccl.  1,  7;  Hos.  9,  16;  ohn- 
chikoh,  but  yet,  Rom.  5,  7;  ohnch,  Is. 
14, 1  ( =onk ,  with  form  of  imperat.  3d 
pers.  singular  or  absolute  participle). 
See  gut. 

oncheteau.  See  onchteau. 

oncheteauun,  ‘revised’  or  ‘corrected’ 
(as  used  in  title-page  of  Rawson’s  revi¬ 
sion  of  Eliot’s  translation  of  Samp. 
Quinnup.,  1689):  oncliheaog  wuthashab- 
poouh,  they  mended  their  nets,  Mark 

I,  19;  onchteauunat  wek,  to  repair  his 
house,  2  Chr.  24,  12;  34,  10;  oncheteau- 
unat,  2  Chr.  24,  5.  See  onchteau. 

onchittamauonat  (?),  v.  i.  to  chew  the 
cud(?);  cf.  kohkodhumau.  onchittamau, 
it  chews  the  cud,  Lev.  11,  4,  5,  6;  on- 
chiltamont,  part.,  cheweth  the  cud,  Lev. 

II,  3,  =kohkodhumont,  Deut.  14,  6; 
oonchittamoncheg,  pi.  they  which  chew, 
etc.,  Lev.  11,  4,  =  kohkodhumoncheg, 
Deut.  14,  7;  matta  onchittamauco,  he  does 
not  chew,  Lev.  11,  7 ,=matta  kohkod- 
humoou,  Deut.  14,  8. 


onchteau,  oncheteau,  he  amends  (it); 
suppos.  2d  pi.  oncheteaog,  if  ye  amend 
(your ways),  Jer.  7, 5;  onchteoook,  amend 
ye  (your  ways),  v.  3;  onchetoe,  amended, 
title-page  of  second  ed.  of  Indian  Bible. 
See  oncheteauun. 

onchteoonk,  n.  a  repairing,  repair:  onch - 
teoonk  wek,  the  repairing  of  the  house, 
2  Chr.  24,  27. 

onchteunk,  part. :  ohchteunk  pokgshunk, 
the  repairer  of  (he  who  repairs)  the 
breach,  Is.  58,  12. 

ongkome,  ogkomai,  prep,  on  the  other 
side  of,  Josh.  24,  2,  3  (its  adversative  is 
sometime  yoai,  2  Sam.  2, 13) :  ogkomde, 
on  the  other  side  (of  the  way),  Luke 
10,  31,  32;  ogkomde  purnmeneutunkanit, 
on  the  other  side  of  the  wall,  Neh.  4, 
13  (‘behind  the  wall’);  nag  ogkomut 
sepuut,  (to)  those  beyond  the  river, 
Neh.  2,  7.  See  acawmen(dakit) .  ogko- 
muk  \_=Accomac~\  Jordan,  (that  which 
is)  beyond  Jordan,  Matt.  4,  15. 

[Abn.  ahgSahmek,  en  dela.  Quir.  ak- 
kommuk  kathans,  over  the  seas,  Pier.  10. 
Cree  akdmik,  across,  on  the  other  side. 
Del.  gamunk,  over  there,  the  other  side 
of  the  water;  achgameu,  over  against, 
Zeisb.] 

ongkoue,  prep,  beyond  (El.  Gr.  21),  1 
Sam.  20,  37:  wutuhshame  .  .  .  ongkoue, 
on  this  side  .  .  .  on  that  side  or  beyond 
(the  river),  Josh.  8,  33;  aongkoue,  ut¬ 
most,  farthest  off,  Deut.  30,  4;  Jer.  9, 26; 
25,  23;  comup  aongkouoh  komut,  ‘come 
from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  ’ , 
Matt.  12, 42;  en  aongkoue,  to  the  furthest 
( ‘  utmost  ’ ) ,  Deut.  34, 2  ( onkkdue ,  C.  168 ) ; 
ongkoue,  behind,  1  Sam.  21,  9.  See 
wutuhshame. 

ongquomonat.  See  onkquommommcoonk. 

onk,  conj.,  a  particle  which  nearly  an¬ 
swers  to  the  Greek  5;),  and  is  com¬ 
monly  used  in  the  continuation  of  a  re¬ 
cital  or  for  connecting  parts  of  a  propo¬ 
sition  or  members  of  a  sentence  less 
closely  and  directly  than  by  kah.  It  is 
sometimes  put  for  ‘  and  ’ ,  Gen.  20, 12, 13; 
Matt.  18,  5;  elsewhere  for  ‘so’,  ‘so 
that’,  Ps.  78,  20,  29.  anue  onk  wame, 
more  than  all,  1  Chr.  16,  20;  anue  mis- 
suken  onk  neen,  he  is  more  great  than  I, 


108 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


onk — continued. 

Mark  1,  7;  missi  onk,  greater  than,  j 
Mark  4,  32  ( onkne ,  besides,  C.  234). 
[Was  it  originally  the  same  as  ironk  ?]  ! 
onkaeese,  adv.  (dimin.  of  onrjkoue),  a 
little  farther,  Acts  27,  28. 

[Xarr.  awwassese,  R.  AY.  55.] 
onkapunanittuonk,  n.  torment  (en¬ 
dured;  referred  to  the  subject),  Rev. 

9,  5;  Ex.  1,  13,  14  (‘rigor’).  See  au- 
wct  kompandonk. 

onkapunanonat,  onkapunnonat,  v.  t. 
an.  to  torment,  to  torture:  umtonka-  j 
punnonaout,  to  torment  them,  Rev.  9, 

5;  ahque  onkapunaneh,  torment  me  not, 
Luke  8,  28.  Pass,  onkapunnanoog,  they 
were  tortured,  Heb.  11,  35.  Cf.  auwa- 
kompunnassn. 

onkapunnanittue,  adj.  and  adv.  cruel, 
severe,  Heb.  11,  36  (with  reference  to 
the  subject  or  victim), 
onkapunnaonk,  n.  torment,  torture, 
cruelty  [inflicted;  referred  to  the 
agent],  Rev.  9,  5  (3d  pers.  pi.), 
onkatog,  adj.  another,  Dent.  28, 30:  pasuk 
.  .  .  onkatog,  one  .  .  .  theother,  Deut. 
21,  15;  ketasswt  ayeuhkonont  wonkatogeh 
ketassootoh,  a  king  going  to  war  against 
another  king,  Luke  14,  31  (here  -on¬ 
katog  has  the  prefix  of  3d  pers.,  ‘his 
other’  (?),  and  objective  affix);  pi.  on-  I 
katogig  (unkatak,  Pier.  14).  From  onk 
or  wonk. 

*onkatoganit,  conj.  otherwise,  G.  234. 
*onkatuk,  onkne,  conj.  besides,  C.  234. 
onkauoht,  onkauohteau,  onkauwoht, 
n.  a  shadow,  Gen.  19,  8;  2  K.  20,  9;  Is. 
32,  2. 

onkauwonkqut,  ‘behind  a  tree’,  Is. 
66, 17. 

onkhumunat  ( onkwhonat ,  an.),  v.  t. 
(1)  to  put  one  thing  above  another,  to 
cover.  (2)  to  hide.  See  putlogliam. 
onkwhau,  he  hideth  (it),  Prov.  27,  16; 
nulonkhum  nuskemk,  I  hide  my  face, 
Deut.  31,  18;  onkichont,  part,  hiding, 
Prov.  27,  16;  onkwhosik,  unkwhosik,  (it) 
is  covered  by,  Prov.  26,  23,  26  ( nuttonk - 
humun  nuhhog,  I  cover  (myself),  C. 
187). 

[Cree  uckwunnahum,  he  covers  it, 
Howse  45;  uckvmnnawayoo,  he  covers 
him,  ibid.  45,  83.] 
onkne.  See  *onkatuk. 


onkouohtae,  adj.  shady:  - mehtug- 

quash,  Job.  40,  22. 

onkquanumooonk,  n.  sorrow,  physical 
pain,  Nah.  2,  10.  See  onkquommom- 
mcoonk;  unkquanumooonk. 
onkquatunk,  n.  a  recompense,  Is.  35,  4; 

mit - ,  his  recompense,  Job  15,  31 

( onkqmtonk ,  wages  or  reward,  C.  203). 
*onkqueekhco,  n.  a  hat,  C.  160;  ohk- 
quohtapape,  cap,  C.  239. 

[Xarr.  saunketippo  or  aslionaquo,  a  hat 
or  cap,  R.  W.  107.] 

i  *onkqueneunkque,  adj.  cruel,  C.  168; 
severe,  p.  175. 

onkquequohJiou,  -hm,  n.  a  veil,  Ex.  34, 
33;  2  Cor.  3,  14.  See  qmttogquequohhou. 
onkqu.equoh.hou,  ‘he  covered  his  face’ 
(with  it),  Is.  6,  2. 

onkqunnesog,  n.  pi.  claw’s:  wonkqunnS- 
sog,  their  claws,  Zech.  11,  16.  Dimin. 
from  uhquon,  a  hook.  See  muhkos. 
onkquohquodt,  (it  is)  ‘lowering’,  Matt. 
16,  3.  See  kuppohquodt,  (when  it  is) 
cloudy  weather;  *onn5hquat,  raining,  C. 

[Del.  achgumhocquat,  it  is  cloudy 
weather,  Zeisb.  Gr.  162;  ach  gum  hok, 
cloudy,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  13.] 
onkquommommcoonk,  n.  sorrow,  Gen. 

3,  16;  pain,  ‘torment’,  Matt.  4,  24. 
See  onkquanummonk;  unkquanumooonk. 

onkquommomwe,  adj.  sorrowful,  in  sor¬ 
row,  Gen.  3,  16,  17.  See  unkque. 
onkquosketueonk,  n.  poisoning,  Ps.  58, 

4.  See  uhquoskei. 

onkquotteonat,  v.  t,  an.  (1)  to  recom¬ 
pense  (a  person) :  onkquotteau,  he  recom¬ 
pensed  (them),  Prov.  26,  10;  neh  pish 
wutonkquatauoh,  he  will  recompense 
her,  Jer.  51,  6;  kuppapasku  onkquatonsh 
[-oush  ?] ,  I  will  render  to  you  double, 
Zech.  9, 12;  unonquatok,  recompense  ye 
(her),  Rev.  18,  6;  neyan  onkquatunk- 
quedg,  as  she  has  recompensed  you,  ibid. 
(2)  to  hire,  to  pay  wages:  kutonkquat- 
oush,  I  will  give  thee  hire,  1  K.  5,  6; 
yen  kali  yeu  onkquatoe  nuttinhikqun,  ‘thus 
and  thus  he  dealeth  with  me’  (pays 
me  such  wages),  Judg.  18,  4.  See 
annconau  (2). 

[Xarr.  kuttaunckquittaunch,  I  will  pay 
you;  kummuchickonckquatous,!  will  pay 
you  well;  tockelaonckquittiinnea,  what 
will  you  give  me?  R.  W.  72;  kutteado 


TRUMBULI,] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


109 


onkquotteonat — continued. 
commeinsh,  ‘I  will  give  you  your 
money?’,  p.  135.] 

onkqussohliou,  n.  the  cover  or  ‘lid’  (of 
a  chest,  2  K.  12,  9). 

onkup[pe],  n.  strong  drink,  Is.  5, 11,  22; 
Prov.  20,1,  =  manuhkag  wuttatiamdonk, 
Lev.  10,  9,  =menuhke  vrutlattamdonk, 
Kum.  6,  3;  onkuppe,  Prov.  31,  4,  6. 

[Abn.  a'kSbi,  boisson  forte,  Rasies.' 
Del.  achewon,  strong,  spirituous,  Zeisb. 
Gr.  167.] 

onkwheg,  n.  =  onkwhonk;  pi.  -\-aih,  cov¬ 
ers  to  dishes,  etc.,  Num.  4,  7. 

onkwhongane,  adj.  covering,  Num.  4,  5. 

onkwhonk,  n.  a  covering,  Num.  4,  6, 

10,  14;  a  screen  or  curtain,  v.  25,  26: 
wutch  mishehtash,  a  covert  from  the  tem¬ 
pest,’  Is.  32,  2;  pi.  onkwhongash,  cover¬ 
ings,  Prov.  31,  22.  See  pultogham. 

onkwhosuonk,  n.  that  which  makes  a 
cover  or  covers;  pi.  -ongash,  Ex.  25,  29. 

*onnohquat  (?),  ‘raining’,  C.  222.  Cf. 
wunnohquodt,  fair  weather. 

[Narr.  dnaquat,  rain,  R.  W.  83.  Del. 
alhacquot,  ‘it  rains  a  general  rain  (over 
a  large  surface  of  country)  ’,  Zeisb.  Gr. 
161;  ‘stormy,  rainy  weather’,  Zeisb. 
Voc.  14.] 

onoquesuonk,  ana-,  n.  a  joint;  pi.  -on- 
gash,  Cant.  7,1;  Eph.  4, 16. 

onouwussu,  adj.  lean,  Ezek.  34,  20  [from 
oonou-weyaus,  low  [hollow]  flesh  (?)]: 
coweeyausee  wees  pish  onauimsseumco,  ‘the 
fatness  of  his  flesh  shall  wax  lean’,  Is. 
17,  4;  ianauwussuog,  ianauwussitoheg 
(an.  pi.),  Gen.  41,  3,  4;  unauwussue,  C. 
172. 

[Narr.  nanowwussu,  it  is  lean,  R.  W. 
143.] 

onquontcowonat,  v.  i.  to  roar,  as  a  wild 
beast:  pish  onquontoowau,  he  shall  roar, 
Is.  42,  13;  nutogquontanvomun,  we  roar, 
Is.  59,  11;  pish  ogquonlcoaog  wuske  qun- 
nonouut,  they  shall  roar  like  a  young 
lion,  Is.  5,  29  ( =  nehnehteau(og ),  Hos. 

11,  10). 

onquottantamunat,  v.  t.  to  recompense 
or  reward;  (inan.  obj.)  to  repay:  noli 
woh  onkquottantam,  he  will  recompense 
(it),  Job.  34,  33;  nutonkquadtantam,  I 
will  recompense  (it),  Jer.  16,  18;  ahque 
onkqutok,  do  not  recompense  (evil  for 


onquottantamunat — continued, 
evil),  Rom.  12, 17;  onkquatontaj,  let  him 
recompense  (thy  work),  Ruth  2,  12. 
onsapinneat.  See  ontapinneat. 
ontahtauunat,  v.  i.  to  be  moved,  Jer. 
24,  9;  to  be  in  a  state  of  motion  or  to 
be  made  to  move  from  one  place  to 
another,  passively  [sometimes  transi¬ 
tive,  to  move  or  impart  motion  to:  wu- 
tontalauunat,  with  prefix  of  3d  pers.,  to 
remove  it,  Gen.  48,  17]:  *mattci  ontah- 
tdunwut  (pass.  neg. ),  not  to  be  moved, 
1  Chr.  16,  30;  pish  ontohteau,  it  shall  be 
removed,  Ezek.  7,  19;  sun  woh  qussuk 
ontahtauun,  shall  the  rock  be  removed? 
Job  18,  4;  pish  ontahtauun,  it  shall  be 
removed  from  its  place,  Is.  22,  25;  que- 
nohtag  ontohteau,  the  foundation  moved 
[was  moved],  2  Sam.  22,  8;  agwu  oh- 
tagish  wadchuash  ohtahlaash,  the  foun¬ 
dations  of  the  mountains  were  moved, 
Ps.  18,  7;  mat  pish  ohtohtano,  it  shall  not 
be  moved,  Ps.  96,  10. 

[*Note. — “Wrong.  This  is  n  different  verb. 
See  ontatauunat."] 

[Cree  {!)  d  t-astayoo  (inan.),  he  is,  or 
is  lying,  in  another  place;  (2)  a't-athdyoo 
(an.),  “he  ali-ates,  puts,  him  in  an¬ 
other  place,  removes  him”;  (3)  a't- 
ootayoo,  he  goes  elsewhere,  ‘removes  ’, 
Howse  157.  Chip.  (1)  aund' -ahtd,  (2) 
ood’  aund'-assdun,  (3)  aund'-oota,  ibid.] 
*ontaneehkinneat,  to  step;  nuttontdneh- 
tip,  I  step,  C.  210.  Cf.  ontconu. 
ontapinneat,  onsap-,  ontsap-,  v.  i.  to  be 
removed  to  another  place  (with  refer¬ 
ence  to  change  of  place  without  the  ac¬ 
tion,  volition,  or  power  of  independent 
motion  of  the  object  moved);  with  pre¬ 
fix  of  3d  pers.  wutontapeinat,  (he)  to  be 
moved,  1  Thess.  3,  3:  God  noeu  appu, 
matta  pish  ontappu,  God  is  in  the  midst 
of  her,  she  shall  not  be  moved,  Ps.  46, 5; 
nag  pish  ontappuog,  they  shall  move, 
Mic.  7,  17;  matta  ontappeog,  they  may 
not  be  moved,  2  Sam.  7,  10;  ontapush, 
ontsapish,  ‘be  thou  removed’,  Matt.  21, 
21;  Mark  11,  23;  onsappineau,  onsap- 
puog,  Num.  33,  5,  6,  7,  8,  etc.  ( antsa - 
pinneat,  ontsahtauunat,  to  move,  to  move 
one’s  house,  C.  202;  nutanlseap,  I  move; 
nutantsepumun,  we  move,  ibid.;  tohwaj 
ontootadn,  why  do  you  remove?  ibid. 
239). 


110 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  A> 


ontapinneat,  etc. — continued. 

[Cree  a'l-dp-u  (an.),  ‘he  other-sits, 
changes  his  seat’,  Howse  156.  Chip. 
auniV-ahbeh,  ibid.] 

ontashonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  remove  or  move 
from  place  to  place  (to  be  removed(?), 
Ezek.  23,  46):  ontasliau,  he  removeth 
(them),  Dan.  2,  21;  wutontahshuh,  he 
removed  them,  Gen.  47,  21;  he  re¬ 
moved  him,  Acts  7,  4.  Cf.  *oteshem; 
oolshoh. 

ontatauunat,  v.  t.  to  move  (an  inan. 
obj.),  Gen.  48,  17  (with  prefix  of  3d 
pers. ) :  oniatoush  kusseet,  remove  thy  foot, 
Prov.  4,  27  ( ordaltaush ,  Luke  22,  42); 
onlah  (?)  dhkon,  remove  (it)  not,  Prov. 
23, 10;  noh  ontattunk,  he  who  removeth, 
Deut.  27,  17;  matta  pish  kutontaltocoh, 
thou  shalt  not  remove  (it),  Deut.  19, 14; 
noootahtah,  remove  (it)  far  from  me, 
Prov.  30,  8  ( antsapinneat ,  ontsahlauunat, 
to  move,  to  move  one’s  house,  C.  202). 
Cf.  ontahtauun&t. 

[Cree  at-astow  (inan.),  he  removes 
it,  Howse  156.  Chip,  ood’  aund'- 
ahtoon,  ibid.] 

ontchetoe,  amended.  Title-page  of  sec¬ 
ond  ed.  of  Indian  Bible.  See  onchteau. 

onthamunat,  v.  i.  to  put  out,  to  quench, 
to  extinguish,  as  a  fire,  lamp,  or  candle 
(cf.  ncotau  uhtea,  the  fire  goes  out,  Prov. 
26,  20;  wequananteg  matta  ohtaoo,  the 
candle  does  not  go  out,  Prov.  31,  18; 
waban  cotshoh,  the  wind  bloweth) :  nag 
ontohu'hoog,  they  are  quenched,  Is.  43, 
17  ( ontah -,  Ps.  118,  12) ;  matta  pish  oh- 
tanco,  it  (anger)  shall  not  be  quenched, 

2  Chr.  34,  25  ( -  ontanoo,  2  K.  22, 

17);  matta  pish  onthamooun,  it  shall  not 
be  quenched,  Is.  34,  10;  66,  24;  matta 
autanmk,  not  to  be  quenched,  Luke 
3,  17;  nag  onthamwog,  they  quench 
(coals),  2  Sam.  14,  7;  uhnthamwog  noo- 
teau,  they  quenched  the  fire,  Heb.  11, 
34;  pass,  pish  ontharnun,  it  shall  be  put 
out,  Prov.  13,  9;  na>tau  .  .  matta  pish  \ 
onihama>un,  the  fire  shall  not  be  put  out, 
Is.  34, 10;  66,  24;  Lev.  6,  12.  See  uhtap- 
pattauunat. 

ontconu,  adv. :  ontconu  penushau,  he  fell 
backward,  1  Sam.  4, 18,  =  anta>shau  (an- 
twshaog,  they  fell  backward,  Is.  28, 13). 
Cf.  *ontaneehkinneat. 

*ontcowaonk :  tanne  ontowdonk,  a  hoarse 
voice,  C.  171.  See  ayeuteaontcnwaonk.  j 


ontsappinneat.  See  ontapinneat. 
ontseonk,  n.  offspring:  nxdontseonk,  my 

offspring,  Job  31,  8;  wut  - ,  his  or 

their  offspring,  Job  21,  8. 
ontseu,  he  descends,  proceeds  from,  he 
is  the  offspring  of:  uanne  ontseu,  ‘with¬ 
out  descent’,  Heb.  7,  3  (see  wutont- 
seonk);  neg  ontsecheg  wutch  Jacob,  ‘they 
that  come  of  Jacob’,  Is.  27,  6;  ontsetcheg, 
they  which  issue  from  (them),  2  K.  20, 
18;  nutonsem,  I  proceed  from,  John  8, 42; 
ohhontseug  wutch  machuk  en  machukut, 
‘  they  proceed  from  evil  to  evil,  ’  Jer.  9, 3. 
Cf.  comundt  (indie.  1st  sing.  nann). 
-ontup,  in  compound  words,  head.  See 
chepiontup;  kodtantupont;  *uppaqu6ntup; 
wompontupont;  wuskononiup.  Cf.  Abn. 
Step. 

*onuhqushakomuk,  ‘a  house  of  mer¬ 
chandise’  (?),  Mass.  Ps.,  John  2,  16. 
oontohkonauonat,  eiantuhk-,  eian- 
togk-,  etc.,  v.  t.  an.  to  mock  at,  to  de¬ 
ride;  eiontogkonaog,  they  scoff  at  (him), 
Hab.  1, 10;  kuttodntdhkoneh,  thou  moek- 
est  me,  Num.  22,  29;  nag  ncoche  wui- 
tdontohkonduh,  they  began  to  mock  him, 
Luke  14,  29  (see  momonehtauaii) ;  an. 
act.  i.  odntogkkossu,  he  mocks,  is  mock¬ 
ing,  Judg.  16,  9,  13.  Ybl.  n.  oontohkus- 
sanvaen,  a  mocker,  Job  17,  2. 
oontomuk,  tountomuk,  n.  the  womb, 
matrix,  Ex.  13,  2;  12,  15;  34,  19;  Num. 
8,  16:  tvutch  oontomukqut,  from  the 
womb,  Jer.  1,  5  ( otdmuk ,  Exp.  Mayhew; 
wuttontomukqut,  C.  158). 
*opponenauhock  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  oysters, 
E.  W.  103;  uponuhpug  (Narr.),  Stiles; 
a’punnyhaug  (Peq. ),  ibid.;  chunkco, 
apwonnah,  an  oyster,  C.  159.  From 
apwonat  (to  roast)  and  hog,  wuhhog 
(shell-fish). 

opwosu.  See  appeosu. 

*osacontuck  (Narr.),  ‘a  fat  sweet  fish, 
something  like  a  haddock  ’ ,  E.  W.  103. 
Perhaps  the  pollack  (Merlangus  pur- 
pureus,  Mitch.)  or  hake  (Merluccius 
vulgaris,  Cuv. ),  more  often  called  ‘  whit¬ 
ing  ’ .  Possibly  the  same  as  ‘aquaundmit, 
blue  fish’  (Peq.),  Stiles, 
oshkoshqui,  adj.  green:  oshkoshqut,  as 
the  green  herb,  Ps.  37,  2.  See  cish- 
koshqui. 

*oskon,  n.  a  hide,  C.  156;  a  skin.  See 

askon;  wuskdn. 

*oskosk,  grass,  C.  160.  See  moskeht. 


TRUMBUIX] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


111 


oscowunnumunat,  v.  t.  to  change,  Dan. 
7,  25;  Jer.  2, 36:  dscoivunurn  wuthogkcoun- 
ash,  he  changed  his  clothes,  Gen.  41, 
14;  malta  irutoscoivunoh,  he  does  not 
change  it,  Lev.  27,  10  ( osoowunont ,  if  he 
change,  an.  obj.,  Lev.  27,  10);  matta 
nutuhosue  ussit,  ‘I  change  not’,  Mai.  3, 6; 
hsoowemco,  it  changes,  it  is  changed, 
Lam.  4,  1. 

ossoeposu,  he  slideth  back,  Hos.  4,  16; 
assoeposue,  adj.  backsliding,  Hos.  4, 16. 
Cf.  assddshai't,  he  goes  backward, 
otan,  n.  a  town,  a  ‘city’,  Gen.  4,  17; 
Josh.  8,  19,  21;  pi.  -j- ash ,  Gen.  19,  29; 
2  Pet.  2,  6.  See  kehlotan,  a  great  town. 

[Narr.  otan,  the  town,  pi.  ot&nasli; 
otanick,  to  the  town,  R.  W.  120.  Del. 
u  te  ney  (u  te  nunk,  in  town),  Zeisb. 
Yoc.  31.] 

otanemes,  n.  dim.  for  otan,  a  village, 
Matt.  21,  2;  pi.  -4-  ash,  Is.  42,  11;  Luke 
13,  22. 

*6teshem  (Narr.):  wetudmuck  nuteshem, 
I  came  from  the  house;  acdwmuck  note- 
shem,  I  came  over  the  water;  ncunca- 
tucknoleshem,  I  came  from  far;  tuckd- 
teshana,  whence  came  you?  R.  W.  28; 
tunna  wutshadock,  whence  come  they? 
ibid.  29.  See  ootshoh;  wadchinat. 

*ou,  well  (it  is  well),  C.  227.  See  *6. 
ouwan,  n.  mist,  vapor,  Gen.  2,  6;  Job 
36,  27. 

[Abn.  aSanis,  il  fait  brouillard;  ctSa- 

nebegat, - sur  la  riviere.  Chip,  awdni- 

bissa,  it  drizzles,  Bar.  533;  avian,  it  is 
foggy,  ibid.  532.  Del.  awonn,  fog,  Zeisb. 
Yoc.'  7.] 

ouwassu,  he  warms  or  warmed  himself, 
Is.  44,  16.  See  auwassu. 
owanux.  See  hoivan. 
owohkontcoau.  See  auwohkontcodu. 
owohshaog,  n.  the  hawk,  Dent.  14,  15. 

See  mashquanon;  quanunon. 
owonogkuog,  v.  i.  3d  pers.  pi.  they 
‘  have  holes  ’ ,  they  burrow,  Matt.  8, 20, 
—cowonogkooog,  Luke  9, 58.  See  wdnogq. 
*owwepinnue,  adv.  calmly,  C.  227.  See 
auwepin. 

-CD-,  an  inseparable  negative  particle, 
interposed  between  the  radical  and  the 
last  syllable,  or  the  suffix,  of  affirmative 
verbs,  to  constitute  the  negative  form: 
anvadchanumun,  he  keeps  it;  oowad- 
clianumcoun,  he  does  not  keep  it,  or,  as 
more  commonly  found,  matta  coicad- 


-co - continued. 

chanumamn  (with  a  double  negative). 
The  negative  a>  enters  into  the  com¬ 
position  of  several  words  other  than 
verbs  of  negation,  as  xcanne  (q.  v. ), 
co-anne,  none.  Cf.  hoivan,  someone; 
unneu,  etc. 

coch,  ootch,  adv.  out  of,  forth  from, 
thence:  na  a>tch  sohhamun,  there  went 
forth  from,  Num.  11,  31;  na  coch  sohha¬ 
mun,  ‘he  went  out  from  thence’,  1  K. 
12,  25;  na  coch  qushken,  thence  he  re¬ 
turned,  2  Iv.  2,  25;  ootcheun,  he  made 
from  (it),  Gen.  2,  22.  This  is  one  of 
the  most  important  radicals  of  the  lan¬ 
guage,  denoting  origin,  source,  causa¬ 
tion:  cf.  na  ootch  ( ncoche ),  therefrom;* 
kooch,  kcoche,  kxitehe,  which  denote  ori¬ 
gin  and  progress,  though  often  used  by 
Eliot  for  ncoche;  whence  kutche  or 
kShche,  chief;  kehchis,  old;  kulchissik, 
the  beginning  (of  action,  etc.  ),  and  the 
perhaps  identical  wutche  as  a  preposi¬ 
tion  (from,  out  of,  for),  ootth,  a  father, 
and  cokas,  okas,  a  mother,  and  perhaps 
ohke,  the  earth,  have  apparently  the 
same  origin;  hence,  too,  cochetuonganog, 
parents,  etc.;  also  wutcli,  wutche:  mo  teag 
vmtch,  without  cause,  1  Sam.  19,  5,= 
mat  teag  wutch,  Lam.  3,  52 ,  —  wanne 
monteag  wutch,  Ps.  35,  7,  — wutch  mon- 
teag,  ibid. ;  nenan  wutche,  for  the  same 
cause,  Phil.  2,  18.  See  wutche. 

[*Xote. — After  “ na  catch  (ncoche),  there¬ 
from”,  in  the  manuscript,  occurs  the  following: 
“mo  cotche  tmooche  and,  with  a  slightly  altered 
form  and  meaning,  mahche) ,  thence-after  (the 
sign  of  the  pluperfect  tense).”  In  the  margin 
thisismarked  ‘'omit”,  and  a  footnote  explains 
that  “mcoche,  for  mos  cotche,  with  reference  to 
a  future,  implies  obligation  or  necessity.  See 
mcoche.”) 

[Cree  and  Chip.  See  Howse,  Cree 
Gr.,pp.  166,  289,  291.] 
cochaus,  cochaas,  n.  a  fly,  Eccl.  10,  1; 
Is.  7,  18.  Cf.  mcomhq. 

[Del.  u  tsche,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  12;  pi. 
utschewak,  ibid.  31.] 

cocheinnat,  v.  i.  to  be  weaned,  Gen. 
21,  8;  cocheninop,  he  was  weaned,  Gen. 
21,  8. 

cochetuonganog,  pi.  parents:  aochetuon- 
guli  (constr. )  his  parents,  Luke  2,  27, 
=  umtchetuonguh  (obj.),  Luke  18,  29; 
kcochetuongancobog,  your  parents,  Luke 
21,  16;  Eph.  6,  1. 


112 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


coch.iinn.eat,  v.  p.  to  lie  advantaged  or 
profited  (vniichi  inneat,  Is.  47,  12):  teag 
noochiin,  what  advantage  will  it  be  to 
me?  what  am  I  profited?  Job  35,  3; 
motto,  noochiein,  it  profited  me  not,  Job 
33,  27;  teaguas  kajchiyimwco ,  what  are 
you  profited?  Hab.  2, 18;  cochiin,  (it)  is 
profitable,  Ecel.  10,  10;  woh  cochiin,  it 
may  profit,  Job  35,  8;  nish  motto  pish 
kmchieinash,  these  things  shall  not  profit 
thee,  Is.  57,  12;  nish  motto  wadchiyeu- 
mukish,  things  which  can  not  profit  (be 
profitable),  1  Sam.  12,  21;  ivanne  teag 
wutchieu,  it  profiteth  nothing,  Job  34,  9. 
C'f.  o otcheun,  he  made  from  (it). 

CDhk,  cohkq,  ohkq,  n.  a  worm,  Job  17, 
14;  24,  20;  25,  6  ( =ask<nk ,  Ps.  22,  6); 
pi.  cohquaog,  Is.  14,  11;  coliqou,  it  bred 
worms, Ex. 16, 20;  askkcokinossog, worms, 
Deut.  28,  39  ( askmkse ,  dimin.  askcok,  Is.  j 
41,  14);  oohke,  C.  156.  See  askcok. 

[Del.  mooch-u-e,  Zeisb.  Voc.] 
cohoomous,  n.  a  little  owl,  Lev.  11,  17, 
=kcokcokhomwem,  Dent.  14,  16.  See 
koohkcokhaus. 

[Narr.  ohomous,  an  owl,  R.  W.  85.] 
cohquaeu.  See  ahquae. 
cokas.  See  okas. 

CDmsinneat,  comussinneat,  v.  i.  to  go 
or  come  down,  to  move  downward.  \ 
See  U'oomsinneat. 

comunat,  wamunat,  v.  i.  to  go  or  come 
from  (cf.  ail,  v.  i.  he  goes  thither;  peyau, 
he  comes  hither):  oomun,  com,  wcom,  he 
goes  or  comes,  went  or  came,  2  Chr.  1, 
13;  Job  37,  9;  Prov.  14, 16;  Dan.  8,  5;  na 
mrnnn,  he  wentthence,  2  K.  2,  25;  Gen. 

20,  1;  35,  21;  comwog,  they  journeyed 
(went),  Gen.  35,  16  (went  from,  Num. 
33,  5,  13,  17,  etc.);  tunoh  kaom,  toh 
karnun,  whence  comest  thou?  Gen.  16, 
8;  Job  1,  7;  lohnoh  kcomwco,  whence  come 
ye?  Gen.  42,  7  ( tohhunnco  kcom  kekit,  : 
when  did  you  come  from  home?  C.  185) ; 
ongk,  go  ye  to,  from  dnat,  oudnot,  Matt,  j 

21,  2;  Josh.  2,  16  (more commonly  mon- 
cliek) ;  ( [nuttom  nummissinninneumut,  I  go  j 
to  my  people,  Num.  24,  14;  pish  nutom 
wuhhogkat,  I  shall  go  to  him,  2  Sam.  12, 
23;  kutdmun,  we  are  going,  Num.  10, 29;) 
with  inan.  nom.,  comcoco  nannummiyeu, 
it  cometh  (is  come)  out  of  the  north, 
Jer.  46,  20;  pish  comwog  wutch  wuhhogkat, 
‘they  shall  be  of  her’,  i.  e.  proceed  from 


comunat,  wamunat — continued. 

her,  Gen.  17,  16;  umcoco  (there)  pro¬ 
ceeds  out  of  (inan.),  Mark?,  21;  comcoco, 
there  came  out  of  (the  cloud  a  voice), 
Luke  9,  35  [ kuhtconog  6ma>,  a  ship  was 
going  to  (from  oudnot,  anal),  Jonah  1,  3]; 
comup  aongkouohkomuk,  (she)  eamefrom 
the  uttermost  parts,  etc.,  Matt.  12,  42; 
olique  comcogk,  depart  not  from,  Acts  1,1; 
nutonsem  kah  ncom  Goclut,  ‘  I  proceeded 
forth  and  came  from  God’,  John  8,  42; 
noh  ncomun,  I  am  from  him,  John  7,  29. 
The  Mass.  Ps.  substitutes  6rnau  ( aum - 
mau)  for  Eliot’s  au,  he  went  to,  where 
obj.  is  inan.  Derivatives:po?no/i/ia?mma< 
( pummoh ,  the  sea),  to  go  by  water;  soh- 
hamunat,  to  go  forth;  wamunat,  womu- 
nat  ( womcoenatl ) :  en  moyut  newdman,  ‘  in 
the  way  by  which  thou  earnest  ’  ( mayest 
come,  i.  e.  mayest  come  from),  Is.  37, 
29;  ne  womcouk  wulcli,  ‘that  proceedeth 
out  of’  (that  may  come  from),  Deut.  8, 
3;  wowcouk  (for  wo  month'!)  kesukqut,  (it) 
may  come  from  heaven,  2  Pet.  1,  18; 
liowan  yeuoh wag  Edom,  (suppos. )  ‘who 
is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom?  Is. 
63,  1  {noh  wag  Godot,  (who  art)  come 
from  God,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  3,  2);  uttoli 
womomp,  whence  I  came,  John  8,  14 
( uttuli  wamaouk,  ‘whence  it  cometh’, 
(Mass.  Ps.,  John  3, 8) ;  asq  yeu  ivamcoomp, 
before  I  go  (hence),  Job  10,  21;  waik 
Judea,  when  he  came  out  of  Judea, 
John  4,  54.  See  wadchinat. 

[Note. — The  terms  and  their  definitions  in 
heavy  parentheses  above  are  marked  with  the 
marginal  note,  “  from  auonat,  onCil.”] 

[Narr.  mlshoon  homwock,  they  go  by 
water  (by  boat),  R.  \V.  74;  tunna  co- 
waCnn,  whence  came  you?;  yd  nowa&rn, 

1  came  that  way,  ibid.  28.  Del.  noom, 
koom,  wum,  I,  thou,  he  comes  from 
thence,  Zeisb.  Abn.  itSmen,  je  viens  de 
la;  subj.  8ma;  Seglie,  venant,  etc.] 

conanumau.  See  wunndnumau. 
cone,  cona,  =  wunne,  q.  v. 
conetuonk.  See  wunneluonk. 
oonoi,  conoe,  adj.  blue,  Esth.  1,  6:  con6- 
ogk,  conoag,  blue  (cloth),  Ex. 38, 18,23; 

2  Chr.  2,  7;  =  amoonag;  pi.  conoiyeuash, 
Esth.  1,  6. 

[Roger  Williams  gives  Narr.  peshaui, 
blue  (p.  154),  but  that  is  apparently 
identical  with  uppeshau,  a  flower.  Pos- 


TRUMBULI.] 


1ST ATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


113 


-conoi,  amoe — continued. 

siblv  the  Indian  who  taught  him  the 
word,  having  misunderstood  his  ques¬ 
tion,  gave  him  the  name  of  the  object 
to  which  his  attention  was  called  in¬ 
stead  of  its  color.  Cotton  gives  peshai, 
blue  (168);  uppeshou,  a  flower  (160); 
peshdnndquat,  blue  color  (168).  Cf. 
Arab,  znhr,  a  flower;  az'rek,  blue.] 
conou,  conoi,  adj.  deep.  Except  in  com¬ 
pound  words,  it  has  always  the  defini¬ 
tive  prefix,  m’amdi,  probably  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  it  from  conoi,  blue  (the  color  of 
deep  water) ;  and  for  the  same  reason 
the  m’  is  retained  in  such  compounds 
as  mconompag,  deep  waters.  See  mconoi. 
conouhkoi,  n.  a  valley,  Josh.  11,  16,17; 
2  K.  3,  17;  Is.  40,  4  ( oonouwohkoai ,  — 
yeuash,  C.  158):  ut  oonodhkouut,  in  a 
valley,  Gen.  14,  17;  en  oonfiuhk&iyeuut , 
to  the  valley,  Sum.  32,  9;  en  conouh- 
kdiyeue,  into  the  valley,  Josh.  7,  24; 
conouohkoiyeue,  adj.  ‘of  the  low  coun¬ 
try’,  2  Chr.  26,  10  [conoi-ohke,  hollow 
land];  pi.  oon6uhluash,  conduhkoiyeuash, 
Ezek.  36,  4,  6. 

oonouwusse,  lean.  See  Cmouwusse. 
oonoonat,  v.  i.  ‘to  yell’  as  a  wild  animal, 
‘to  howl’:  conwog,  ‘they  yell’  (as lions’ 
whelps),  Jer.  51,  38  [from  anum,  a 
dog  ( ? )  ] ;  nishno  pasuk  pish  conao,  every 
one  shall  howl,  Is.  15,  3;  maush  kcih 
amsh,  ‘cry  and  howl’,  Ezek.  21,  12; 
concok,  howl  ye,  Zech.  11,  2. 

[Chip,  wah-o-no,  he  howls,  Spelling 
Book.] 

concoonk,  n.  howling,  Is.  15,  S;  Zeph. 
1,  10. 

concowaonk.  See  vmnucowdonk,  a  cov¬ 
enant,  an  agreement, 
coshe,  cosh,  (constr. )  coshoh,  n.  father, 
Gen.  17,  5;  Prow  17,  21;  Matt.  10,  37: 
noosh,  my  father,  Gen.  22,  7;  Luke  15, 
21;  ncoshun,  our  father,  Luke  3,  8;  11,  2; 
kcosh,  thy  father,  Gen.  12,  1 ;  wutch  ne- 
gonne  naoshik,  from  my  forefathers,  2 
Tim.  1,  3  (suppos.  form);  kcosheu  ( kco - 
slico) ,  your  father,  Gen.  31,  6,  7;  43,  7; 
coshoh  (constr.),  the  father  of,  his 
father,  Prow  17,  21;  (obj.)  Gen.  19,  33; 
28,  7;  ken  pish  wutooshin ,  thou  shalt  be 
a  father  (of  many  nations),  Gen.  17,  4; 
ivutooshimau,  [he  who  is  (?)  ]  a  father,  IV. 
103,  13;  Prow  4,  1;  Is.  9,  6;  Mark  13, 

•8 


coshe,  oosh,  coshoh. — continued. 

12;  1  Thess.  2,  11;  God  wutcosheog,  ‘if 
God  were  your  father’,  John  8,  42.  See 
*6teshem;  colshoh;  wadchinat. 

[Narr.  osh,  a  father;  nosh,  my  father, 
cdsh ,  your  father;  cuttdso,  have  you  a 
father?  R.  W.  44.  Del.  nooch,  my 
father;  gooch  ( kooch ),  thy  father;  och- 
i vail,  his  father,  Zeisb.  Voc.] 

*coshesin,  an  uncle,  C.  162  (dimin.  of 
coshe).  See  wussisses. 
coshkappeum,  -oppeum,  n.  a  concu¬ 
bine:  ncoskoppeum,  my  concubine,  Judg. 
20,  4,  6;  (obj.  pi.)  —  oh,  2  Sam.  16,  21, 
22;  21,  11.  See  urishquin;  imskappeum. 
coshoh.  See  coshe. 

coske,  for  ivuske  (especially  in  compound 
words),  new,  young,  first  in  time,  etc.; 
before. 

[cosooweneat,  v.  i.  to  swim:]  neg  voh 
coscowecheg,  they  who  can  swim,  Acts 
27,  43.  Cf.  pamooscD,  he  swims;  ossoe- 
pdsu,  he  slideth  back. 

[Del.  a  scho  will,  to  swim,  Zeisb. 
Voc.  14.] 

cosqheonk,  n.  blood.  See  wusqueheonk. 
cosukongquneau]?),  it  (the  brazen  sea) 
‘was  set  above  upon  them’,  1  K.  7,  25. 
cotattamcoonk.  See  vmttattamoonk . 
cotch.  See  meh;  wulche. 
ootcheun,  he  made  from  (it),  Gen.  2,  22. 
See  < ochiinneat . 

cotchteau,  he  i~>roduces  (it)  from  (it), 
he  forms  it:  cotcheau-un,  Ex.  38,  8; 
cotche-uu,  he  produces  from  it  (an.  obj. ), 
Gen.  2,  22. 

cotshoh:  iraban  colshoh,  the  wind  blow- 
eth,  John  3,  8  ( wuttishau ,  Mass.  Ps.). 
Cf.  *6teshern . 

[Del.  (a  ilndchen,  whence  blows  the 
wind?;  loicanneunk  undchen,  the  wind 
comes  from  the  north,  Hkw.  456 
(see  ‘ wundschun’ ,  Zeisb.  Gr.  161). 
Chip,  nodin,  it  blows,  is  windy,  Bar. 
532.  Old  Alg.  loutin,  wind,  Lah.] 
cowee,  interj.  of  sorrow  (El.  Gr.  22) ;  oove, 
ah!  C.  234. 

ooweesquabinneat,  v.  i.  to  wrap  up. 
See  i ceesquapinneai. 

cowesuonk,  n.  his  name,  Ex.  20,  7;  Gen. 

29,  16.  See  iresuonk. 
rowohsumunat.  See  uvhsumundt. 
oowonogkcoog.  See  owonogkuog. 


B.  A.  E..  Bi  ll.  25- 


114 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


:p 


p’.  See  /«!-. 

pa,  a  particle  which,  prefixed  to  a  verb 
in  the  indicative,  gives  it  the  sense  of 
the  1st  pers.  imperative:  naowaantam, 
I  am  wise;  pd-noowaantam,  let  me  be 
wise,  EL  Gr.  25. 

[Creepd,  indecl.  particle,  prefixed  to 
the  root  of  the  verb,  has  the  force  of 
‘should  ’  or  ‘would’  conditional:  ne  pa 
nipan,  I  should  or  would  sleep.] 
pa,  applied  to  extension  in  time,  an 
indefinite  going-on.  It  has  the  force  of 
‘  yet  ’  in  such  phrases  as  ‘  while  he  was 
yet  speaking’.  Indie,  ash  pdmekesukok, 
while  it  was  yet  day,  2  Sam.  3,  35; 
paamu,  ‘upward’  in  age  or  time:  ‘  from 
twenty  years  old  \_kah  paamu ]  and  up¬ 
ward’,  i.  e.  passing,  Xum.  26,  2,4,= 
padmr,  2  Chr.  31,  16,  17.  Suppos.  ash 
pamwadt,  while  he  yet  spoke,  Job  1, 
16,  17;  Matt.  14,  43.  Pass.  (man.  sub¬ 
ject)  pamemco ,  it  is  passed,  Ps.  18,  12. 
Imperat.  3d  pers.  would  be,  regularly 
formed,  paj  or  pajeh  (q.  v. )  [or  pame- 
jeh  (?)],  let  it  go  on  or  continue  (until). 
Of.  pdmantum  (suppos.  pam&rdog),  he 
lives;  pomushau,  he  walks;  pdmsheau, 
it  is  past,  etc.  ( Cf.  also  Sansk.  parnb,  ire, 
se  movere. ) 

[Abn.  pemi  ( =amptsi  and  anptsi),  in 
compos.  ‘  pendant,  vel  encore  ’ ;  ‘  il  est  a  ’ 
(with  verb  in  infinitive),  Rasies.  Del. 
pern  mi,  yet,  to  this  time,  Zeisb.] 
pa-,  pe-,  pu-  [p’],  prefixed  to  words 
which  signify  motion,  denotes  indirec¬ 
tion  in  the  act  or  agent.  In  verbs  of 
motion  it  signifies  ‘all  about’,  ‘in  one 
direction  or  another’,  or  without  direc¬ 
tion.  Cf.  pa-nne,  ‘out  of  the  way’, 
‘astray  ’ ,  and  pu-mmoh,  the  sea;  pa- 
rncosa. >,  he  swims;  pa-mornpagin,  it 
creeps;  pamUchuan,  (water)  runs,  etc. 

[For  the  Cree,  Howse  (84)  has  pim- 
milachemoo,  ‘  he  moves  himself  horizon¬ 
tally,  crawls’,  and  perhaps  this  may  be 
the  primary  signification.] 
paamu,  adv.  past,  upward  (in  age  or 
time),  Xum.  26,  2,  4.  See  pdrne. 
paanonteg,  as  n.  a  (winnowing)  fan, 
Is.  30,  24,  i.  e.  that  which  blows  away. 
See  pauanuhtunk. 


pabahtanum  [pa-bdt-an-nm],  v.  t.  he 
trusts:  pabahtanumau,  he  trusts  in 
(him),  has  confidence  in;  inan.  pabah- 
tantam,  he  trusts  (it),  depends  on  (it). 
Adj.  and  adv. pabafiianumwe,  -wde,  faith¬ 
fully  ( pdpahtantamive ,  C.). 
padahquohhan.  See  padtohquohhan. 
padteateamin-ash,  n.  pi.  nuts,  Gen. 
43,  11. 

padtippashin,  padtapashin,  v.  i.  it 

drops,  there  is  dropping;  freq.  papad- 
tippdshin,  there  is  a  shower;  verbal  pd- 
pddtinunk,  ‘showers’,  Deut.  32,  2. 

[Del.  pankpechen,  a  drop;  popankpe- 
chen,  it  drops  (cf.  popetelan,  it  is  show¬ 
ery,  ‘rains  by  showers’),  Zeisb.  Abn. 
ahpeterahn ,  il  est  encore  ii  pleuvoir,  il 
pleut  encore.  ] 

padtohquohhan,  padahquohhan,  v.  i. 

it  thunders  ( padtohqubhhan  and  pattoli- 
quohhanni,  it  thunders,  C.);  as  a  n. 
thunder.  [From  a  verb  which  signifies 
‘to  hear’,  ‘to  be  heard’  (?).  Pierson’s 
Catechism  (Quiripi)  has  padak,  he 
heareth.  Cf.  Cree  peytoic-ayoo,  he  hears 
him;  peytum,  he  hears  it.  But  see  the 
next  following  verb.] 

[Note. — The  bracketed  part  of  this  definition 
is  marked  “omit”  in  the  manuscript.] 

[Abn.  pedaiighiag8,  le  foudre,  ton- 
nerre.  Quir.  pdddahqudhhum, Pier.  Del. 
peelhacquon,  it  thunders,  Hkw.,  which 
Cass  corrects  to paathoe' quon,  ‘it  begins 
to  thunder’  (from  pao,  ‘to  come’,  and 
hoc/ quon,  ‘thunder’).  [Is  either  cor¬ 
rect?]  Zeisb.  has  ped  hac  quon,  it  thun¬ 
ders;  pen  da  quot,  it  is  heard,  Yoc.  26.] 
padtuhkuh.nteau,  v.  t.  he  smites  (it) 
into  (it),  1  Sam.  19,  10,  of  a  dart  or 
spear  thrown  from  the  hand, 
pagkodtantam.  See  pdkodtantdm. 
paguanau,  v.  t.  an.  he  destroys  (him);, 
inan.  paguatau,  pagwodtau,  he  destroys 
(it);  v.  i.  paguateau,  pagwohteau,  he 
is  destroying,  or  is  a  destroyer;  pi. 

•  paguatoog,  they  destroy,  are  destroy¬ 
ers.  (This  was  the  name  given  to  the 
Xluhhekans  of  eastern  Connecticut  by 
neighboring  tribes:  Pequattdog,  Pequots, 

‘  destroyers  ’ . )  Verbal  paguanuonk,  de¬ 
stroying,  destruction,  Prov.  15,11;  18» 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


115 


p  agrianau — con  t  inued . 

7;  Is.  59,  7;  ‘pestilence’,  Ps.  91,  6. 
From  pohi]-  ( pogk •-),  to  break,  to  divide. 
See  pohqui. 

[Narr.  pauquana,  ‘there  is  a  slaugh¬ 
ter’;  pequttoog  pciuquanan,  ‘the  Pequts 
are  slain’,  R.  W.  151.  Cree  puckwaht- 
ayoo,  ‘he  hates  (him)’.] 
paguodche,  pagwodche,  adv.  ‘it  may 
he’,  perhaps,  El.  Gr.  22 ( pogqudtche , C. ). 

[Alg.  pakSash,  probablement.] 
pahchanitchau,  v.  i.  he  has  fingers:  ne- 

qutta-tahshe - - ,  he  has  six  fingers, 

2  Sam.  21,  20.  See  pohchanutch. 
pahchasittau,  v.  i.  he  has  .  .  .  toes, 
2  Sam.  21,  20;  lit.  he  has  divided-feet 
( pahshe-wusseet ).  See  pohchanutch. 
pahch.au,  pauchau,  pohchau,  v.  i.  he 

turns  aside,  deviates: - watch  mayut, 

he  turns  aside  from  the  way,  Num. 
22,  23. 

[Del.  pachgeclien,  ‘where  the  road 
strikes  off’;  pachgeen ,  ‘to  turn  out  of 
the  road’,  Zeisb.] 

pahheau,  v.  t.  an.  he  waits  for  (him): 
nup-pdih,  I  wait  for  (him),  Ps.  130,  5; 
suppos.  noli  pdhhit,  he  who  waits;  v.  t. 
inan.  pahtau,  pahto,  he  waits  for  (it); 
v.  i.  an.  pahtussu,  he  is  waiting;  suppos. 
noh  pdhtsit,  he  who  is  waiting.  Verbal 
pahtsuonk, waiting,  ‘forbearance’,  Rom. 
2,4  (pahiscoog,  they  wait;  nup-pahtis,  I 
stay,  I  am  ready;  pahtsii,  ready,  C. ). 
From  pd.  Cf.  pdme. 

[Del.  pee  soop,  he  waited  (pret. ), 
Zeisb.] 

pahke,  pohki,  (1)  it  is  clear,  plain,  evi¬ 
dent;  adv.  plainly,  clearly.  (2)  it  is 
clean,  pure.  See  pohki  and  cf.  pohquae. 
pahkheau,  pahkehheaii,  v.  t.  an. 
(caus.)  he  cleans  (himself  or  another), 
makes  clean,  ‘purifies’,  Lev.  8,  15. 
V.  t.  inan.  pahketeau,  he  makes  (it) 
clean,  purifies  (it).  V.  i.  an.  pahkesu 
( =pahkeussu ),  he  is  clean,  pure,  Lev. 
13,  13;  2  Sam.  11,  4.  Adj.  an.  clean, 
pure. 

pahpahkshas,  n.  a  ‘partridge’,  Jer.  17, 
11,  =pohpohknssu,  1  Sam.  26,  20.  Cf. 
pcohpcohquttog  ( pi. ) ,  ‘  quails  ’ ,  Ps.  105, 40. 
See  mameesashques,  the  swallow. 

[Narr.  pdupock-suog,  partridges,  R. 
\V.  85.  Peq.  popoquateece,  quail,  Stiles 
(see  his  kutquauss,  partridge).  Del. 


pahpahkshas — continued. 
pabhachx,  pheasant;  popocus,  partridge. 
Chip.  (Gr.  Trav. )  puh-push-kuh-se,  ‘a 
snipe’  (?),  Sch.  ii,  466.] 

pahpasinnum,  v.  t.  he  plucks  off  (as 
corn,  Luke  6,  1).  See  polish inum. 

pahpassehteau,  v.  i.  he  is  cleaving  or 
splitting  (wood).  Suppos.  noh  pahpas- 
sehtog,  he  that  cleaveth  wood,  Eccl.  10, 
9.  Redupl.,  with  caus.  inan.  form,  from 
pohshinum,  he  divides  (it),  ‘he  causes 
it  to  divide’,  ‘makes  it  half’  (s eepoh- 
she). 

pahpohkumas,  n.  a  moth,  Luke  12,  33. 
Cf.  Matt.  6, 19 , papoquttamuk  (suppos.), 
‘moth’,  for  ‘when  it  is  injured  by  the 
moth  ’ .  See  papekq. 

pahshe,  pahshe,  half,  a  part  of.  See 
pohshe. 

pahsconogk,  n.  pi.  - ogquash ,  a  board, 
Acts  27,  44;  Ex.  27,  8.  See  pahpasseh¬ 
teau. 

[Abn.  psikaskS,  planche,  ais.  Del. 
passikachk,  Zeisb.] 

pahsu.  See  pdsoo. 

pahtekomuk.  See  pi  u  m  m  u  w  utta  uwd  e 
komuk. 

pajeh,  adv.  until:  yeu  pajeh,  until  now; 
no  pay  eh,  until  ( ndpaj ,  C. ).  See  pdme. 

[Del.  petschi,  Zeisb.] 

pakodche,  adv.  completely,  to  the  end, 
to  the  full,  thoroughly.  (It  is  strictly 
a  verb  impers. ,  ‘  there  is  completion  ’ , 
‘it  is  through’. )  Freq.  orintens.  pdjiog- 
kodche,  2  Chr.  36,  21.  See  pohshane. 

[Narr.  paucotche,  paugcotchc,  R.  AY. 
[Del.  packantschi,  fully,  completely, 
Zeisb.] 

*pakodchimau,  v.  t.  an.  he  condemns 
(him),  primarily,  disposes  of,  makes  an 
end  of:  noh  pakodchimit,  he  who  con¬ 
demns;  pogkodchummu,  ‘to  condemn’, 
‘to  convince’,  C. 

pakodchteau,  v.  i.  (inan.subj.)  it  finishes, 
completes,  or  comes  to  an  end;  inten¬ 
sive  pakojteau,  Dan.  9,  24,  John  5,  36; 
pass.  part,  pakojteau-un,  (it  is)  finished, 
Ezra  5,  16.  The  causative  form,  pog- 
kodchehteau  (he  makes  complete,  fin¬ 
ishes),  is  of  more  frequent  occurrence: 
nap-pogkodchehteoh,  I  have  finished  or 
completed  (it),  2  Tim.  4,  7. 

[Del .pakantschiechton,  he  fulfills,  com¬ 
pletes  (it),  Zeisb.] 


116 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


pakodtantam,  pogk-,  pagk-,  v.  i.  and 
t.  inan.  he  determines,  resolves,  pur- 
jMises,  2  Chr.  32,  2;  Lam.  2,  8.  Act. 
vbl.  pAkodtantamdxmk,  determination, 
settled  purpose.  From  pakodche  and 
- iintain ,  completely-minded.  Cf.  kod- 
tantam,  he  intends  or  wishes. 
*pakonnotam,  n.  a  codfish,  C. 

[Narr.  pauganaiit,  R.  W.  Abn.  uS' - 
kamek8,  nSkamegS,  pi.  -g8ak,  morue, 
Rasies.] 

pame,  paame,  may  be  regarded  as  a 
defective  verb  used  separately  as  an 
auxiliary  or  in  composition  with  other 
verbs  to  denote  progress,  continuance, 
or  duration  of  action.  It  is  related  to, 
if  not  formed  from,  the  indefinitive 
particle,  pame,  padmu,  is  the  suppos., 
pummeu  the  indie,  form.  See  under 
pomantam. 

[Marginal  note. — “Rewrite  this.  Cf.  pn- 
■nuintam;  pomohhom;  pomushau.  ash  pummeu, 
2  K.  14,4,  see  a«A.”] 

pamequanum  [=  pame-unnequanum], 
v.  t.  inan.  he  rolls  (it)  about;  suppos. 
noh  pamequanuk,  he  who  rolls  (when 
rolling)  it,  Prov.  26,  27. 
pamitchuaiL,  -utchuwan,  -cowan,  v.  i. 
impers.  it  flows  or  runs  (as  water,  irre¬ 
spective  of  direction  or  force).  As 
n.  ‘running  water’,  Prov.  5,  15.  Im- 
perat.  3d  pers .  pomiichuwadj,  ‘let  (the 
waters)  be  dispersed  abroad’,  Prov.  5, 
16  ( onatuh  nippeit  pamvttchuwohk,  ‘as 
waters  which  run,’  -Mass.  Ps.,Ps.  58,  7). 
From  pdme  (q.  v.)  and  vmtehe-u,  it 
proceeds  from.  More  immediately, 
from  pomushau,  he  walks,  moves,  with 
the  introduction  of  the  hard  eh,  denot¬ 
ing  involuntary  or  inanimate  activity. 

[Cree  pimmtchewun,  it  flows,  as  water, 
Howse  49.] 

pammoh.  See  pummoh,  the  sea(?). 
pamompagin,  v.  i.  unipers.  it  creeps 
or  crawls  {nup-pummwtashom,  I  creep, 
C. ).  As  adj.  (also  pomompagee)  creep¬ 
ing,  crawling.  Suppos.  owaas  noh  pdm- 
ompagit,  an  animal  which  creeps  or 
crawls;  pi.  neg  p&mompakecheg.  Freq. 
papa mompagi n ,  pohpomompagin  (and 
papamcotcheg,  Ps.  148, 10) .  See  popom- 
ompakecheg. 

[Cree phnmitdchemoo,  ‘he  moves  him¬ 
self  horizontally,  crawls’,  Howse  84. 


pamompagin— continued. 

Abn.  ne-pernigSxi,  je  rampe,  je  marche 
sur  le  ventre.  Del. pimochkham  (v.  adj. 
an.),  stirred,  moved,  Zeisb.  Gr.  166; 
poinmoach.ru,  it  creeps,  Zeisb.  Yoc. 
27.] 

pamontog,  suppos.  of  pdmantani  q.  v. ), 
he  lives:  noh  pdmontog,  he  who  liveth, 

1  K.  3,  23,  25;  Lam.  3,  39;  pi.  pamonto- 
gig,  ‘the  living’. 

pamaasm,  pamwdsco,  pnm6soa,  v.  i.  he 
swims,  moves  himself  by  swimming 
(nup  pumoscoweem,  I  swim,  C. );  suppos. 
noh  pdmcoscowit,  he  who  swims,  Is.  25, 
11.  For  pame-oossco.  Cf.  aosanreneal,  lie 
swims. 

[Abn.  ne-pemakSitstn,  ‘je  nage’.] 
pamsheau,  pamusheau,  v.  i.  inan.  it 
passes,  goes  on.  See  pomushau. 
pamutchuwan.  See  pamltchuau. 
pamwosco.  See  pamcosoo. 

*panikqua  [  =  pannithquaeu] ,  ‘squint- 
eyed’,  C.  From  panne  and  uhqude,  he 
looks  contrary  or  perversely, 
panne,  pannu,  out  of  the  way,  per¬ 
versely,  contrary:  pannu  vruttin,  ‘the 
wind  was  contrary’,  Matt.  14,  24;  Acts 
27,  4;  au  panneu,  ‘he  went  another 
way’,  1  K.  13,  10.  Cf.  the  prefix  ;kf-; 
also  pendwe,  strange,  foreign;  penahi,  it 
is  spread  about. 

[Del.  palliwi,  elsewhere,  otherwise; 
paUiaeu,  he  goes  away,  goes  wrong, 
Zeisb.] 

panneaii,  v.  i.  he  errs,  goes  out  of  the 
way,  goes  wrong,  Prov.  10,  17;  suppos. 
part. panneont,  going  astray,  ‘perverse’, 
Prov.  14,  2;  verbal  pannegmonk  ( pan- 
ne-u-onk),  wrong-going,  ‘perverseness’, 
Prov.  15,  4. 

panneiissu,  v.  i.  an.  he  does  wrong,  com¬ 
mits  a  fault;  suppos.  noh  pdnnesit  ()>an- 
neusseil) ,  he  who  does  wrong,  who  goes 
astray,  Xuin.  5, 12,  29;  verbal  panneus- 
seonk,  wrong-doing,  error,  Prov.  17,  9; 
Jude  11;  agent,  vb.  panneiisseden,  a 
wrong-doer  (‘the  unjust’,  1  Pet.  3,  IS), 
pannoowau,  v.  t.  he  deceives,  speaks 
falsely  to  (him).  Imperat.  2d  —  1st 
pers.  ahque  pnnnoowah,  do  not  lie  to  me, 

2  K.  4,  16.  Adj.  and  adv.  jiannayvae, 
falsely,  deceitfully.  N.  verbal  panna>- 
vxtonk  (and  -u'ayeuonk),  wrong  saying, 
a  lie,  Ps.  7,  14;  Rev.  21,  27;  agent,  vb. 


trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


117 


panncowau — continued. 
panncowden-in,  a  liar.  From  panne,  and 
noowau,  he  speaks, 
pannu.  See  panne. 

panuppu,  panuppe,  throughout,  thor¬ 
oughly;  as  v.  i.  panuppu  wame,  (he)  is 
through  all,  Eph.  4,  6;  prep.,  Rom.  1, 8; 
adv.,  Gen.  11,  3;  Rom.  15,  19;  intens. 
papannuppe,  throughout,  2  Chr.  34,  7; 
wholly,  Jer.  2,  20. 

[Abn.  papanmiSi,  ‘par  tout’.] 
panupwvishaii,  v.  t.  he  goes  through¬ 
out:  panupwushaog  otanash,  ‘they  went 
through  the  cities’,  Luke  9,  6;  2  Chr. 
16,  9  ( pannupshdnat  kehtoh  kah  ohJce, 
‘to  compass  sea  and  land’,  C. ;  but 
kup-pannupwushoneau,  etc.,  ‘you  com¬ 
pass’,  etc.,  Matt.  23,  15).  From  pan¬ 
uppu. 

papadtinunk,  n.  coll,  fine  rain,  ‘show¬ 
ers’,  Deut.  32,  2.  See  padtippdshin. 
papahtantam,  y.  i.  and  t.  inan.  he  trusts. 
See  pabahtanum. 

papamompagin,  freq.  of  pamornpagin 
(q.  v.),  it  creeps. 

papamcotacheg,  part.  pi.  ‘creeping 
things’,  Ps.  148,  10. 

papanne,  adv.  ‘safely’,  Prow  31,  11  (?) 
( papane ,  ‘  wholesome  ’ ,  C. ) :  papane  kuh- 
kinneasish,  mark  thou  well,  Job  33,  31. 
papannoowau,  y.  i.  he  flatters;  suppos. 
noli  papannaoat,  he  who  flatters,  Prow 
28,  23.  Adj.  and  adv.  papan&e,  flatter¬ 
ingly,  Prow  26,  28. 

papaquanne,  papuk-,  adv.  ‘utterly’, 
‘thoroughly’,  Judg.  15,  2;  Is.  40,  30; 
Nah.  1,  8;  Zech.  14,  11. 
papashpe,  prep. (?)  through:  umssitturn 
papashpe  mahtokqs-ut,  he  shines  through 
the  cloud,  Job  22,  13.  Bvredupl.  from 
peshau,  it  breaks  through.  Cf.  nepauz 
paspishau ,  the  sun  rises, 
papaskhas,  n.  the  ‘swallow’,  Ps.  84,  3; 

but  cf.  niameesashques. 
papasku.  See  papiske,  double, 
papaume,  prep,  concerning,  with  respect 
to,  of. 

papeasik,  suppos.  part.  inan.  when  (it 
is)  very  small,  a  very  small  thing;  pi. 
papeasikish,  ‘small  things’,  Zech.  4,  10; 
Acts  26,  22.  See  pedsin. 
papeissit,  pi.  -itcheg;  suppos.  part.  an. 
very  small  (persons),  very  young,  Esth. 
3,13.  Intens.  of  peississu  (q.  v. ).  From 


papeissit — continued. 
papeissesu  has  come  the  corrupted  form 
‘ papoose ’  (pi.  ‘papooses’),  a  young  child. 

[Narr.  yu  cuppdppoos,  is  this  your 
child?;  papoos,  a  child;  nippapoos,  my 
child,  R.W.  Peq.  pouppous,  ‘an  infant 
new-born’,  Stiles.] 

papekq,  n.  a  flea,  1  Sam.  24,  14;  26,  20 
( poppek ,  C. ).  Cf.  pdhpohkumas. 

[Abn.  babikS,  puce;  bahis,  ciron  dans 
les  mains,  etc.;  p8’k8e,  vers  dans  la 
chair,  sur  viande.  Del.  achpiquak  (pi. ), 
fleas,  Zeisb.] 

papenuppashunk,  n.  ‘a  drop’  (‘in  the 
bucket’,  Is.  40,  2).  [Is  it  a  noun  col¬ 
lective  from  pa  ( peawe )  and  nuppe,  ‘  very 
little  water’?]  Cf.  padtippdshin. 
papesukaeu,  v.  i.  or  adv.  it  is  twilight;. 

in  the  twilight,  Ezek.  12,  6. 
papisiswaonk  (?),  vbl.  n.  ‘mirth’,  fun, 
Sian.  Pom.  86. 

[Chip,  pau'pe,  he  laughs.] 
papiske,  papasku,  papske,  v.  i.  it  is 
double;  adj.  double.  By  redupl.  from 
piskeu  (there  is)  double:  piskinnum-cok 
papiske  neyaunctg  .  .  .,  ‘double  unto 
her  double,  according  to  .  .  .’,  Rev. 
18,  6;  papske  ahtdonk,  a  double  portion, 
Deut.  21,  17.  Sometimes  with  neesii 
(twice),  as  neesit  piskeu  (for  papisku ) 
uadtehleav ,  he  pays  double,  Ex.  22,  4,  7. 
papiuhsuke,  adv.  one  against  the  other, 
reciprocally  opposite,  1  K.  20,  29;  Num. 
8,  2,  3.  By  redupl.  intens.  from  piuh- 
suke  (q.  v. ). 

papokquog,  suppos.  as  n.  a  cleft;  pi. 
-gish,  Amos  6,  11.  From  pohpohqui, 
augm.  otpohqui,  it  breaks,  opens.  See 
passipskodtut. 

papomush.au,  papomsh.au,  v.  i.  he  jour¬ 
neys,  continues  walking,  Acts  10,  38 
( papaumushau ,  Matt.  9,  35).  Freq.  of 
pomushau  (q.  w). 

*paponaumsu,  pi.  og  (Narr.),  n.  “a 
winter  fish  which  conies  up  in  the 
brooks  and  rivulets;  some  call  them 
frost  fish,”  etc.,  R.  IV.  105.  The  ‘tom- 
cod’  or  ‘frost-fish’  of  the  markets 
(Gadus  [Morrhua]  tomcodus,  Mitch. ). 
Tacaud,  the  specific  name  given  by  Cu¬ 
vier,  may  be  from  tohkoi  (Narr.  tahki ) , 

‘  when  it  is  cold  ’ ,  ‘cold-weather  fish  ’ ,  or 
Narr .taqudttin,  frost,  it  is  frozen,  ‘frost- 
fish’,  but  certainly  does  not  signify 


118 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


*paponaumsu — continued. 

‘plenty  fish’  in  anyAlgonquian  dialect. 
From  popon-de  and  aumsu,  dimin. 

[Abu.  ap8nanrnes8-ak,  ‘petits  [pois- 
sons]  de  la  mer’.] 

*papone  (Narr. ),  winter,  R.  W.  69.  See 
popi'yn. 

*paponetin  (Narr.),  v.  unipers.  (it 
blows  from  the  west,  or  it  blows  win- 
tery),  the  west  wind,  R.  W.  83.  From 
papdne  (popon,  EL),  winter, 
papske.  See  papiske. 
papukuanne.  See  papaquanne. 
papumunont,  pi.  -oncheg,  suppos.  part, 
of  pepumwau,  flying:  pahpumunont 
psukses,  flying  bird  (i.  e.  bird  when 
flying),  Ps.  148,  10. 
pasau.  See  pasmau. 

*pash.anne,  adv.  fully,  C.  See pohshane. 
pash.ksh.eau,  v.  i.  it  bursts  asunder, 
bursts  with  violence,  explodes;  intens. 
of  pasishau  (it  bursts)  by  the  incorpo¬ 
ration  with  the  root  of  shk,  marking  vio¬ 
lence  and  disaster, 
pashkuhkom.  See  paskulikom. 
pashpehtahheau  (- tahwhau ,  El.  Gr. ), 
v.  t.  and  i.  an.  he  makes  (it)  pierce 
through  (him),  he  ‘smiteth  through’ 
(him),  Job  26,  12. 

[Old  Alg.  patchipaoua,  I  dart,  Lah.  ] 
pashpishonau,  v.  t.  an.  it  goes  through 
(him),  pierces  (him)  through;  pass,  he 
is  pierced,  ‘shot  through’,  Ex.  19,  13. 
pasinnum,  v.  t.  he  plucks  (it,  as  corn, 
etc.,  Mark  2,  23).  See  pohshinum. 
pasishau,  passishau,  v.  i.  it  bursts  or 
is  torn  asunder,  Mark  15,  38;  Luke  23, 
45;  with  an.  subj.,  Acts  1,  18.  Intens. 
of  peshau  (see  ptehaui). 
paskanontam,  v.  i.  he  suffers  extreme 
hunger,  he  is  starving,  Jer.  38,  9;  nupp-, 

I  perish  with  hunger,  Luke  15,  17. 
Vbl.  n.  pmkanontamcDonk,  extreme  hun¬ 
ger,  Ex.  16,  4.  Adv.  paskanontamwe,  in 
extreme  hunger,  Lam.  2,  19. 

[Abn.  peskarahdam8sse,  il  a  faim  mar- 
chant  [?],  Rasies.  Cf.  Abn.  peskaht, 
‘creu’.] 

paskcogun  tahshe,  mini,  nine;  pi.  an. 

paskcogujitahmog;  inan. - tahskinash 

(or  tohsiiash),  El.  Gr.  14  ( pasukcogun , 
Luke  17,  17):  nabo  paskcogun,  nineteen 
(as  an  adj.  varied  by  tahshe  (or  lohsti ) 
in  pi.  an.  and  inan.,  2  K.  25,  8);  paskco-  { 


paskrogun  tahshe — continued. 
gun  tahslnnchag  ([>1.  an.  -kodtog,  -kod- 
tash),  nine  hundred,  El.  Gr.  15. 

[Narr.  paskugit  ( p&skcogit ,  ('. ),  as  adj. 
pi.  with  tasuog  and  tashinash,  R.  W. 
Del.  (Unami)  peschkonk,  Hkw.J 
paskuhkom,  pashk-,  v.  t.  he  bursts  (it) 
asunder  or  in  pieces  (Nah.  1,  13;  Jer. 
2,  20;  5,  5;  30,  8:  applied  to  the  burst¬ 
ing  of  bonds  or  fetters).  Cf.  scohqkuh- 
kom.  See  *peskhummin. 
pasro,  pahsu,  v.  i.  (it  is)  near.  Adv. 
near  by,  Gen.  19,  20;  Matt.  24,  33. 

[Chip,  besho,  near  by,  Bar.  Abn.  pes- 
s8t,  c’est  proche.  Del.  peschot,  Zeisb.] 
pascoau,  pasau,  v.  t.  an.  he  brings  (him) 
to:  up-pasco-uh,  he  brings  him,  Luke 
10,  34;  imperat.  2d  pi.  pascok,  bring  ye 
hither,  Luke  14,  21.  This  is  the  pri¬ 
mary  (and  perhaps  the  only)  significa¬ 
tion  of  the  verb:  ‘near  them’,  bring 
them  near.  From  pdsco,  near. 

[Abn.  ne-pesSari,  je  l’apporte.] 
pasooche  [= pdsco -ivutche,  near-from], 
adv.  a  little  way  off,  not  far,  2  K.  5,  19. 

[Del.  peschotschi,  near;  pecliuwat, 
pechuwivn,  near,  Zeisb.] 
pascosukau,  v.  i.  he  goes  or  comes  near, 
he  approaches;  suppos.  noh  pasoosukog, 
he  who  comes  near,  Num.  1,  51;  Luke 
7,  12;  imperat.  pasoosukiitch,  let  him 
come  near  to  me,  Is.  50,  8. 
pasmtappu,  v.  i.  he  is  (remains)  near, 
Is.  50,  8  (elsewhere  pcisivoppu);  sup¬ 
pos.  noli  pasootappit,  noh  paswopit,  he 
who  is  near,  Is.  57,  19;  Prov.  27,  10. 
From  pdsooche,  or  pdsco,  and  dppu, 
manet. 

[Abn.  pessSdapS,  il  est  proche,  il 
demeure  proche.  ] 

pasrotshau  [pasmche-au] ,  v.  i.  he  goes 
or  comes  near,  approaches,  2  Sam.  18, 
25;  suppos.  noh  pascotshadt,  he  who 
comes  near,  Num.  3,  10,  38.  pascotshau 
expresses  merely  the  fact  of  approach 
or  proximity;  pascosukau,  the  action  of 
going  or  coming,  continuing  to  ap¬ 
proach. 

[Abn.  pess8d8sse,  approche-toi;  ne- 
pess8d8sse,  j’approche;  ne-phs8ssekdm en, 
j’approche  de  cela.] 

paspishau,  v.  i.  it  breaks  through,  it 
bursts  forth,  blossoms,  (after  nejxmz, 
the  sun)  rises,  Eccl.  1,  5;  suppos.  part. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


119 


paspish.au — continued. 
paspishont,  (when  rising,)  sunrise,  Eccl. 

1,  5;  Num.  21,  11;  Ps.  50,  1;  and  of 
the  rising  of  the  ‘day-star’,  2  Pet.  1, 19 
( up-poshpishaonk  nepaz,  the  sunrising, 

C. ) ;  freq.  papashpishau,  he  passes  ] 
through  (a  place  or  country) ;  pi.  -aog, 

2  Sam.  2,  29.  Freq.  or  intens.  of  pSshaui, 
it  blossoms,  bursts  forth. 

[Narr.  pdshisha,  it  is  sunrise,  R.  W.] 
pasquag,  suppos.  inan.  (when  it  is) 
made  fine,  in  powder:  pasquag  ncokhik, 
tine  flour,  Lev.  23,  13,  17,  etc.  Cf. 
sohqui,  powder. 

[Abn.  pesai,  poudre.  Narr.  pishqui- 
hick,  unparched  meal.] 
pasquodtam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  chews  (it)?; 
suppos.  pass.  inan.  pasquodtamcomuk, 
(when  it  is)  chewed,  Num.  11,  33. 
passipskodtut  (for  passompskodtut) ,  ‘in 
the  clefts  of  the  rock’,  Jer.  49,  16; 
Obad.  3;  pasipskodtut,  Ex.  33,  32:  pas- 
sompskodehtu,  (among)  the  clefts,  Is. 
57,  5.  From  pahshe  ( pohshe ),  broken 
or  divided,  and  -ompsk,  n.  gen.  for  rock. 
See  papokquog. 
passishau.  See  pasishau. 
passohtham,  -ahtham,  v.  i.  he  digs  a 
pit  or  trench,  Jer.  18,  20,  22;  cf.  Ps.  94, 
13;  pasehtham  (v.  t. ),  he  digs  or  ‘cleaves’  ! 
into  (it),  Judg.  15,  19.  Vbl.  n.  pas- 
sohlheg,  -alitheg,  a  ditch,  a  pit,  Prov. 
22,  14;  Is.  22,  11  ( pohsahteg ,  Ps.  40,  2); 
pi.  -gash,  Gen.  14,  10  \passehtan-ash,  pi. 
‘the  channels’  (of  the  waters),  Mass. 
Ps.,Ps.  18,  15].  Cf.  pissagk;  pissi. 
passukossati,  v.  i.  he  parts  the  hoof, 
Lev.  11,  7.  From  pohsu ,  divided,  and 
iikossa,  (its)  hoof.  See  muhkos;  v,hquae. 

[Chip,  pezhiki,  a  buffalo.] 
pasuk,  num.  one;  Ex.  12,  46;  Judg.  9, 
2;  Eccl.  4,  8,  10.  (In  his  Grammar, 
Eliot  gives  as  the  numeral  adnoun 
‘one’,  nequt,  only.)  -pasukco,  it  is  one; 
pi.  -kaoooog,  they  are  one,  1  John  5,  7. 
Verbal,  pasukooonk,  being  one,  unity, 
oneness.  -pasukooog,  inan.  -kooash, 
with  nequt  prefixed,  one  hundred,  El. 
Gr.  15;  nequt  pasukcoe,  a  hundred  times, 
Eccl.  8, 12.  See  Pickering’s  note  on  nequt 
andpaswl-  in  the  reprint  of  Eliot’s  Gram¬ 
mar  (2  Mass.  Hist.  Coll,  ix),  p.  xlv. 
Cotton  made  this  distinction:  “ nequt,  a 
thing  that  is  past;  pasuk,  a  thing  in 


pasuk — continued. 

being.”  This  Hecke welder  considered 
a  mistake,  yet  it  was  not  without  some 
foundation,  pasuk  denotes  unity  and 
completeness,  one  by  itself,  and  with¬ 
out  reference  to  a  series;  nequtla  (its 
ordinal  is  negonne,  first)  appears  to  have 
the  same  base  as  nukkonne,  old,  dis¬ 
carded,  left  behind  [cf.  nukkonau,  he 
leaves  (him)  behind],  and  so  first  in 
order  of  time;  but  if  this  distinction 
was  not  already  obsolete  in  the  time  of 
Eliot  and  Williams  it  does  not  appear 
to  have  been  observed  by  either. 

[Mah. :  ‘  ‘pdschuk  is  the  true  Mahicanni 
word  for  one”,  Hkw.  Narr.  qmwsuck, 
R.W.  (who  gives  also  nquit,  one).  Abn. 
pezekS,  inan .pezekSn,  one  (but  nequt  or  its 
equivalent  is  found  in  nek8dans  [  =  ne- 
qutta  tahshel,  six;  negSdaimkdo,  eleven; 
negdda' tegSe,  one  hundred,  etc. ),  Rasies. 
Chip,  ba-shiek  and  nin-god-judh  (or  rang 
o  dwa),  Sell,  ii,  211,  213,  216.  “Be¬ 
fore  substantives  signifying  measure  of 
time  or  other  things,  .  .  .  instead  of  bejig 
[ bashick ],  we  say  rang  a.  ’  ’ — Bar.  Gr.  433. 
pazhig ,  one;  pdzliegoo,  he  is  one,  Jones. 
Cr eepeyak,  qohjakoo,  he  is  one  or  alone; 
peyakootow  (inan. ),  he uniteth,  Howse.] 
pasukqut,  num.  once,  Gen.  18,  32;  Josh. 
6,  3. 

paswauwatuog,  v.  i.  (pi.)  they  are  near 
of  kin,  ‘they  are  her  near  kinswomen’, 
Lev.  11, 17.  From  pdsoo  djulweetauoog, 
they  are  related,  lit.  they  live  to¬ 
gether. 

paswohteau,  v.  i.  (inan.  subj.)  it  is  near, 
Ps.  22,  11;  Zeph.  1,7.  From  pels©  and 
ohteau,  se  habet. 
paswoppu.  See  pascotappu. 
paswu,  adv.  lately,  El.  Gr.  21;  ‘for  a 
season’,  Acts  13,  11:  onk  pasivese 

( dimin. ) ,  ‘  some  days  after  ’ ,  Acts  15, 36 
(paswese,  soon,  C.).  See  pdsoo. 
*pattohquohanni,  v.  i.  it  thunders,  C. 
See  padtohquohhan. 

pauanontam,  v.  t.  he  fans  (it);  v.  i. 
pauanontussu,  he  fans;  cf.  Jer.  4,  11;  15, 
7 ;  Is.  41, 16. 

pauanuhtunk,  paan-,  pauunon-,  n. 

a  fan  (for  winnowing),  Luke  3,  17;  cf. 
Matt.  3,  12;  Jer.  15,  7.  See  paanonteg. 
pauchau.  See  pahehau. 


120 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


paudtaii,  v.  t.  he  brings  (it),  1  K.  8,  32; 
Esth.  3,  9  (patou,  lie  brings,  ('. );  ‘he 
cometh  with’,  2  Sam.  18,  27;  imperat. 
paudtaush,  bring  thou,  Amos.  4,1  (pat- 
auish,  C. );  suppos.  paudtunk,  when  he 
brings,  Ps.  126,6  ( pautunk ,  Mass.  Ps. ). 
Vbl.  paudtOonk ,  a  bringing  in,  Heb.  7, 
19.  Cf .  pcisaoau.  (Cf.  also  Sansk.  pat, 
ire;  pad,  ire,  adire. ) 

[Narr.  pautous,  bring  hither,  R.  AY. 
Abn.  apet8n,  il  apporte;  nepetSri ,  j’ap- 
porte;  with  an.  obj.  ne-pes8an,  je  1’ap-  \ 
porte.  Chip,  oo  betoon,  he  brings  it. 
Cree,  inan.  peytov:,  an .  peyshoohayoo  (? ) , 
Howse  41.  Del.  peton,  he  brings,  Zeisb. 
Gr.  152.] 

-paug,  n.  gen.  in  compound  words,  signi¬ 
fying  water.  See  -pog. 

*pauganaut  (Narr.),  n.  codfish,  pi.  -tam- 
woek,  E.  W.  See  *pdkonn6tam. 
*paugautemisk  (Narr.),  n.  an  oak  tree 
( pohkuhtimis ,  white  oak;  wesattimls,  red 
[yellow]  oak,  C. ) ;  pangautemismfind, 
an  oak  canoe,  R.  W. 

*pauishoons  (Peq. ),  meadow  lark  (Stur- 
nella  ludoviciana,  Bonap. ),  Stiles. 
*paukunawaw  (Narr.),  a  bear;  also  the 
name  of  the  constellation  ‘the  Great 
Bear,  or  Charles  AYaine’,  R.  AAT.  [For 
pohkenauau,  he  goes  in  the  dark  or  at 
night  (?).] 

YPaumpagussit  (Narr.),  n.  ‘the  sea 
god  .  .  .  that  deity  or  godhead  which 
they  conceive  to  be  in  the  sea.’ — R.  AAb  | 
98,  110. 

paumush.au,  v.  i.  he  walks.  See  pomu- 
shau. 

*pauochauog-  (Narr.),  v.  i.  ‘they  are 
playing  or  dancing’,  R.  AY.  145;  pau- 
ochautou'win  [ pauocholiteauun'. ?],  ‘a  bau¬ 
ble  to  play  with’,  ibid, 
paupakinasik,  adv.  in  the  twilight,  Pro  v. 

7,  9.  Dimin.  of  pohpohkeni,  it  is  dark. 
Suppos.  paupohkenik,  when  dark  (?). 
See  pohkeni.  Does  not  often  occur  in 
Eliot’s  translation;  perhaps  not.  else¬ 
where  than  in  the  verse  cited. 

*paupock  (Narr.),  partridge,  pi.  +  suog, 
R.  AAr.  See  pahpahkshas.  Cf.  (Peq.) 
popoquatese,  quails,  Stiles  ( =pcohpnohq - 
ultog,  quails,  El. ) ;  pohpohk-wsu,  par¬ 
tridge,  El. 

[Chip.  (Gr.  Trav. )  puhpushkuhse, 


*paupock— continued. 

‘snipe’;  pahpahsa,  ‘woodpecker’,  Sell. 
ii,  466.  Del.  pab  ha  cku,  pheasant, 
Zeisb.] 

pauunontunk.  See  pauariuhlunk. 
pauwau,  (1)  v.  i.  he  ‘uses  divination’ 
(infin.  pduiL'ainneat,  Ezek.  21,  21),  he 
practices  magic  or  sorcery.  Adv.  pau- 
wde,  1  Sam.  15,  23.  Vbl.  n.  pauwauonk 
(pi.  -ongash ) ,  ‘  witchcraft ’ ,  2  Chr.  33,  6; 
Gal.  5,  20  (cf.  Acts  8,  9).  (2)  n.  a  wiz¬ 
ard,  a  diviner,  Ex.  22,  18;  Deut.  18,  14; 
Dan.  4,  7. 

[Narr.  pcrwwaw,  ‘a priest’,  pi. -wafiog, 
R.  AAr.  111.  Cf.  Quir:  peaio,  ‘holy’, 
Pier.  41,  etc.] 

payont,  when  he  comes,  when  coming; 

suppos.  part,  of  peyau. 

-pe,  the  root  of  names  of  ‘water’  in 
nearly  all  dialects  of  the  Algonquian. 
It  has  usually  the  demonstrative  prefix, 
and  is  not  found  without  it  in  the  New 
England  dialects.  See  nippe  ( n’pe ),- 
-pog.  [Cf.  the  Sansk.  pd,  to  drink  (pa, 
drinking,  for  drink;  op,  water),  a  root 
which  runs  through  almost  all  Indo- 
European  languages:  Zend,  pco,  water; 
Afgh.  pbi;  Litu.  uppe,  flumen;  Irish 
abh,  flumen;  Greek  IT£l,  nenwKcc, 
Lat.  potum.] 

[Abn.  nebi  (n’pi).  Narr.  nip.  Muh. 
n’bey.  Chip,  rie'-bi,  ne-be,  ne-bee,  water p 
se  be,  see  bee,  river.  Cree  nip  pee.  ] 
pe-.  See  pd-. 
peamesan.  See  pedsin. 
peantam,  v.  i.  he  supplicates,  (in  Eliot’s 
transl.)  he  prays;  lit.  he  is  small- 
minded  (pe-antam) ,  he  humbles  him¬ 
self.  Tr.  an.  peantamauau,  he  prays 
to,  supplicates  (him):  ken  kuppeanlam- 
oush,  I  pray  to  thee,  Ps.  5,  2.  ‘Advocate 
form’  (imperat.)  peantamwawh,  pray 
thou  for  (them),  1  Sam.  12,  19;  -wan- 
shinnean,  pray  thou  for  us,  Jer.  37, 
3.  ATbl.  n.  peantamoonk,  supplication, 
prayer. 

[Narr.  peeyauntam,  ‘he  is  at  prayer’, 
R.  AA’.  Abn.  panbatam,  il  prie.  Del. 
pa  ta  mau,  to  pray,  Zeisb.  Muh.  pe- 
yuhtom-mauwukon  ( vbl. ) ,  ‘  religion  ’ , 

Edw.  Quir.  peaio,  used  by  Pierson  for 
‘  holy  ’ ,  etc. ,  Catechism  41, 42, 57 ;  inan. 
pi.  pealous,  ibid.  55.  This  seems  to  be 
the  primary  or  the  simple  verb  from 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


121 


p  e  antam — con  t  in  ued . 

which  peantam  was  formed,  and  is  per¬ 
haps  identical  with  pauwau  (q.  v. ); 
peai&u>ungan,  ‘holiness’,  Pier.  51.  See 
attaboan .] 

peantcowau,  v.  i.  he  has  a  small  voice, 
speaks  low;  pass,  with  inan.  subj.  pean- 
tcowomco,  it  has  (or  there  is)  ‘a  small 
voice’,  1  K.  19,  12.  From  pe  and  untco- 
wau.  Cf.  mishontcowomco,  ‘it  roareth’ 
(Job  37,  4),  has  a  great  voice.  See 
mishanlcowau. 

peasin,  v.  i.  it  is  (very)  small;  n.  a  small 
thing,  Num.  16,  13:  wussnume  peasin, 
it  is  too  small,  2  K.  6, 1.  Double  dimin. 
peame.san\_-in],  a  very  small  thing,  Ex. 
16,  14.  Suppos.  inan.  peasik,  peesik, 
and  peydsik,  when  it  is  small,  a  small 
thing,  Josh.  17, 15:  anue peyasik  onk  ne 
moteag,  ‘less  [more  little]  than  noth¬ 
ing’,  Is.  40, 17.  Intens.  papeasik  (q.  v. ). 
See  peu. 

*peawe,  pewe,  adj.  little:  pewe  mukkoie- 
sog,  little  children;  peakom.uk,  a  little 
house,  C.  See  peu. 

pechehquogkunk,  -gwonk,  n.  the 

sheath  or  scabbard  of  a  sword.  From 
pet-au,  he  puts  in,  and  chohquog,  a  knife; 
with  the  terminal  of  the  suppos.  inan. 
concrete,  that  which  a  knife  is  put 
into. 

*peeg\ham,  v.  i.  he  shaves  (himself); 
nup-peegham,  I  shave,  C.  See  cheguod- 
wehham;  mcosum. 

peeksq,  peeskq,  n.  the  ‘night  hawk’, 
Lev.  11,  16;  Deut,  14,  15. 

[Abn.  pipigSs,  ‘ oiseau  de  proie ’  (?). 
Del.  pischk,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  6  (cf.  pisgeu, 
it  is  night;  pisgeke,  at  night,  ibid.).] 

peeu.  See  peu. 

pegskiyeue  (?),  adj.  ‘narrow’  (of  ‘win¬ 
dows’),  Ezek.  41,  26. 

pehcheu,  adv.  unawares,  unintention¬ 
ally,  Num.  35,  11;  Gal.  2,  4.  Perhaps 
related  to  pet-shau  (q.  v. ),  he  goes  into  it 
by  mischance,  he  falls  into  it. 

[Abn.  pisSiSi,  vel  patsi  (by  mistake, 
unintentionally).  Del. pitschi,  acciden¬ 
tally,  by  chance;  as  v.  he  blunders  acci¬ 
dentally,  Zeisb.  Gr.  183.] 

pehteau,  v.  i.  it  foams;  n.  foam,  Hos. 
10,  7;  ‘the  scum’  (of  a  boiling  pot), 
Ezek.  24,  6,  11, 12  ( pelitom ):  petamcttoo- 


pehteau — ^continued. 
nau  [ pehtan  (an.)  - wuttcon-ut ],  he  foam- 
eth  (at  the  mouth),  Mark  9,  18.  Cf. 
peshaui. 

[Abn.  pi' tie  or  pitte,  foam,  froth 
(4eume);  pittaSio,  it  foams;  pitti'tte 
8d8n,  he  foams  at  the  mouth.] 
pehtehennitchab.  See  petehennitchab. 
pehtoxinau,  v.  i.  he  puts  on  his  shoes 
(moccasins);  imperat .  pehtoxinash,  put 
on  your  shoes,  Ezek.  24,  17.  From 
petau  and  (m)okussin.  Cf.  amaunsh 
kum-moxinash,  take  off  thy  shoes,  Ex. 
3,  5. 

pehttuhhennitchab.  See  petehennit¬ 
chab. 

pehtuanum.  See  pctuanum. 
peisses,  n.  an  infant,  a  child,  Gen.  37,30; 
44,  22;  Luke  1,  59;  pi.  -\-og.  [By  con¬ 
traction  from  peississu,  or  a  diminutive 
of  endearment  for  peissese  (?)•] 
peississu,  v.  i.  an.  or  adj.  an.  he  is  very 
small  (Amos  7,  2,  5),  very  young. 
Suppos . noh peississit,  ‘he  who  is  least’, 
Matt.  11, 11;  ash  peississit,  while  he  was 
yet  (very)  young  or  small,  2  Chr.  34, 
3;  pi.  -itcheg.  Intens.  or  dimin.  of  en¬ 
dearment,  papeissit,  pi.  -itcheg,  young 
children,  Esth.  3, 13. 

[Abn.  pi8sessi,  il  est  petit;  piSsesen 
(inan.),  cela  est  petit.  Chip,  pangi,  a 
little,  a  few,  Bar.  424,  =pungee,  small, 
‘limited  to  the  expression  of  quan¬ 
tity’,*  Sch.  Cree  appesis  (adv.),  little; 
dppiseesissu,  he  is  small;  (inan.)  dppisd- 
sin,  it  is  small.  Narr.  papods,  a  child.] 

[*  Marginal  note. — “  It  has  changed  places 
with  ogquhse.  See  Sch.”] 

pemaogok,  peonogok,  where  the  path 
or  way  is  narrow,  Matt.  7,  13,  14:  ped- 
nogod  (indie,  pres.),  Prov.  23,  27  (of  ‘a 
narrow  pit’);  en  peimmaogok  mayik,  in 
the  narrow  path,  Man.  Pom.  87.  From 
pe,  small;  -may,  path;  -dog  (suppos. 
from  au),  where  it  goes;  -ohke,  place; 
and  pednog  (suppos.  of  com,  he  goes) 
ohke. 

[Narr.  peemayagdt,  ‘a  little  wav’, 
R.  W.] 

*pemisquai  (Narr.),  adj.  crooked  or 
winding,  R.  W.  56. 

[Cree  puskay,  ‘diverging,  branch¬ 
ing’,  Howse.  Del.  pimochqueu,  twisted, 
turned,  Zeisb.] 


122 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


[pemsqunnum,  v.  t.  he  wreaths,  twines, 
twists  (it);]  adj.  -numwde,  ‘wreathed’, 
Ex.  28,  14,  =pepemsqunnumvm,  v.  22. 

[Del.  pimochqueu,  vbl.  adj.  turned, 
twisted,  Zeisb.] 

pemsquoh,  n.  a  whirlwind,  Job  37,  9; 
Is.  40,  24.  For  pemsqudu,  it  winds 
about,  twines  (?).  Cf.  pepemsque. 
pemunneaht,  -unneat,  n.  a  cord,  a 
string,  Is.  50,  2;  Mark  7,  35;  pi.  -j- ash 
and  -\-ona.$h,  Judg.  15,  13;  16,  11,  12. 
Suppos.  of  pemunohteau  (it  is  twisted 
or  plaited),  ‘when  twisted’  ( pemin - 
neaht  ome,  a  fishing  line;  pedmenyaht , 
a  cable,  C.).  The  primary  meaning  j 
seems  to  be  plaited  or  braided;  that 
which  is  made  by  putting  one  (strand 
or  thread )  across  another.  Cf.  pummee- 
che.  See  tuttuppun. 

[Abn.  pemaiSi,  il  va  de  travers.  Cree 
pim-ich,  crosswise.  Del.  pimenatan, 
thread ;  pimeu,  slanty,  Zeisb.  Cree  pe- 
eme-num,  ‘he  awryeth  it’;  pimme-num, 
‘he  twists  it’,  Howse  93.  Powh.: 
“Their  women  use  to  spin  ...  a  kind 
of  grasse  they  call  pemmenau;  of  these 
they  make  a  thread  very  even  and 
readily.” — J.  Smith,  Hist,  of  Va.] 
penaekinnu,  v.  i.  it  grows  and  spreads, 
spreads  as  it  grows  (of  a  vine,  Ezek. 
17,  6).  From penaeu,  with  k  progressive, 
and  - innu ,  the  characteristic  of  verbs  of 
growth  and  production :  ‘  it  goes  on 
growing  and  spreading  ’ ,  or  1  it  continues 
to  spread  as  it  grows.  ’ 
penaeu,  v.  i.  it  is  spread  about,  as  a 
growing  plant,  tree,  or  vine.  Cf.  panne, 
out  of  the  way. 

[Narr .  pendyi,  ‘crooked’,  R.  IV.  56.] 
penohkonau,  v'.  t.  an.  he  casts  or  throws 
(him)  down:  kup-penuhkon-eh,  thou 
casteth  me  down,  Ps.  102,  10  ( penoh - 
konat,  to  throw  down,  C. ).  From  nooh- 
konau,  he  throws  (to  the  ground) ;  with 
the  prefix  pe-,  he  throws  from  a  height, 
casts  down  (to  the  ground).  See  nco- 
konmiat  and  its  cognates,  and  penuhkau. 

[Abn.  ne-penakann  or  ne-nesakkan, 
‘je  le  jette  du  haut  en  bas.’] 

*penoht,  n.  soot,  C.  161. 

[Abn.  pircUai.] 

penomp,  n.  a  virgin,  Gen.  24,  16;  Is.  7, 
14;  pi.  -paog,  Esth.  2, 19.  From  pendwe, 
strange,  in  its  secondary  or  privative 


penomp — continued. 

sense,  and  -omp,  n.  gen.  for  ‘man’,  nes- 
cia  viri  (?).  Cf.  *keegsquaw;  *quausses. 

[Du  Ponceau  (?)  says:  “A  young  man 
of  Delaware  is  called  pilape.  This 
word  is  formed  from  pilsit,  chaste,  in¬ 
nocent,  and,  lenapi,  man,  viz.,  man  in  his 
purity  and  innocence.” — Tocqueville, 
DGiioe.  en  Am6r.  app.  c.  ( penomp , 
peissit  (?),  or  penussu  (?).)  Hkw.  gives 
pilapeu,  a  lad;  pilawesis,  a  boy;  pilawetit, 
a  male  infant  babe.  Zeisb.  gives  pi  la 
pi  u,  a  big  boy;  pi  la  we  til,  a  little  boy; 
pi  la  we  tschitsch,  a'  boy,  Voc.  52.] 
penowe,  adj.  and  adv.  (1)  strange,  differ¬ 
ing,  or  of  another  kind,  uncommon. 
(2)  foreign,  of  another  country  or  lan¬ 
guage.  From  the  same  base,  perhaps, 
with  panne  (q.  v. ),  out  of  the  way. 
Vbl.  n.  penooweyeuco  [pen6>ve-ua>],  it 
is  different,  strange,  Prov.  21,  8.  Caus. 
inan.  pencoivehleau,  he  makes  (it)  differ¬ 
ent,  distinguishes  (it),  Lev.  11,  47.  Cf. 
nanwe. 

[Abn.  pin,  pir8i,  ‘  indicat  novitatem  ’ ; 
pirie,  nouveau.  Del.  pili,  another, 
Zeisb.  ] 

*penooon,  n.  a  boat,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  6,  22. 
See  *peconog. 

penrowanumau,  penuan-,  v.  t.  an.  to 
have  a  difference  with,  to  contend 
with  (him).  Suppos.  part,  penuanu- 
mont,  when  contending  with,  Job  9,  3; 
up-penuanmno-uh ,  they  contended  with 
them,  Prov.  28, 4.  V.  mutual  an.  penua- 
nittuog,  they  contend  with  each  other, 
‘are  at  strife’,  2  Sam.  19,  9.  Vbl.  n. 
penudnittuonk,  mutual  strife,  contention, 
Gen.  13,  8;  2  K.  5,  7.  Adj.  -ittede,  at 
strife  with,  contentiously,  Prov.  27,  15. 
From  penowe  (emotional  an.  form). 
penoDwohkomuk,  penuwoh-,  n.  a 
strange  place,  Ex.  2,  22. 
penmwoht,  penuwot,  (contracted  form 
of  the  preceding)  n.  a  stranger,  one  dif¬ 
ferent,  a  foreigner,  Prov.  5,  20;  Deut. 
27, 19;  pi.  -tedog,  strangers  ( pencowohtea , 
a  stranger,  C. ).  Used  by  Eliot  for  ‘the 
heathen’,  Ezek.  36,  3,  4.  Adj.  -ohtede, 
foreign,  Ezra  10, 11. 

[Narr.  nip-penowdntawem,  I  am  of 
another  language,  R.  W.  31.  Abn.  ne- 
pirSaiiclSe,  je  parle  une  language  etran- 
gere.  ] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK  ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


123 


penaDwoh.teau,  v.  i.  he  is  strange  or  un¬ 
like  by  nature.  From  pendwe  and  ohteau, 
he  is  a  stranger  or  foreigner, 
penmwomai,  n.  a  difference,  Ezek.  22, 
26;  44,  23. 

penuanumau.  See  penoowanumau. 

penug-quekontu.  See  punukquekontu. 
penuhkau,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan.  he  casts 
(it)  down  upon  (him);  up-penuhkau-oh, 
‘he  cast  (it)  down  upon  them’,  Josh. 
10,  11.  Of.  penohkonau. 
penuhteau,  v.  t.  inan.  it  casts  (it)  down, 
he  casts  (himself)  down  upon  the 
ground,  1  K.  18,  42;  Dan.  8,  10.  Caus. 
he  makes  it  fall  (?). 

penushau,  v.  i.  he  falls;  inan.  subj.  pe- 
nusheau,  it  falls  (as  a  flower,  ‘fadeth’, 
Is.  40,  7,  S;  nup-pirilsshom,  I  fall,  C. ). 
Vbl.  n.  penushaonk,  falling,  a  fall.  Of. 
petshau,  he  falls  into;  pogkishin,  an. 
pogkussu,  he  drops,  falls  inanimately; 
chauopsheau,  he  falls  into  the  water;  j 
kitchisahshau,  lie  falls  into  the  fire;  kep-  i 
shau,  he  falls  by  stumbling  or  by  reason 
of  an  obstacle,  etc. 

[Abn.  penire,  il  tombe  d’en  haut. 
The  corresponding  primary  verb  is  not 
found  in  Eliot.  From  it  penushau  is 
formed  by  adding  sh  (marking  mis¬ 
chance)  to  the  root.  Old  Alg.  pankisin, 
to  fall.] 

penuwohkomuk.  See  pmoowohkomuk. 
penuwot.  See  pencowoht. 
peonogok.  See  pemaogok. 

*peontaem,  a  boat  or  canoe,  C. 

*pecDnog,  n.  a  little  ship,  Mass.  Ps.,  John 
21,  8.  Cf.  kehtaonog  (kehte-onog) ,  a  ship. 
So,  peawe-unog,  the  small  conveyance. 
These  names  were  framed  for  English 
and  foreign  boats,  as  distinguished  from 
the  canoe  [musham)  or  Indian  boat. 
They  do  not  appear  to  have  been  widely 
used. 

[Abn.  ketSrakS,  a  ship;  sahr8pe8ragS, 
a  barque.] 

pepemsque,  adj.  and  adv.  (badly)  con¬ 
torted.  Intens.  or  freq.  form  of  pem- 
squau  (Narr.  pemisqudi,  q.  v. ),  of  the 
serpent,  ‘crooked’,  Job 26, 13;  Is.  27,  1. 
From  pbn  (twisted)  with  squ  [ = show] , 
the  mark  of  badness,  violence,  or  mis¬ 
chance.  Cf.  pemsquoh. 

[Narr.  pendyi,  crooked;  pemisqudi, 
crooked  or  winding,  R.  W.  56.] 


pepemsqunnumroonk,  vbl.  n.  a  wreath, 
2  Chr.  4,  12,  13. 

pepemsqushau,  v.  i.  ‘it  whirleth  about’ 
(of  the  shifting  wind),  Eccl.  1,  6. 
pepenam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  selects,  chooses 
(it),  Gen.  13,  11;  Is.  40,  20;  v.  an.  pe- 
penau,  he  chooses  (him).  Adj.  pepe- 
naue,  chosen,  selected,  Jer.  49,  19. 
From  pendwe,  ‘he  differences  it’. 

[Del.  pipinamen,  to  choose,  Zeisb.] 
pepenautchitcliuhkquonk,  -uhquok, 
n.  a  mirror,  Ex.  38,  8;  2  Cor.  3,  18; 
James  1,  23;  (pi.)  Is.  3,  23. 

[Narr.  pehenochichauqudnick  (?),  a 
looking-glass,  R.  W.  Del.  pepenaus, 
Zeisb.] 

pepummu,  v.  t,  {-moo,  v.  i.),  he  shoots 
often,  continues  shooting.  Freq.  of 
pummu,  q.  v. 

[Narr.  pepemai,  ‘he  is  gone  to  hunt 
or  fowl’,  R.  W.] 

pepumwaen(u),  n.  agent,  one  who 
shoots  often  or  habitually;  pi.  -nuog, 
‘archers’,  Judg.  5,  11;  ‘shooters’,  2 
Sam.  11,  24. 

*pequawus  (Narr. ),  n.  a  gray  fox,  R.  IV. 

95;  pequas,  a  fox,  Wood, 
peshaui,  v.  i.  (1)  it  blossoms,  puts  out 
flowers:  qoish  peshauau,  it  (for  an.  he) 
shall  blossom.  (2)  n.  a  flower,  James 
1,  10;  pi.  -aonash,  2  Chr.  4,  5.  Com¬ 
monly  with  prefix  of  3d  pers.  See  up- 
peshau.  Cf.  (freq. )  paspishau,  (intens. ) 
pasishau,  and  pashksheau. 

[Abn.  abasiar  (pi. ),  ils  bourgeonnent; 
pe'tsesS  abarin,  le  pain  enfle.] 

*peshaui  (Narr. ),  blue; peshauiuash  (pi. ), 
violet-leaves,  R.  W. ;  peshai,  blue,  C. 

[Abn.  titiens,  blue  paint;  petidiens, 
violet.  Chip,  apissi,  violet;  apissin,  it 
is  of  a  violet  or  dark-blue  color,  livid, 
black-blue,  Bar.] 

*peskh.6mmin  (Narr.)  v.  i.  (1)  it  thun¬ 
ders  (‘to  thunder’,  R.  W.).  (2)  it  ex¬ 
plodes,  as  a  gun;  ‘to  discharge  a  gun’. 
Suppos.  inan.  concrete  peskunck,  that 
which  thunders,  a  gun.  Cf.  paskuhkom, 
he  bursts  (it);  pashksheau,  it  bursts 
asunder. 

[Abn.  ne-peskam,  I  fire  a  gun;  aSenni 
peskak,  who  shoots?;  paskSiasS,  (the 
gun)  bursts.  Cree  paskes-ivoosoo,  he 
shoots  himself;  pooskooputhu,  it  bursts 
(from  within),  like  a  gun;  pdske-p&thu, 


124 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25- 


^peskhommin — continued . 
it  bursts  (from  without),  as  a  bladder; 
pusnilkee-puthu,  it  splinters;  pdskesiggun, 
a  gun.  Old  Alg.  paskmgan.  Del.  pocik 
mean  and  pai  achk  hi  can,  gun;  paiach 
kam  men,  to  fire  a  gun,  Zeisb.] 
*pesuponck  (Narr. ),.  n.  ‘an  hothouse’, 
“a  kind  of  little  cell  or  cave  .  .  .  into 
[which]  frequently  the  men  enter  after 
they  have  exceedingly  heated  it  with 
store  of  wood,  laid  upon  an  heap  of 
stones  in  the  middle, ”  etc.  “Here  do 
they  sit  round,  .  .  .  sweating  togeth¬ 
er.” — R.  W.  158.  Verbal  from  *pesup- 
pau. 

*pesuppau-og  (Narr.),  v.  i.  (pi.)  they 
are  sweating,  R.  W.  158. 

[Cree  net’  -appooysin,  I  sweat.  Chip. 
nind-dbwes,  Bar.] 

*petacaus  (Narr.),  n.  ‘an  English  waist¬ 
coat’;  dimin.  petacawmnnese,  ‘a  little 
waistcoat’,  R.  W.  107.  From  putlog- 
queu,  he  hides  himself  (?).  Cf.  puttog- 
quequohhou,  a  veil. 

petan,  n.  a  quiver,  Job  39,  23;  Is.  22,  6. 
From  petau. 

[Abn.  p'Uarann.\ 

petashqushaonk,  petaoshq-,  vbl.  n.  an 
outside  garment,  ‘cloak’,  Is.  59,  17; 
Luke  6,  29;  ‘vesture’,  Ps.  102,  26. 
*petasinna  (Narr.),  ‘give  me  some  to¬ 
bacco’,  R.  W.  35. 

petau,  v.  t.  he  puts  (it)  into,  Ex.  37,  5, 
38, 7.  Imperat.petaits/j,  put  thou  (it)  into 
(it),  Gen.  44,  1.  Suppos.  inan.  con¬ 
crete  petunk  (that  which  is  put  into), 
a  bag  or  pouch ;  petogge,  Wood.  Intens. 
(involuntary  action)  petshau,  he  falls 
into.  From  peyau,  caus.  an.  (?). 

[Abn.  ne-piran,  I  put  it  into;  3d  pers. 
apn  rarer;  ne-tept8n,  I  put  it  in  (a  dish, 
vessel,  or  the  like).  Cree  peetche 
(prep. ),  in,  within;  peelhis,  until,  unto. 
pit-,  as  an  ‘instrumentive  characteristic’ 
of  verbs,  implies  action  performed  ‘with 
the  arm  ’ ,  ‘  he  pulls  ’  [cf.  m' pit  ( muhpit )  ] , 
Howse  87 ;  peetenum,  he  puts  it  in;  peeta- 
hurn,  he  thrusts  it  iu;  peechenum,  he 
pmts  it  in  the  inside,  Howse  34.  Del. 
pin  den,  to  put  in,  to  fill,  Zeisb.] 
petaug.  See  *petogge. 
petehennitchab,  peht-,  pethen-,  peht- 
tubh-,  n.  a  finger  ring  (or  bracelet). 
F rom pet-auun,  put  into,  natch,  the  hand, 


petebennitebab,  etc. — continued. 

and  appu,  it  remains:  ‘that  which  the 
hand  remains  put  into’;  pi.  -abpeash. 
Cf.  kehiippittena&b,  bracelet,  Is.  3,  19 
( kehtetipetendpeaxh ,  pi.,  Ex.  35,  22). 
pethompakeau,  v.  i.  he  creeps  in;  pi. 

-eog,  Jude  4.  Cf.  pamompagin. 
pethcotacheg,  part.  pi.  (suppos.)  they 
who  creep  into,  2  Tim.  3,  6.  Cf.  pam¬ 
ompagin. 

*petogge  [=petaugT\,  a  bag,  Wood. 
*petouwassinug  (Narr.),  n.  “their  to¬ 
bacco-bag,  which  hangs  at  their  neck, 
or  sticks  at  their  girdle,  which  is  to 
them  instead  of  an  English  pocket.” — 
R.  W.  108. 

petsbau,  v.  i.  he  falls  into  (a  pit  or 
snare),  Amos  3,  5;  Ps.  7,  15;  suppos. 
jietshonit,  when  he  falls;  part,  petshunt, 
when  falling.  From  petau,  with  sh  of 
mischance  or  involuntary  action.  Cf. 
pehcheu;  penushau. 

petuanum,  peht-,  pittu-,  v.  i.  he  is 

proud;  suppos.  noh  politudnumndt,  he 
who  is  proud,  Job  40,  12.  Adv.  petud- 
numum,  ‘frowardly’,  Is.  57,  17  ( petu - 
anumo&  and  -mdoe,  proudly,  haughtily, 
C. ).  Vbl.  n.  petuanum  monk,  pride,  Job 
33,  17;  Prov.  14,  3;  16,  18. 
petukau,  v.  i.  he  goes  (is  going)  into, 
Judg.  18,  9;  1  K.  3,  7.  From  petau,  with 
’k  progressive. 

[Cree  pietook-ayoo,  Howse  268.] 
petukodtum,  v.  t.  he  brings  (it)  into: 
kup-petuko dtomwco,  ye  bring  (it)  in, 
Hag.  1,  6;  with  inan.  subj.  petukodtau, 
Dan.  9,  24. 

petukqui,  petuhki,  puttukqui,  v.  i.  it 
is  round;  adj.  round:  peamesan  pe- 
lukhi,  a  small  round  thing,  1  K.  10,  19. 
From  petau  and  uhqude,  it  goes  in  at  the 
ends,  the  end  goes  in  or  returns.  Cf. 
pmttogham,  he  covers,  incloses  (?). 

[Narr .  puttdckqui.  Abn.  petegSi.  Cree 
pittikwow,  it  is  spherical.  Del.  ptuk- 
hican,  a  round  ball;  ptucquimimchiT 
[round-nut  tree]  a  black-walnut  tree, 
Zeisb.  Voc.  27,  53.] 

petukqunneg,  n.  a  (round)  cake,  a  cake, 
or  loaf  of  bread,  Matt.  7,  9  ( petukqulneg , 
C. );  pi.  -f-os/i,  Judg.  6,  19,  20;  -ganash, 
Matt.  15,  36;  n.  coll,  petukrpinnunk, 
bread,  Mark  8,  4. 

[Narr.  puttuckqunnege,  a  cake.] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


125 


petutteau,  v.  t.  he  enters,  goes  into, 
Gen.  24,  32;  Ex.  24,  18;  imperat.  2d 
pers.  sing,  petutteash,  come  thou  in, 
enter  in,  Gen.  24,  31.  From  petau. 

[Narr.  petitees,  ‘come  in’,  R.  W.  30. 
Abn.  petaSighe,  he  enters,] 
peii,  peeu,  or  peweu,  v.  i.  it  is  little,  it 
is  small:  peeu  onk,  (it  is)  less  than, 
Ezra  9,  16.  This  primary  verb  (rep¬ 
resented  by  Cotton’s  peaive)  is  rarely 
found  in  Eliot  by  itself,  but  to  it  must 
be  referred  a  great  number  of  modal 
and  derivate  forms.  Caus.  peelieau,  he 
makes  (him)  small,  causes  him  to  be 
small;  pass,  he  is  made  small  (or  ‘low’, 
James  1,  10):  kuppeh-esh,  I  make  thee 
small,  Jer.  49,  15;  Obad.  2.  Imperat. 
p'euh,  ‘bring  (thou)  him  low  ’,  Job 
40,  12.  See  peasin. 

*pewe.  See  *  peaive. 
peweu.  See  peii. 

jpeyau,  v.  i.  he  comes  hither;  imperat. 
peyaush,  come  thou;  peyunk  {-onk, 
- onch ),  come  ye;  suppos.  part,  payonl, 
when  coming;  v.  t.  an.  peyauau,  he 
comes  to  (him):  kup-peyaunsli,  I  come 
to  thee,  Ex.  18,  6. 

[Narr.  peydu,  he  is  come;  peeyduog, 
they  are  come,  R.  W.  48,  49.  Abn.  ne- 
ba,  jeviens;  iSabann,  il  vientici.  Cree 
pey-,  peyclie,  hitherward.  Del.  peil  or 
peyeya,  he  comes;  part,  payat;  infill. 
paan;  imperat.  pi.  paak;  pe  ye  yu,  it 
comes,  Zeisb.] 

piahquttum,  v.  t.  he  has  authority  over, 
is  master  of  (it);  suppos.  noh  piahquttuk 
wetu,  ‘the  master  of  the  house’,  Mark 
13,35;  infin.  piahquttumunat,  (to  have) 
authority,  v.  34.  As  adj.  and  ad v.piah- 
quttumwe,  chief,  principal,  Gen.  40,  2. 

[Narr.  nt-acquetunck  ewo,  he  is  my  sub¬ 
ject;  kut-dcquetous,  I  will  (be)  subject 
to  you.  “Beside  their  general  subjec¬ 
tion  to  the  highest  sachems,  .  .  .  they 
have  also  particular  protectors,  under 
sachems”,  etc.,  R.  IV.  120,  121.  Abn. 
neteberghe,  je  gou verne.] 
piogque,  n.  adj.  ten.  See piuk. 
pish,  the  auxiliary  of  the  (indicative) 
future  tense,  will  or  shall;  ‘awordsig- 
nifiying  futurity’,  El.  Gr.  20.  [Is  this 
pi-tch,  a  participle  from  pey-,  the  radical 
of  pay-au,  ‘the  coming’,  ‘that  which  is 


pish — continued. 

to  come’?  Cf.  paommon,  the  future, 
the  ‘to  come’,  C.] 

[Narr.  pitch;  pitch  n’keetom,  shall  I 
recover  my  health?;  pitch  nip-pautowin, 
I  will  bring  it  to  you,  R.  W.  Cree 
patoos,  hereafter;  ( cheskwa ,  presently) 
pa-chcskiva,  presently  (with  emphasis); 
pa,  indecl.  particle,  the  sign  of  the  con¬ 
ditional  (as  is  go,  of  the  indicative) 
future,  Howse  199.  Chip,  tali:  tali  atta, 
it  shall  or  will  be,  Sch.  ii,  441.  Mic.m. 
apch,  ‘ensuite’,  Maill.  28.] 
pish  iogkosishoshro,  it  shall  distil  (as 
dew),  i.  e.  moisten,  make  moist,  Deut. 
32,  2.  See  ogqushki. 

-pisk.  See  muppisk  ( m’pisk ),  the  back, 
-pisk,  in  comp,  words.  See  ompsk,  rock, 
piskeu.  See  pdpiske,  double, 
pissagk,  pusseog,  -agquan,  n.  mire, 
mud,  dirt,  Is.  57,  20;  Job  41,  31;  8,  11. 
Adj.  pisseagquane,  ‘miry’,  Ps.  40,  2; 
-eogqucine,  Ezek.  47,  11  ( pussoqna  we- 
yaus,  ‘corrupted  flesh  or  rotten’;  pis- 
sogquam-moo,  it  sticks  to;  pissugk  ut 
toumayog,  ‘dirt  in  the  streets’,  C., 
=pisseogq  ut  mai-kontu,  El.  in  Zech. 
9,  3.)  See  piss/. 

[Abn.  pesag8e,  gluant  {aseskS,  boue); 
qisazeske,  boueux,  bourbeux;  pSskenigan, 
fosse.] 

pissaumatoonk,  n.  a  matter  of  business, 
‘suit’  or  ‘cause’,  Ex.  18,  22;  2  Sam. 
15,  4  (pi ,-atuongash,  ‘weighty  matters’, 
C.). 

pissenum,  pissogkinnum,  v.  t.  he  flays, 
skins  (it);  an.  p issenumauaog  imittuh- 
quabe,  they  flay  off  their  skin,  Micah 
3,  3.' 

pisseogquayeuonk  ( pisseogq-ayeu-onk) , 
n.  pi.  -ongash,  miry  places,  Ezek. 
47,  11. 

pissi,  pusseu,  v.  i.  it  sticks,  adheres,  is 
sticky.  (This,  the  primary  verb,  is  not 
found  in  Eliot,  except  in  the  supposi¬ 
tive  concrete,  pissag. )  See  puppissi. 
Cf.  Greek  ni66a. 

pissishaonk  (?),  n.  ‘matters’  of  business, 
employment,  Ex.  24,  14  ( pissaiyeuonk, 
employment,  G. ).  S ee  pvisaumatuonk. 
pissogkinnumwe,  adj.  peeled,  skinned, 
Is.  18,  2,  7;  an.  pissogkinausu,  Ezek.  29, 
18.  See  pissenum,  he  flays,  skins  (it). 

[Abn.  pessihadassS,  il  6corche.  ] 


12(3 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


pissogqsheau,  v.  i.  it  sticks,  cleaves  fast, 
by  mischance,  Lam.  4,  4;  suppos. 
pissogqshunk,  when  it  sticks  or  cleaves, 
Job  31,  7;  an.  subj.  piasogqshau,  he 
sticks.  From  pissagk-ue,  with  sh  of  in¬ 
voluntary  action. 

pissogquodtin,  pisseog-,  pissug-,  n. 
the  rot  or  blasting  of  grain,  Deut.  28, 
22;  1  K.  8,  37;  Amos  4,  9. 
*pittakunnam  (Narr.),  v.  i.  he  goes 
back:  nip-pittakunnamun,  I  must  go 
back:  pittiichsh,  go  thou  back;  pittucke- 
tuck,  let  us  go  back,  R.  IV.  76,  77.  Of. 
petukau;  petukodtum.  (Perhaps  R.  IV. 
mistook  the  signification  of  this  word, 
‘I  go  back’,  for  ‘I  go  into  the  house’.) 
pittu,  -eu  (?),  n.  pitch,  Is.  34,  9. 

[Cree pieku,  gum  or  pitch,  Howse20.] 
pittuanum.  See  petudnum,  he  is  proud, 
piuksuke,  prep,  ‘over  against’,  Neh. 
3,  23,  25,  26;  adv.  fittingly,  fitting 
( piuhsukke ,  ‘exact,  right’  (?);  pinhsuk- 
keyZue,  ‘plainly’,  C.):  piuhsuke  moeh- 
teomuk,  ‘fitly  framed  together’,  Eph.  2, 
21;  irunne  piuhsiikehtunk,  fitly  joined 
together,  Eph.  4,  16,  i.  e.  made  to  fit; 
suppos.  of  piuhsukehteau,  v.  caus.  (inan. 
subj.).  See  pdpiuhsiike. 
piuk,  num.  ten;  pi.  an.  piukqussuog;  inan. 
- qiissaash ,  El.  Gr.  14.  Adj.  piogqne, 
pioque,  Deut.  32, 30:  Ezek.  45, 14;  piogh.it 
nompe  (to  the  tenth  time),  ten  times, 
Gen.  31,  7  (inan.  pi.  piukqutiash,  Ex. 
3,  28). 

[Narr.  piiick,  R.  W.,  =Peq.  piugg, 
Stiles.  Abn.  mtdra.  Cree  metdtat. 
Chip,  middssici,  Bar.;  me  das  ire,  Sch. 
Micro,  m’teln,  Maill.] 
poakussohkug  mukqs,  ‘he  bores  his 
ear  through’  with  an  awl,  Ex.  21,  6. 
Cf.  soghissohhou,  an  earring, 
poanatam,  -antam,  v.  i.  he  ‘makes 
mirth’,  is  mirthful,  Ezek.  21,  10.  Adj. 
and  adv.  pddnittainire,  mirthfully,  Eccl. 
7,  4.  Ybl.  n.  poanatam coonk,  mirth, 
Eccl.  2,  1,  2.  See  Jiahdnu,  he  laughs, 
-pog,  -paug,  in  comp,  words  water.  It 
represents  the  suppos.  inan.  concrete 
form  of  ’pi  ( n’pi ,  nippe),  ‘where  water 
is’,  nippe  was  not  used  in  composition. 
-pog,  the  norm  generic,  was  not  used 
separately.  Cf.  nunni-pog ,  ‘  fresh  wa¬ 
ter’,  James  3, 12;  sepu,  a  river  of  water, 


-pog,  -paug — continued. 

Ps.  107,  35,  and  woskeche  sepu-pog-unt, 
on  the  surface  of  (upon)  the  waters  of 
the  river,  Dan.  12,  6  ( =  sepui  nippe-it, 
v.  7);  tohkekoiiimit-pog (under tohkekom), 
running  (or  spring)  water,  Num.  19, 
17;  Josh.  15, 19;  m ish ippag  (mishe-pog ) , 
much  water,  John  3,  23;  sonki-pog,  cool 
water,  Prov.  25, 25;  Matt.  10, 42;  seippog, 
‘salt  water’,  James  3,  12;  uppauppog, 
‘abundance  of  waters  (cover  thee)’, 
Job  22,  11. 

poggokkam,  pogkok-,  pogguk-,  v.  t. 

(1)  he  threshes  or  pounds  out  grain, 
Judg.  6, 11.  (2)  he  beats  or  knocks  (it), 
pounds  (it),  strikes  (it)  with  force; 
pret.  pogkuhhum-up,  he  was  threshing 
(wheat),  1  Chr.  21,  20.  Adj.  and  adv. 
-hamcoe,  -hamwae,  of  or  for  threshing, 
Is.  41,  15.  The  primary  meaning  is  to 
beat  out,  to  separate  or  divide  by  beat¬ 
ing.  From  pohqunnum,  or  rather  poh- 
qui,  it  is  broken. 

[Narr.  pockhommin,  to  beat  or  thresh 
out,  R.  W.  Abn.  ne-bagkheh imine,  je 
bats  (le  ble);  ne-bahktehah,  je  le  bats. 
Cree  puckamahum,  he  knocketh  it, 
strikes  it  with  force,  Howse.  Chip. 
puk-e-tai,  v.  t.  he  strikes,  Sch.  it,  424; 
puk-ud-ai  and  poc-kee-tag,  ibid.  468.] 
pogkenau,  v.  t.  an.  (1)  he  casts  away, 
Is.  31,  7  ( pakenau ,  C. ).  (2)  he  puts 

(him)  away.  (3)  he  divorces  (her). 
Suppos.  noli  pagketont,  he  who  puts 
away  or  divorces,  Matt.  19,  9;  imperat. 
pogkes,  cast  (her)  out,  Gen.  21,  10;  Gal. 
4,  30;  pi.  pogkencok,  Gen.  35,  2;  suppos. 
pass,  noh  pognit,  she  (when)  divorced, 
put  away,  Lev.  22,  13. 

[Abn.  ne-baghirah,  j’abandonne  (ho- 
minem  vel  mulierem,  etc.).] 
pogkenum,  v.  i.  he  is  blind;  pi.  -{-v:og, 
-rcoog,  Is.  42,  16;  56,  10;  suppos.  noh 
pogkenuk,  he  who  is  blind  ( =  noh  pd- 
kunut,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  10,  21);  pi.  pog- 
kenukeg,  the  blind,  Is.  35,  5.  Adj.  pog- 
kenumirde,  Is.  42,  7  ( paukinnurheoe ,  C. ). 
From  pohkeni,  it  is  dark. 

[Narr. «’ pockunnum,  1  am  blind;  pau- 
kurmum,  dark,  R.  IV.] 
pogkesu,  v.  i.  act.  an.  he  is  putting  away  or 
casting  off.  Eliot  occasionally  uses  this 
form  of  the  verb  (which,  in  the  indicat. 
3d  pers.,  corresponds  with  his  ‘adjec- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


127 


pogkesu — continued, 
tive-animate’ ),  as  in  Ps.  43:  tohichutch 
pogkesean,  why  dost  thou  cast  me  off? 

[Abn.  pakatsiSi,  ‘loin  de  nous;  a 
l’ecart  ’.] 

pogketam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  casts  (it)  away, 
puts  (it)  from  him  ( paketam ,  C. ): 
nup-pogketam,  I  cast  off,  2  K.  23,  27; 
impend,  pogetash,  cast  thou  (it)  out, 
Matt.  7,  5;  suppos.  pogketog,  when  he 
casts  (it)  off. 

[Xarr.  n’paketam,  I  will  put  her  away; 
aquie  paketash,  do  not  put  away;  n’pa- 
kenaqun,  I  am  put  away,  R.  W.  126. 
(In  the  first  two  examples  he  has  used 
the  inan. pogketam  for  the  an .pogkenau. ) 
Old  Alg.  packitan,  I  abandon  or  forsake, 
Lah.  Abn.  ne-baghitamen ,  j’abandonne 
cela.  Del.  pakiton,  he  throws  (it) 
away.]  «■ 

pogkodantam.  See  pdkodtamtan. 
pogkohlham.  See  poggohham. 
pog-komunk,  n.  a  rod,  a  stick  (carried  in 
the  hand),  Ex.  21,  20;  Prov.  29, 15:  pog- 
komunk  quo  nk,  a  stake,  Is.  54,  2;  -muh- 
quonk ,  a  pillar,  Gen.  28,  18,  22;  31,  45. 

[Cree  puckamoggun,  a  club  or  cudgel, 
Howse.] 

pogkussu,  v.  i.  act.  an.  he  drops,  falls 
(as  an  inan.  body,  or  without  external 
cause.  See  penushau);  suppos.  howan 
woh  pog truss'd,  ‘whoever  shall  fall’, 
Matt.  21,  44.  With  inan.  subj.  pogk- 
ishin(ni),  it  falls;  pi.  -neash,  Nah.  1, 12; 
suppos.  ve  pogshunk,  it  (when)  falling, 
Is.  34,4.  See  pwohkehchiuiu. 

[Cree  pahkesin,  he  falls  (as  in  walk¬ 
ing),  Howse  80.  Alg.  pangisin,  il  tombe 
(tin  objet  inan. ).] 

pohchanutch,  -nitch,  n.  a  finger;  3d 
pers.  uppoh-,  his  linger.  Y.  subst.  pah- 
chanitchau,  he  has  fingers  ( is  fingered ) , 
2  Sam.  21,  20.  From  pohshe,  divided, 
and  -nutch  { memitcheg ),  hand.  Cf. 
pahchasit,  toe,  from  pohshe  and  -sit,  foot. 
*pohchatuk,  pi.  +  qulnash,  a  bough,  C. 
See  pokshau. 

pohch.au,  v.  i.  he  turns  aside,  deviates. 
See  pahchau. 

pohkeni,  -nai,  v.  i.  it  is  dark;  adj.  dark; 
n.  darkness,  Gen.  15,  17;  Is.  5,  20;  45,  7; 
Amos  5,  18:  poliken-ahiu,  in  darkness, 
Eccl.  2,  14.  Adv.  and  adj.  pokenae, 
darkly,  obscurely,  Job  22,  13;  1  Cor. 


pohkeni,  -nai — continued. 

13,  12.  Intens.  pohpohkeni,  Job  24, 15. 
Related  to  pohki,  clear,  open,  as  Incus 
to  lucendo,  etc.  See  paupakinasik;  pog- 
kenuin;  cf.  kuppogki. 

[Narr.  paukunnum,  dark,  R.W.  Abn. 
pekenem,  pekeneghe.  Del.  p&ckenam,  very 
dark,  Hkw.] 

pohkenittipukook  [pohkeni-tipukook], 
‘in  the  dark  night’,  Prov.  7,  9.  See 
*tuppaco. 

[Xarr.  poppakunnetch,  ‘dark  night’ 

( =  po-pohkenit,  when  it  is  very  dark), 
R.  W.] 

pohki,  pahke,  v.  i.  (1)  it  is  clear,  trans¬ 
parent,  that  may  be  seen  through, 
pervious,  Rev.  21, 11,  18.  (2)  Adj.  clean, 
pure,  Lev.  11,  36;  Prov.  30,  5;  Ps.  51, 
10.  As  adv.  pahke  (and  pohkiyeu,  C. ), 
clearly,  plainly.  Suppos.  inan.  pohkok, 
when  it  is  clear;  hence,  the  (clear) 
sky,  Matt.  16,2,3;  Ps.  77,  17;  and  poh - 
kohqxiodt,  when  clear,  in  clear  weather, 
a  clear  day.  (Cotton  has  pahke  and 
pohkiyeu,  ‘clearly’;  pohkoiyZue,  ‘clean’; 
pahkeyeue,  ‘cleanlilv ’. )  See  pohqude, 
open,  manifest. 

The  three  roots,  pohk,  (pdk),  poliq 
(pogh) ,  pohsh  ( pdsh  or  pdj),  have  all 
the  same  ultimate  base,  with  the  idea 
of  division  or  separation  into  parts. 
poliq-  and  its  derivatives  denote  the 
act  of  separating  (breaking,  opening, 
beating  out,  etc.);  pohsh-,  the  fact  of 
division  or  partition  {pohshe,  half,  part 
of,  etc.),  and  pohk  {pohki,  pahke)  the 
result  of  separation,  openness,  per¬ 
viousness,  a  going  through.  [Cf.  Tamil 
pag-u,  to  divide,  to  share;  por,  to  cleave; 
pal,  a  part,  a  portion;  pang-u,  a  share, 
Caldw.  446,  475.  Sansk.  bhag,  dividere; 
bhdg,  dividere,  distribuere;  hhd'ga,  pars, 
portio;  bhang,  frangere;  pakshd,  latus, 
dimidia  pars  mensis.  These  groups 
of  derivatives  from  a  common  root 
correspond  nearly  with  English  (and 
Anglo-Saxon)  words  beginning  with 
the:  thorough,  through,  throw  (  =  to- 
through,  A.  S.  thrawan),  thrust,  thrash 
(A.  S.  thersc-an),  threshold  (A.  S. 
thersc-el,  thrcecs-wald) ,  thread,  throat, 
throttle,  thrill  (A.-S.  thirlian) ,  and  drill, 
etc.] 

[Xarr.  pduqui,  pduquaquat,  ‘it  holds 


128 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


pohki,  pahke — continued, 
up’  (i.  e.  the  sky  clears),  R.  W.  82. 
Abn.  pahg8i8i,  purement,  sans  melange 
( pahg8i8i  8ios,  I  eat  clear  meat) ;  pakSe, 
an  arrow;  pikann,  thread.] 
pohkohquodtae,  adv.  when  clear,  in  a 
clear  day,  Amos  8,  9.  See  pohki. 
pohkshau.  See  pokshau. 
*pohkuhtimis,  n.  white  oak,  C.  See 
*paugdutemisk. 

pohpohkussu,  n.  a  partridge,  1  Sam.  26, 
20.  See  pahpahkshas;  cf.  pmhpeohquttog, 
quails. 

pohpcoquesit,  suppos.  part,  (one  who  is) 
lame;  pi.  -tcheg,  Acts  8,  7.  See  poh- 
qussittont. 

pohpu.  See  porhpu. 
pohquae,  adj.  open,  manifest,  1  Sam.  3,  1; 
Prov.  27,  5  ( pohquae ,  public,  C. ).  Adv. 
-aeu,  openly,  Matt.  6,  4,  6.  (Another 
form  of  pohki. ) 

pohquashinne  (amouhkoiyeu) ,  open  (val¬ 
ley),  Ezek.  37,  2;  pohqu&shinne  ohteuk, 
open  field,  Ezek.  16,  5;  33,  27;  39,  5. 
pohquetahham,  v.  t.  he  continues  break¬ 
ing  (it),  habitually  breaks,  Ps.  107, 16. 
Imperat.  pohquetdhash  wepitteash,  break 
thou  their  teeth,  Ps.  58,  6. 

[Marginal  note. — "Or  causative? — or  by 
pounding?  [Howse,]  Cree  [Grammar] ,  87.  Cf. 
sohquttahham .”] 

pohqui,  v.  i.  it  breaks,  is  broken.  As  adj. 
broken,  Ps.  51,  17  (and  pohquiyeu,  Is. 
36,  6).  Suppos.  pass,  pohqui,  when 
broken;  hence,  n.  a  brand,  a  fragment 
of  wood,  Judg.  15;  4;  Amos.  4,  11.  See 
papokquog;  pohsheau;  pokshau. 

[Cree  pdke,  part,  some  (adv.  of  quan¬ 
tity).  Del.  poo  ktees  (dimin. ),  ‘a  little 
junk  of  fire’,  Zeisb.] 
pohqunnum,  v.  t.  he  breaks  (it)  with 
his  hands,  Is.  28,  24;  Ezek.  4,  16;  nup- 
poqun,  I  break  (it),  Jer.  30,  8;  49,  35. 
With  an.  obj.  pohquanau,  -quenau,  he 
breaks  (him),  Jer.  31,  28;  Ps.  46,  9 
( pohquanum ,  he  opens;  pohquanisli 
usquont,  open  the  door;  nup-poohqun,  I 
break  (a  law),  C.  The  last  example  is 
bad,  verbs  in  ununi  always  denoting 
action  of  the  hand,  or  physical  action). 

[Narr. pauquanamlinnca,  open  (thou) 
to  me  the  door,  R.  W.  Cree  peekoo- 
puthu,  it  breaks;  peekdonayoo,  he  breaks 
it  (by  hand).] 


pohqunnutchont  (from pohqui  and nulch, 
with  the  form  of  the  suppositive  active 
participle),  having  a  broken  hand,  Lev. 
21, 19. 

pohquodch.e,  as  prep,  without,  outside 
of  (Lev.  9,  11);  primarily,  in  open  air, 
out  of  doors.  Suppos.  pohquadchit 
(when)  without,  out  of  doors,  in  open 
air,  Gen.  24,  31;  Ex.  21,  19;  Lev.  10,  45. 

[Narr.  pucquatchick,  R.  W.  Abn. 
pek§atse-mek,  hors  de  la  maison,  de¬ 
hors.] 

pohquohham,  v.  i.-he  goes  clear,  escapes; 
imperat.  pohquohush,  escape  thou,  Gen. 
19,  17;  caus.  pohquohwhunau  (for  -quo- 
hehhau),  he  makes  (him)  go  clear,  de¬ 
livers  (him) ;  imperat. pohquohwhus  kuh- 
hog,  save  thyself,  Luke  23,  37, 39.  From 
pohki  or  pohqui,  and  oom,  he  goes.  [  Nwp- 
qwquohmissu,  etc.,  our  Savior  (title-page 
of  N.  T. ) ;  nu]>pohquohwussuaen,  deliv¬ 
erer,  Judg.  3, 9;  nup-pohquohumssu-m,  my 
Savior,  2  Sam.  22,  2;  kup-pohquohivussu- 
aeneum,  thy  (own)  Savior,  Is.  43,  3;  noh- 
pohquoh-whunont,he  who  saves  (them), 
who  delivers,  Judg.  3,  9;  1  Tim.  4,  10; 
woi  ken  pohqu o h wussooa en ,  O  thou  that 
savest!  Ps.  17,  7;  up-pohquohwhun-oh, 
he  saveth  them,  Ps.  107,  13,  19,  20;  de¬ 
livered  them,  v.  6;  nag  pohquoh  whun- 
noncheli  Jehovah,  the  redeemed  of  the 
Lord,  Ps.  107,  2;  pohquetahham,  he  cuts 
(it)  asunder,  Ps.  107,  16;  lomohinnean, 
deliver  thou  us,  Judg.  10,  15;  pohquah- 
wusseh,  deliver  thou  mg  (intr. ),  Ps.  119, 
153;  pohquah  whuneli  wutch,  deliver 
thou  me  from,  Ps.  119,  134;  pohquah 

ivusseh  wutch, - evil  men,  Ps.  140,  1 

( - my  persecutors,  Ps.  142,  6);  poh¬ 

quah  urussinan  viutch,  deliver  thou  us 
from,  1  Sam.  12, 10;  pohquah  wussinean, 
deliver  thou  us  (intr. ),  Ps.  79, 9;  pohquah 
whunittuonk,  deliverance,  Judg.  15,  18; 
qwhquoh  hamooonk,  escaping,  Ezra  9, 14; 
wutch  num-matcheseonganundnash,  our 
iniquities,  Ezra  9,  6,  7;  nup-pohqunum 
nummeesunk,  I  plucked  off  my  hair, 
Ezra  9,  3.] 

[Note. — The  examples  inclosed  in  brackets 
under  this  definition  appear  on  a  loose  slip  in¬ 
serted  in  the  manuscript.  They  were  neither 
revised  nor  arranged  by  the  compiler.] 

[Del.  pol-  gun,  ‘escaped  from  me’, 
Zeisb.] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


129 


pohqussittont,  having  a  broken  foot, 
Lev.  21,  19.  Freq.  pohpooquesit,  one 
who  is  lame  (pi.  -tcheg,  Acts  8,  7). 
From  pohqui  and  m’seet  ( musseet ). 
poh.sah.teg,  a  (miry?)  pit,  Ps.  40,  2.  See 
passuhthcim;  pissagk. 

pohshane,  adv.  fully,  completely,  thor¬ 
oughly,  Col.  1,  25.  See  p&kodche. 
pohshe,  pahshe,  it  halves,  divides  in 
two,  is  severed;  a  half,  a  part  of,  some 
of  (as  opposed  to  wame,  the  whole  of), 
Ex.  24,  6;  37, 1;  Deut.  12,  7;  Luke  19,  8; 
Rev.  8,  1;  11,  9,  11.  S ee  pohqui.  (Cf. 
Sansk.  paksha,  a  side,  half  (a  month). 
Zend,  pas,  yek-pdsh,  one  half  (Engl, 
piece).  Tamul  pag-ir,  to  divide;  pdl,  a 
part. ) 

[Narr.  paushe,  ‘some’;  poquesu,  half 
(of  an.  obj.),  R.  W.  Abn.  pSk8ks 
(inan.),  -U,  la  moietie  en  large.  Del. 
pachsiwi  (an.?),  half,  Zeisb.] 
pohsheau,  v.  i.  it  divides  in  two,  cleaves 
asunder,  halves  itself,  Zech.  14,  4.  Cf. 
pokshau,  he  breaks  (by  violence);  pas- 
ishau,  it  bursts;  pohqui,  it  breaks, 
pohshequae,  puhsh-,  adv.  at  noonday, 
Job  5,  4  ( puhshaqua-ut ,  Acts  10,  9). 
From  pohshe,  half  the  day  or  sun’s 
course. 

[Narr.  paushaquaw,  paweshaquaw ,  R. 
W.  67.  Abn.  paskSe.  Del.  pachhac- 
queke,  Zeisb.] 

pohshinau,  v.  t.  an.  he  divides  (him)  in 
two,  halves  (him):  pishup-pohshin-ouh, 
they  shall  divide  it  (an  animal),  Ex. 
21,  35. 

pohshinum,  v.  t.  inan.  he  divides  (it), 
halves  (it);  pi.  -\-wog,  Ex.  21,  35.  Cf. 

'  pasinnum. 

[Narr.  paushinum-mm,  to  divide  (into 
two).  Abn. ne-psikassi,  ‘jefens’.  Del. 
pachsenum-men  (infin.),  Zeisb.] 
pohshittahham,  v.  t.  inan.  he  cuts  (it) 
in  two,  Is.  45,  2;  Zech.  11,  10. 
poke.  See  pooke. 

pokshau,  pohkshau,  v.  t.  he  breaks 
(an.  obj.)  with  force  or  violence;  with 
inan.  subj.  poksheau,  it  breaks,  is 
broken;  with  inan.  obj.  pokshadtau,  he 
breaks  (it),  Ps.  107,  16;  Jer.  28,  4. 
Suppos.  an.  part,  pokshont,  when  break¬ 
ing,  2  Sam.  22,  35.  Adj.  and  adv. 
pokshae,  broken,  Jer.  2,  13.  Ybl.  n. 
pokshdonk,  a  breaking,  a  breach,  Prov. 

B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 9 


[  pokshau,  pohkshau — continued. 

15,  4;  Is.  30,  13.  See  pohsheau,  it 
divides  in  two;  pohqui,  it  breaks. 

[Narr  .pdkesha,  -shaunoa,  ‘  it  is  broke’; 
pokeshdttommn,  to  break,  R.  W.] 
poksunkquonk,  n.  a  saw,  Is.  10,  15.  See 
tussonkquonk. 

[Abn.  psipodaSahgan,  temipodahgan. 
Del.  pachkschican,  a  knife;  pachschach- 
quoacan ,  a  board-saw,  Zeisb.  ] 
pomahhom.  See  ponwhhom. 
pomantam,  v.  i.  he  lives,  Gen.  5, 10, 16, 
19,  etc.;  suppos.  pomantog,  when  he 
lives  (or  lived),  Gen.  5,  12,  13,  15,  18, 
etc. ;  part,  (indie.)  pamontamunutch,  liv¬ 
ing,  1  K.  3,  26.  Adj.  and  adv.  -tamwae, 
living.  Yrbl.  n.  pomantamoonk,  living, 
life.  From  pdme  (or  pama>),  it  con¬ 
tinues,  with  -antain,  the  formative  of 
verbs  of  mental  and  emotional  activity. 
See  pdme.  An  earlier  derivative,  pometu 
( pom-ohteau) ,  he  ‘continues  to  be’,  is 
not  found  in  Eliot,  but  he  has  its 
verbal,  pometuonk  (q.  v. ). 

[Narr.  as-n’paumpmauntani,  I  am  very 
well  (am  yet  alive) ;  taubutpaump  maun- 
taman,  I  am  glad  you  are  well,  R.  IV. 
Abn.  n8ri-peman8si,  je  suis  en  bonne 
sante.  Cree  pemoot-ayoo,  he  walks; 
pem&t-issu,  he  is  alive;  pSmoot-aymagun, 
it  goes  (as  a  watch),  Howse  36,  80. 
Del.  pommauchsu,  he  lives;  part,  (sup¬ 
pos.  ),  pemauehsit,  Zeisb.  Gr.] 
pometuonk,  n.  vbl.  (from  pometu;  see 
pdmantam )  a  generation,  Eccl.  1,  4; 
Deut.  32,  5. 

pomitchuwan  (it  flows,  goes  on),  ‘run¬ 
ning  water’.  See  painttchu/m. 
pomohhom,  pomah-,  v.  i.  he  goes  by 
water,  sails,  Acts  27,  9.  Vbl.  n.  -muonk, 
going  by  water,  a  voyage,  Acts  27,  10. 
Agent'wepurnmuhhamvjaen(ii),  pi .-nuog, 
‘mariners’  (Jonah  1,  5),  those  going 
(habitually)  on  the  sea.  From pummoh 
or  pdme  (q.  v. )  and  warm,  he  goes. 

[Cree  pimdsu,  he  sails.  ] 
pomompagee,  adj.  creeping,  crawling, 
Lev.  11,  44,  46.  See  pamompcigin. 
pompasuhkonk,  n.  vbl.  a  ball  (to  play 
with),  Is.  22,  18. 

pompu,  pohpu,  v.  i.  he  plays,  is  playing 
( puhpu ,  he  plays,  C.);  pi.  +  og,  they 
play,  Ex.  32,  6;  Zech.  8,  5;  t.  an.  pom- 
pau,  he  plays  with  or  for  (him):  sun 


130 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


pompu,  pohpu — continued. 

voh  pornpeh,  wilt  thou  play  with  him? 
Job  41,  5  (puhpuog,  they  play;  puhpin- 
neat,  to  play,  C. ).  Vbl.  n.  pompuonk, 
play,  sport,  Judg.  16,  25  ( puhpuonk , 
playing;  pompoonk,  recreation,  C. ; 
pohmpooonk,  Ind.  Laws,  iv). 

[Xarr.  pauochauog,  they  are  playing, 
R.  W.  Cree  pdpu,  he  laughs;  intens. 
p&pdpu;  freq.  pdpisku.  Chip.  (St  | 
Marys)  pau-pe,  (Sag.)  pah-pa,  he 
laughs,  Sch.  ii,  469.  Del.  papaby  (for 
papaliy?) ,  to  play,  Zeisb.] 

pompuhchai,  n.  a  member,  organ,  limb, 
or  part  of  the  body,  1  Cor.  12, 14,  19,  26; 
pi.  -)-  yeuash,  1  Cor.  6,  15;  ukkosae  pom¬ 
puhchai,  the  virile  organ,  Deut.  23,  1. 
X.  collect,  pompuhchdinneunk,  all  the 
members  or  organs  collectively,  1  Cor. 
12,  26. 

pomushau,  v.  i.  (1)  he  walks.  (2)  he 
journeys,  goes  a  journey,  1  K.  18,  27; 

2  K.  10,  31;  but  in  this  sense  the  freq. 
popomushau  is  more  commonly  used. 
(3)  he  goes  or  passes  by.  Suppos.  po- 
mushadt  (and  pamivushadt),  when  he 
■walks,  if  he  walk,  Ex.  21, 19;  Gen.  3,  8; 
noh pomushadt,  he  who  walks,  John  12, 
35.  With  man.  subj.  pdmsheau,  pam- 
dshaa,  it  goes  on,  passes,  is  past;  pass, 
inan.  ( pdmsheomco )  paumushdnuo,  it  is 
passed  by  or  over,  Is.  40,  27;  Jer.  6,  4. 
X.  agent,  pomushaen ,  one  who  is  walk¬ 
ing,  a  traveler;  pi.  -nuog,  Job  31,  32. 
Vbl.  n.  pomushdonk,  a  journey  (Gen.  24, 
21;  1  K.  19,  7),  a  walk.  Freq.  popo- 
mushau,  -ivushau,  he  walks  much,  goes 
about,  travels,  journeys,  Acts  10,  38; 
Matt.  9,  35  ( papaum -);  imperat.  popdm- 
shagk,  walk  ye,  John  12,  35;  with  inan. 
subj.  popomsheau,  it  moves  about. 
From  pdme  (pummeu).  The  primary 
form  of  this  verb  appears  to  be  pom- 
asm  (see  Muh.  and  Abn.  equivalents 
below),  the  act.  intrans.  form  (he  con¬ 
tinues  doing),  aspom-antam  is  the  sim¬ 
ple  intrans.  or  neuter  form  (he  con¬ 
tinues  feeling  or  thinking,  he  lives),  and 
pomohhom  (or  pam-wmm),  the  inact.  I 
intrans.  (he  continues  going,  passively  I 
or  without  action  of  his  own,  he  sails  ! 
or  goes  by  boat).  This  primary  form 
is  energized  in  pomushau  by  the  aspi¬ 
rate,  as  in  the  intens.  ussishau  for  us-  . 


pomushau — continued. 

ussu.  See  ussendt;  m'seet  (musseet),  a 
foot.  Cf.  Sansk.  pamb,  ire,  se  movere. 

[Xarr.  as  pummissin,  ‘he  is  not  yet 
departed’  (he  lives  yet);  nowecontum 
pummishem,  I  have  a  mind  to  travel; 
as-pummhci,  he  is  not  gone  by;  pi.  as- 
pummewock,  R.  W.  This  last  is  an  ear¬ 
lier  form,  which  I  do  not  find  used  by 
Eliot*  [pom-du,  he  continues  going  or 
travels  to  a  place  (see  ail),  goes  onward, 
passes  by],  corresponding  nearly  to  the 
v.  i.  inan.  subj.  (and  impers. )  pummeu, 
paamu,  it  goes  on,  passes.  Abn.  ne- 
periiSssi,  je  marche;  pemSsse,  il  march e. 
Muh.  npumseh,  I  walk;  paumseet,  he 
who  walks,  he  walking.  Micm.  pemiei, 
I  walk.  Cree  pemoot-ayoo,  he  walks. 
Chip.  (St  Marys)  pim-d-sai',  he  walks, 
(Sag.)  pemussay.  Del.  pomsa;  suppos. 
permit,  Zeisb.  Gr.] 

[*  Note. — The  compiler  afterward  wrote  the 
following  in  pencil  on  the  margin:  “Correct 
this.  Eliot  has  the  verb  ash  pamooadt,  Luke 
22,  47,  while  he  was  going  on,  and  pummeii  is 
v.  i.  inan.  subj.”] 

ponam.  See  ponum. 
ponanau,  v.  t.  an.  he  lets  loose,  sets 
free  (an  an.  obj.):  pish  ponanau  psukses- 
oh,  he  shall  let  loose  the  bird,  Lev.  14,  7 ; 
qunnegk  panarum  (pass.),  a  hind  (is) 
let  loose,  Gen.  49,  21.  From  annamau, 
he  sends  (him)  away,  with  pa  indefi¬ 
nite  or  indirective  prefixed, 
ponashabpaen,  n.  agent,  one  who  sets 
nets,  a  fisherman;  pi.  -f -  nog,  Matt.  4, 
18.  From  ponam  and  ashab  ( hashdbp ), 
he  sets  a  net. 

ponasketuwosuen,  n.  agent,  one  who 
administers  medicine,  a  physician,  Jer. 
8,  22;  Col.  4,  14.  From pon-am,  (m)a- 
skehtu  ( moskehtu ),  and  ussendt,  he  ap¬ 
plies  or  administers  medicine. 

[Xarr.  mask'd  ponamiin,  ‘give  [put 
on]  me  a  plaister’,  R.  AY.  159.] 
*pongqui,  shallow,  C.  See  pohquag. 
ponkque,  adj.  dry  (it  dries?):  pongque 
vmttin,  ‘a  dry  wind’,  Jer.  4,  11. 
ponompau,  v.  t.  an.  he  makes  a  gift  to, 
‘gives  gifts  to’  (a  woman),  Ezek.  16, 34; 
v.  i.  act.  (an.),  kup-jxmompus,  thou 
givest  a  reward,  Ezek.  16,  34. 

[Abn.  ne-p8naisess8e,  ‘  je  fais  presens  ’ 
(in  view  of  marriage).] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


131 


ponquag,  n.  a  fording  place,  Gen.  32,  22;  [ 
pongqui,  shallow,  C.  See  tcoskeonk. 

[Abn.  pank8kat,  il  y  a  peu  d’eau  dans 
la  riviere;  pakdiSi,  peu;  ne-bi’kagan- 
s8ghe,  je  passe  la  riviere  au  guet, 
Rasies.  Mod.  Abn.  pongua-,  shallow; 
p&'guaso,  very  shallow,  Osunk.  46,  53. 
Chip,  bagwa,  Bar.] 

ponteam  (?),v.  t.  with  prefix :  poshpontearn 
hasAunnutonk,  he  digs  through  the  wall, 
Ezek.  12,  7 ;  nag  pannup-ponteaog ,  they 
dig  (quite)  through  (the  wall),  v.  12. 
ponurn,  ponam  ( poonum ,  C.),  v.  t.  he 
places,  puts  (it)  by  hand  (Lat.  pon-it), 
Ex.  4,  6;  40,  22,  24:  nup-ponam,  I  put 
(it),  1  Sam.  28,  31.  Imperat.  ponsh, 
put  thou,  Gen.  24,  2;  47,  49;  ponitch, 
let  him  put,  Rom.  14, 13.  Suppos.  ponuk, 
he  who  puts,  (and  part. )  putting.  V.  t. 
an.  ponauj  he  puts  or  places  (him): 
up-pon-uh,  he  put  him,  Gen.  2,  5;  Is. 
14, 1;  poneh,  put  thou  me,  1  Sam.  2, 36.  ; 
V.  t.  inan.  and  an.  ponamauau,  he  puts 
(it)  on  (him):  up-ponamau-un,  he  puts  | 
it  on  (him),  Gen.  39,  4;  up-ponam-un- 
eau,  he  puts  (it)  on  (it),  Gen.  29,  3. 

[Narr.  ponainduta,  (let  us)  lay  it  on; 
pdneivhush,  lay  down  your  burthens; 
aukuck  pdnamun,  to  lay  in  the  earth, 
R.  W.  Abn.  ne-pSnemeii,  je  le  mets; 
ne-p8nma8an,  je  mets  dans  lui. ] 

*pooke,  poke,  ‘a small  kind  [of  tobacco], 
with  short  round  leaves’,  used  by  the 
Indians  in  New  England,  Josselyn, 
N.  E.  Rarities,  54.  Wood’s  vocabulary 
gives  ‘ pooke,  coltsfoot.’  Prof.  Tucker- 
man,  in  a  note  to  Josselyn,  loc.  cit. , 
makes  this  inferior  kind  of  tobacco,  “not 
colt’s  foot,  but  Nicotiana  rustica,  L.,  the 
Yellow  Henbane  of  Gerard’s  Herbal,  p. 
356.”  But  he  is  unquestionably  right 
in  his  inference  that  “the  name  poke 
or  pooke  was  perhaps  always  indefi¬ 
nite.”  It  signifies  merely  ‘that  which 
is  smoked’,  or  ‘which  smokes’.  See 
pmkeu,  and  cf.  pukit. 

[Corvado  (Brasil?)  boke,  tobacco; 
Puri  poke;  see  Martius.  ] 
popomompakecheg,  vbl.  n.  pi.  ‘creeping 
things’,  Acts  10,12.  See  pamompagin. 
popomshaonk,  vbl.  n.  from  popomshau, 
freq.  of  pomushau,  a  going  to  and  fro, 
Is.  33,  4. 


popon,  v.  i.  it  is  winter;  n.  winter,  Cant. 
2, 11;  Ps.  74, 17  (pret.  puppoon-up,  it  was 
winter,  Mass.  Ps. ).  Adj.  and  adv.  po- 
ponde,  of  winter,  in  the  winter.  Cf. 
tohkoi. 

[Narr.  papdne;  papona-keemush,  win¬ 
ter  month;  papapocup  (misprint  for  pa- 
pocup),  last  winter,  R.  W.  69,  70.  Quir. 
pabuuks,  in  winter,  Pier.  28.  Abn. 
pehSn,  l’hiver;  pebSne,  le  passe;  pebSghe, 
le  prochain.  Cree  pepoon,  it  is  winter; 
pepjoon-oop/un,  it  was  winter;  kuit& 
pepoon,  it  will  be  winter;  suppos.  pe- 
pook,  when  it  is  winter;  pepook-oopun, 
when  it  was  winter;  pepooke,  when  it 
shall  be  winter,  Howse  191, 192.  Chip. 
peebon,  last  winter;  peebonoong,  next 
winter;  peebong,  Sch.  Old  Alg.  pi- 
poun.  ] 

*poponaumsuog  (Narr.),  winter  fish. 
See  *paponaumsti. 

*popoquatese  (Peq. ),  a  quail,  Stiles. 
See pahpahkshas;  *paupock;  pcobpcohi[Ut- 
tog. 

popotowegash,  n.  pi.  bellows,  Jer.  6,  29 
(i.  e.  blow  instrument).  From  pcotau. 

[Del.  pu  ta  woa  gan,  Zeisb.] 
*popowuttah.ig  (Narr.),  a  drum,  R.  W. 
*poppek,  n.  a  flea,  C.  See  papekq. 
poquag,  a  hole  or  hollow.  See  pukqui. 
*poquauhock  (Narr.),  the  round  clam 
(Venus  mercenaria),  the  ‘quahaug’  of 
the  Eastern  markets;  “  a  little  thick  shel  1 
fish  which  the  Indians  wade  deep  and 
dive  for.  .  .  .  They  break  out  of  the  shell 
about  half  an  inch  of  a  black  part  of  it, 
of  which  they  make  their  suckauhock  or 
blackmoney.” — R.  W.  104.  From  poh- 
keni,  in  the  sense  of  closed.  Cf.  kup- 
pogki,  thick,  and  hogki,  shell,  distin¬ 
guishing  it  from  the  Mya  arenaria 
(sickismog)  or  gaping  clam. 

[Peq.  p  quaughhaug,  pouh-quauhhaug, 
Stiles.  Abn.  pekSahak,  ‘huitres’  (cf. 
pek8ahank,  ‘ ils  sont  clouees’,  i.  e.  affer- 
mis  or  serres?).  Del.  poc  gne  d,  clam, 
mussel,  Zeisb.] 

posampu.  See  pmsampu,  he  looks  into 
(it). 

posekinau,  -num,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan. 
he  buries  (him),  inters  (him),  Gen.  23, 
19;  nup-posekin-non,  I  bury,  Gen.  23, 13; 
imperat.  posekin  ke-nup-com,  bury  thy 
dead,  Gen.  23, 11, 15;  suppos.  poxekinit, 


132 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


posekinau,  -num — continued. 

when  burying,  he  who  buries,  and 
(pass,  part.)  buried.  Vbl.  n.  act.  pose- 
kindonk,  a  burying;  pass,  -nitteaonk,  a 
being-buried,  burial,  Matt.  26, 12.  Adj. 
and  adv. :  posekinittude  ohke,  a  burying 
place,  Gen.  23,  4  ( nup-pcosukin ,  I  bury, 
C. ).  [From  poskinau,  he  strips  naked, 
makes  bare  (?),  or  the  derivative 
m’pusk  ( muppu.sk ),  the  back,  ‘he  places 
or  is  laid  on  his  back’  (?).] 

[Narr.  posakunnamun,  to  bury,  R.  W. 
Abn.  ne-p8skenan,  je  l’interre.] 
poske,  adj.  naked:  nup-poske,  I  naked,  Job 
1,21;  adv. poskeu.  Adj.  an.  (v.  i.  act. ), 
poskissu ,  he  is  naked,  Ex.  32,  35;  suppos. 
part.  pi.  poskissi(ni)lcheg,  the  naked, 
2  Chr.  28,  5;  Ezek.  18,  7.  Caus.  pos- 
kisseheau,  he  makes  (him)  naked,  Ex. 
32,  25;  2  Chr.  28,  19;  and,  with  sh 
privative,  up-posqushdheo-uh,  they  make 
(him)  go  naked,  hurtfully,  Job  24,  10. 
V.  i.  inan.  subj.  poskohteau;  with  the 
aspirated  sibilant  (privative),  poshkoh- 
teau,  it  is  naked,  Job  26,  6.  Cf.  mup- 
pusk. 

poskinum,  v.  t.  inan.  he  bares  (it),  makes 
bare  or  naked:  jwskinum  wuhpit,  he 
makes  bare  his  arm,  Is.  52, 10.  An.  pos¬ 
kinau,  he  makes  (him)  naked,  bares 
(him) :  nup-poskin,  I  strip  (him)  naked, 
Hos.  2,  3.  Imperat.  poskinush  kehquau, 
uncover  thy  thigh,  Is.  47,  2. 
poskissu,  v.  i.  he  is  naked:  nup-poskis 
I  am  naked,  i.  e.  by  my  own  act 
(this  is  the  intransitive  active  form,  or 
‘adj.  an.’  of  Eliot;  see  poske).  Imperat. 
poskts  kuhkont,  make  bare  thy  head,  Is. 
47,  2;  pi.  poskissegk,  make  yourselves 
bare,  Is.  32,  11.  Ybl.  n.  poskisseuonk, 
nakedness,  Rom.  8,  35;  Ex.  20,  26. 

[Narr.  nip-pdskiss,  I  am  naked;  pabs- 
kesu,  naked.  Abn.  ne-paskenaii,  ‘je  le 
mets  &  nud’,  je  le  d^pouille.] 
posksin,  v.  i.  he  lies  down  naked,  1  Sam. 
19,  24. 

potab,  a  whale.  See  paotdop. 
potantam.  See  pcotau. 

*powwaw  (Narr.),  ‘a  priest’,  R.  W. 

See  pauwau. 

prochenau,  n.  the  bosom,  the  breast: 
up-pcochenaout,  in  his  bosom,  Lam.  2, 12 
(up-pcochSnau,  bosom,  C.).  From  poh- 
shinae,  divided  in  two  (?). 


poohpoohquttog,  n.  pi.  ‘quails’,  Ps.  105, 

40.  See  chcachcowdog ;  pahpahkshas; 
*paupock.  (Cf.  Cree  pd-pdtdyoo,  it  is 
spotted;  chd-chbchagow,  it  is  striped, 
Howse  73.) 

pcokeu,  v.  i.,  is  used  by  Eliot  to  translate 
‘  he  is  puffed  up  ’  (Gr.  pv6ioT) ;  pi .pcnke- 
wog,  they  are  puffed  up,  1  Cor.  4, 18;  sup¬ 
pos.  pookit,  when  he  is  puffed  up,  Col. 
2,  18;  pi.  neg  pcokecheg,  they  who  are, 
etc.,  1  Cor.  4,  19  (oi  necpvdiooapivoi). 
Caus.  an.pcokhuwdhuau,  it  puffeth(him) 
up,  1  Cor.  8,  1.  Cf.  pukit,  smoke,  which 
is  perhaps  identical  with  the  suppos. 
q>ookit.  up-pookeonk  (kehtoh)  ‘the  swell¬ 
ing  (of  the  sea)’,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  46,  3. 
pconampau,  -pamau,  he  looks  away 

from  (him),  Is.  22,  4.  From - and 

wompu,  he  looks. 

pcopcotauonk,  vbl.  n.  (continued)  blow¬ 
ing,  a  blast  of  air,  Ex.  15,  8  (for  ‘nees- 
ings’,  Job  41, 18).  See pcotau,  he  blows, 
poosampu,  pos-,  v.  t.  he  looks  in  or  into 
(it),  John  20,  5,  11;  1  Sam.  6,  19.  See 
wompu. 

poosu-og  kuhtconogqut,  ‘  they  entered 
into  a  ship’,  John  6,  17  (pret.  pcosupa- 
neg,  Mass.  Ps. ) . 

[Abn.  p8s8,  he  embarks.  Chip,  bosi, 
Bar.] 

pcotaop,  pcotab,  potab,  n.  a  whale, 
Gen.  1, 21;  Job  7, 12;  Matt.  12, 40.  From 
pcotau  (he  blows)  [-pog  (water)?]. 

[Narr.  polop.  Peq.  podumbaug,  pu- 
dumbaug,  Stiles.  Abn.  p8debe  (i.  e. 
p8da8-bi).  Del.  ’mbiachk,  Zeisb.] 
pcotau,  v.  i.  he  blows,  breathes  strongly. 
(Not  used  in  this  form  by  Eliot,  who 
has  instead  the  transitive  pootantam.) 
T.  inan  .pootantam,  he  blows  (it)  or  upon 
(it).  Imperat.  pootantash,  Ezek.  37,  9; 
pi.  -amcok,  blow  ye  upon  (it),  Cant.  4, 
16.  Freq.  pmpootau,  he  continues  blow¬ 
ing;  part,  noh  paypcotauont(og) ,  he  who 
bloweth,  Is.  54,  16.  Cf.  pcokeu;  pcopoo- 
tauonk;  pcotoemco. 

[Narr.  potduntash,  blow  the  fire. 
Cree  pdotatum,  he  bloweth  (it).  Abn. 
ne-p8da8e,  je  souffle  le  feu;  p8da8angan, 
soufflet  ;1  feu  ( popcopootauwan&muk ,  bel¬ 
lows,  C. );  ne-p8^ta8anman,  je  souffle 
contre  lui.] 

pCDthonsh,  -ansh,  n.  a  ‘pitcher’,  vessel 
for  carrying  water,  Gen.  24,  15,  20; 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


1 33 


pcothonsh,  -ansh — continued. 
poothonchu,  ‘bucket’,  Is. 40, 15;  pcothon- 
chue  nippe,  a  pitcher  of  water,  Mark  , 
14, 13.  From  paudtau,  he  brings.  Of. 
quomphunk,  a  dipping  instrument. 

[Abu.  potahtsS,  p6Qahts8,  ‘espece  de 
cruche  d’ecorce,  ronde  en  haut,  pour 
aller  querir  de  l’eau’;  pekenahtsS,  ‘une 
autre  espece,  plus  longue  que  large’.] 
pcotoemco,  v.  i.  it  swells,  bulges,  pro¬ 
jects:  pootoemcouk,  ‘a  swelling’  (i.  e. 
when  there  is  a  bulging  or  protuber¬ 
ance),  as  in  a  wall,  Is.  30,  13.  Ybl..  n. 
pootoeonk,  pi.  -ongash,  a  swelling,  2  Cor. 
12,  20. 

protonkunau,  v.  t. :  pcotonkundog  wut- 
ahtomp-euh,  they  bend  (draw)  their 
bows,  Ps.  64,  3;  suppos.  part,  -kinont 
(pi.  -kinoncheg)  cihtomp-eh,  he  (they) 
who  draws  the  bow,  Is.  66,  19.  See 
U'onkinonat;  ivuttunkinonat. 
*pcotouwasha,  break  of  day  (?),  C. 
protsai,  as  n.  a  corner,  Prov.  7,  12  (a  re¬ 
cess,  retired  place  ?):  kishke  up-pcot- 
saau-com-ut,  ‘near  her  corner’,  v.  8; 
aush  paotsau-ut ,  go '“into  thy  closet’,  j 
Matt.  6,  6.  Cf.  ut  poochoag,  in  a  corner,  ! 
Prov.  21,  9,  =cidt  pcochag,  Prov.  25, 
24.  From  pahchau,  pohchau,  he  goes 
out  of  the  way,  turns  aside  (?).  pootsai 
with  inan.  subj.,  pcotsaau  with  an.  subj. 

[Del.  pic  tscheek,  (in)  ‘the  corner  of  a 
room’,  Zeisb.] 

pcotuppog,  -pag,  ji.  a  bay,  Josh.  15,  2, 
5;  18,19. 

Chip,  pe-to-beg ,  pee-toe-bee,  a  bog,  Sch. 
ii,  462.] 

psukses,  pi.  -i-og,  n.  a  little  bird,  El. 
Gr.  9;  a  bird,  Eccl.  10,  20;  Amos  3,  5. 
This  word  is  evidently  a  diminutive 
from  a  noun  pmk  or  psukissu,  which  I 
do  not  find  in  Eliot.  For  the  class 
(aves)  ‘fowl’  Eliot  used puppinshaas-og, 
q.  v.  [pahshe,  half  ~ psukses ,  bird;  cf. 
Sansk.  paksMn,  avis  ~pakshcc,  latus,  di- 
midia  pars. 

[Xarr.  pussukesesuck  (pi. ) ,  fowl.  Abn. 
sipsis,  pi.  sipsak,  oiseaux.] 
ptmwu,  tmwu,  v.  i.  he  moves  in  air, 
flies  (as  a  bird),  2  Sam.  22,  11;  Ps.  18, 
10;  Prov.  6,  2;  pi.  ptcoweeog  (pret.  too- 
weep,  he  did  fly,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  18, 10); 
suppos.  noli  ptcoweet  (or  tcoweet),  that 
which  (an.)  flies,  Lev.  11,  20,  21.  With 


ptrowu,  toowu — continued, 
inan.  subj.  ptcoeic,  tcoeic,  it  flies;  pi. 
ptxoeog ,  Prov.  23,  5;  suppos.  ( pick'd ) 
ptoohog,  (smoke)  when  it  flies  away, 
drifts  away,  Ps.  68,  2.  Adj.  ptooweche, 
Prov.  26, 2.  Caus.  inan.  (subj.  and  obj. ) 
ptooanau,  tcohannaic,  it  drives  or  causes 
it  to  drift  in  air;  x>ass.  it  is  driven  or 
drifted;  suppos.  ne  tcounoniog,  ptcoanun- 
tog  (tcoanontog,  Mass.  Ps. ),  that  which 
is  driven  by  the  wind,  Ps.  1,  4;  35,  5; 
Hos.  13,  3.  Adj.-adv.  tooannohhanne, 
driven,  made  to  drift,  Is.  41,  2.  Nearly 
allied  to,  if  not  formed  directly  from, 
pcotau,  he  blows,  moves  the  air.  (Cf. 
Sansk.  pot,  (1)  cadere;  (2)  volare  (cf. 
petau; petshau) ;  Greek  itinzoo,  niropav, 
Lat.  pieto.  See  Max  Muller’s  Lect.  (iii) 
on  Darwin’s  Philos,  of  Lang.,  in  Living 
Age  No.  1523,  p.  424.) 

[Narr.  ptowei,  it  is  fled  (of  a  bird), 
R.  W.  86.  Old  Alg.  pioucin,  the  wind 
drives  the  snow,  Arch.  Amer.  n,  26. 
Cree  twdy-hoo,  ‘he  alights  himself  (?), 
as  a  bird’ ;  pewun,  it  drifts.] 

*p’tuks  (Quir. ),  ‘timber’  (for  building), 
Pier.  17;  ‘trees’,  ibid.  28;  p’tuk,  a  tree, 
ibid.  44. 
pu-.  See  pa. 

puhchuteaonk,  ‘deceit’,  Prov.  12,  20. 
-puhkuk.  See  muppuhkuk,  a  head, 
puhpegk,  n.  an  instrument  of  music,  Ps. 
144,  9;  Is.  38,  20  ( puhpeeg ,  a  trumpet 
or  music,  C. ).  Suppos.  (instr. )  from 
puhpuhki,  hollow.  Cf.  monopuhpeg,  a 
trumpet,  and  see  pummukau. 

[Powh.  pawpeconeSj  pipes,  .T.  Smith. 
Abn.  bibiSaii,  trompette.] 
puhpequau,  v.  i.  he  sounds  a  trumpet 
(Rev.  8,  7,  8),  plays  upon  an  instru¬ 
ment  of  music. 

puhpequon,  -quoan,  n.  an  instrument 
of  music;  pi.  -\-ash,  Eccl.  2,  8;  Ps.  150, 
4;  Gen.  31,  27.  From  puhpequau,  for 
puhpequau-un. 

[Abn.  bibiSaii,  trompette.  Del.  ach 
p>i  quon,  flute,  pipe,  Zeisb.] 

*puhpu,  v.  i.  he  plays,  C. ;  pi.  puhpicog. 
See  pompti. 

puhpuhki,  puppuhke,  v.  i.  it  is  hollow; 
adj.  hollow,  Ex.  27,  8.  Augm.  of  puk- 
qui  (q.  v. ).  Suppos.  concr.  puhpuhkag, 
a  hollow,  Judg.  15,  19.  See  puppuh- 
kohtedi. 


134 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


puhpuhki,  puppuhke — continued. 

[Abn.  apikitghen,  ‘cela  est  creu 
dedans.’  Del.  puch  tsche  su,  hollow, 
Zeisb.] 

puhpuhkitteau,  v.  caus.  inan.  he  hollows 
(it),  makes  it  hollow,  Ex.  38,  8. 
puhquohke,  n.  a  clod  of  earth;  pi.  -cash, 
Hos.  10,  11. 

puhshequae.  See  pohshequde. 
*puhtadtuniyeu.  in  the  west,  westward, 
Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  75,  6;  but  elsewhere  (as 
Ps.  103,  12;  107,  3)  the  Mass.  Ps.  has 
mciquam  ittinniyeu. 

*puhtantam,  v.  i.  he  mistakes  (?),  C. 
pukit,  pukut,  n.  smoke;  suppos.  form 
of  v.  i.  pukkutteau  (Rev.  9,  2),  there  is 
smoke.  From  pohk-eni,  dark  (?),  it 
blinds  (?).  Gi.  pcokeu.  Adj.-adv.  puk- 
kuttde,  smoky,  of  smoke,  Is.  14,  31;  Joel 
2,  30.  Dimin.  pukkuttaem.es,  ‘vapor’, 
Ps.  148,  8.  (Cf.  Sansk.  panka,  lutum, 
pulvis;  Tamil,  pug-ei,  smoke.) 

[Narr.  puck,  smoke :  nip-puckis, 
‘smoke  troubleth  me’,  R.  W.  48; 
pokitta,  smoke,  Wood.  Abn.  ne-pekesi, 
‘  je  suis  comme  aveugle  de  la  fumee’; 
pekeduS,  il  fume.] 

pukquee,  n.  ashes,  Gen.  18,  27;  ‘mire’, 
2  Sam.  22,  43.  The  primary  significa¬ 
tion  is  dust;  like  pukit,  that  which 
darkens  or  blinds  (?). 

[Aim.  pekkS,  cendre.  Chip .pinggu'is, 
dust,  ashes.  Del.  pkindeu,  light  ashes, 
Zeisb.] 

pukqui,  v.  i.  it  goes  through,  continues 
(- uhk )  going  through;  hence  n.  a  hole, 
Ex.  28,  32;  39,  23;  suppos.  ne  pukquag, 
pdquag,  or  pohquag,  that  which  is 
through,  a  hole,  Ex.  28,  32;  39,  6,  18, 
23;  ‘the  eye  of  a  needle’,  Mark  10,  25. 
See  poliki;  puhpuhki. 

[Narr.  puckMim-min,  to  bore  through; 
( puchwheganash  for)  puckwheganash 
(pi.),  awl  blades  (for  boring  shell 
money),  R.  W.  130,  131.  Del.  pku  schi 
kan,  a  gimlet,  Zeisb.] 
pukqussum,  v.  t.  he  bores  through  (it), 
makes  a  hole  through,  2  K.  12,  9. 
pum.  See  pummoh. 
pumipsk,  pi.  -squash,  for  ‘rock,’  Job  29, 
6;  kenugke  pumipsquehtu,  among  the 
rocks,  Job  28,  20;  pi.  pumupsquehtuash, 
rocks,  1  K.  19,11.  From  pum meu (?), 
and  ompsk,  rock. 


*pumraaumpiteunck  (Narr.),  n.  the 
toothache,  R.  \V.  59;  npum-,  my  teeth 
ache,  ibid.  156. 

*pummechesham,  he  slides,  C.  (in  1st 
pers.  nup-pummechesham). 
pummee,  n.  oil,  Ezek.  45,  14;  Luke  10, 
34  ( pummee  or  sammee,  C. ). 

[Abn.  pemi,  huile,  graisse;  pemikan, 
etant  fondue,  on  la  tire  (de  dessus 
l’eau).  This  last  word,  or,  rather,  the 
passive  participle  of  the  same  form, 
pemikan  (‘fat  skimmed’  or  ‘dipped’ 
from  the  surface  of  the  boiling  water  in 
which  it  was  melted,  to  be  poured  over 
fine-chopped  meat),  gave  a  name  to 
the  preparation  so  much  prized  by  the 
northern  tribes  and  bv  Canadian  voy- 
ageurs.*  Old  Alg.  pimite,  fat,  Lah.  Del. 
pxrnyy,  fat,  Camp.;  pomi,  Zeisb.] 

[* Note. — “Same  root  with  pummeu  ?”.] 
pummeecbe  may,  a  crosswav  or  path, 
Obad.  14. 

pummeneutunk,  n  a  waTl  or  rampart, 
2  Sam.  20, 15;  22, 30. 

pummetonkupunnaonk,  vbl.  n.  (from 
pumme-ul  and  onkapunnau,  he  tortures 
(him)  on  the  cross),  is  used  by  Eliot 
for  the  crucifixion;  the  cross  of  Christ, 
Ileb.  12,  2;  John  19,  19.  Elsewhere, 
pumetshin;  as  (to  take  up)  his  cross,  up- 
purnetshin-euni,  Luke  14,  27. 
pummeu,  v.  i.  it  crosses,  traverses,  goes 
across,  passes  (?)  from  side  to  side.  Cf. 
])dme,  it  passes  onward  or  along.  Only 
found,  in  Eliot,  in  derivatives.  See 
pomushau. 

[ Quir.  pummgan,  ‘to  walk’  (in  their 
own  ways),  Pier.  37.  Abn.  pemai8i,  il 
va  de  t ravers;  pemelsintS,  met  cela  .  .  . 
de  travers.  Cree  pimmich,  crosswise. 
Del.  pimeu,  pimiecheu  ( v.  adj. ),  oblique, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  164;  ‘slanty’,  Zeisb.  Yoc.] 
pumminnum.  See  purnmurmum. 
pummoh,  pum,  a  name  of  the  sea,  or 
ocean,  which  had  perhaps  become  obso¬ 
lete,  or  superseded  by  kehtoh,  before  the 
coming  of  the  English,  but  was  still  re¬ 
tained  in  compound  and  derivative 
words.  It  seems  to  be  derived  from  the 
diffusive  particle  pd-,  and  comundt,  the 
verb  of  motion — that  which  goes  all 
about,  is  everywhere  in  motion, without 
course  ordirection.  [ kehtoh  (El. ) ,  Htthan 
( R.  W. ) ,  from  the  inan.  adj.  kehte,  means 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLfSH  DICTIONARY 


135 


pummoh,  pum— continued. 

that  which  is  chief  or  greatest,  rela¬ 
tively  great,  vast.]  Among  the  words 
preserved  by  Eliot  and  R.  Williams, 
into  the  composition  of  which  this 
name  of  the  ocean  enters,  are  the  fol¬ 
lowing:  paumpdgussit  (Narr. ),  the  sea 
god,  R.  W.  98;  pummunat,  pummunu- 
munat  (?),  to  offer,  to  consecrate;  pum- 
upsq,  pumipsq,  a  rock  (in  the  sea?); 
puimndhhamwaenuog,  mariners,  Jonah 
1,5  {pummoh-comun&t,  those  who  go  on 
the  sea;  pummuhshottoeninuog  [ pamu - 
shadtaen-inuog ?] ,  C.  183);  ohqucttiupani 
[ohquanu  pum] ,  on  the  shore  or  border 
of  the  sea,  =ohquanu  kehtahhannit,  Mark 
2, 13;  pdmosanneneat,  to  swim  ( pumosoo - 
encit,  C.  212);  cf.  okkuttdscowSnadut  \_uk- 
keihtohscowbiaout],  to  cast  themselves 
into  the  sea,  to  plunge  into  the  sea,  . 
Acts  27, 43;  wosketupam  [ woskechepurn ], 
the  surface  of  the  sea,  Is.  18, 2  (cf.  Gen. 
1,2);  kehchippom, -pam  [ kehche=kutche , 
pilin'],  on  the  shore,  John  21,  4,  etc.;  j 
keechepam,  Gen.  22,  17.] 

[Note. — The  above  definition  was  not  trans¬ 
ferred  from  the  rough  draft  of  the  manuscript 
to  the  revision,  seemingly  through  oversight.] 

pummohliam,  v.  i.  (1)  he  goes  inactively 
or  without  exertion  (?).  From  pdme 
and  com.  See  under  pomushau.  (2)  he  I 
goes  by  Mater,  voyages.  Not  found  in 
Eliot,  except  in  the  derived  n.  agent. 
pumm6hhamwaen-uog, ‘mariners’,  Jonah 
1,  5  ( pummuhshottoeninuog ,  C.,  formed 
'  apparently  from  pamwushadt,  suppos.  of 
pomushau). 

[Del.  pom  ma  chum,  he  goes  by  M’ater, 
Zeisb.  Yirg.  yapam,  the  sea,  Strachey.] 

pummu,  v.  i.  he  shoots  (with  boM’  or 
gun),  2  K.  13,  17;  pi.  -uog,  they  shoot, 

2  Sam.  11,  24;  imperat.  2d  pers.  sing. 
pumsh,  pi.  pumcok;  inan.  pass,  pum-  \ 
memco,  it  is  shot;  suppos.  ne  pdmemuk, 
that  which  is  shot  (as,  an  arrov1),  Jer. 

9, 8;  freq.  pepummu,  q.  v.  Y.  t.  an.  -pum-  ; 
wait,  he  shoots  at  (him) ;  up-jnnmvd-uh,  J 
they  shoot  at  him,  Ps.  64,  4;  freq. 
pejmmwau,  he  repeatedly  shoots  at 
(him),  Gen.  49,  23  (M-ith  affixes). 

[Narr.  pumm,  pummoke,  imperat. 
sing,  and  pi.,  shoot;  npummuck,  I  am 
shot,  R.W.  Abn.  p8nte,  il  decoche;  ne- 
peman,  je  decoche  contre  lui. ] 


pummukau,  v.  i.  he  dances,  2  Sam.  6,  14 
( pomugkdoh ,  Matt.  14,  6).  Vbl.  n. 
jjurnmiik&onk,  dancing,  a  dance,  Judg. 
21,  21;  Ex.  32,  19.  \_puhpeg  is  put  for 
‘dance’,  dancing,  in  Ps.  149,  3;  150,  4, 
but  signifies  an  instrument  of  music]. 

[Abn.  pemega,  he  dances;  pemegahn, 
on  danse  le  mort.] 

pummunau,  v.  i.  he  flies,  goes  swiftly 
through  the  air,  goes  as  an  arrow  from 
the  bow  ( pummun-un  and  ail),  Job  39, 
26;  Rev.  14,  6;  suppos.  part,  pamunont, 
when  flying,  Dent.  28,  49.  Adj.-adv. 
pummunae,  flying,  sM’ift-going,  Is.  30,  6. 
*pummunneeteam :  nup  -  purnmunn  ee- 
team  Jiussun,  I  carry  a  stone;  ken  pum - 
minnegkosseh,  do  thou  carry  me,  etc., 
C.  41,  184. 

pummunnum,  pumminnum,  v.  t.  (1) 

he  gives  away;  (2)  he  offers,  devotes 
(it),  as  to  God  or  to  a  superior,  1  Chr. 
29,  6,  9,  17;  Mark  12,  43;  suppos.  pd- 
munuk,  ibid.;  freq.  paumpaummunum, 
pumpum-,  he  offers  (it)  habitually  or 
by  custom.  Y.  t.  an.  pummunau,  he 
offers  (it)  to  (him),  Mark  12,  42;  freq. 
pump-,  Num.  8, 11, 21.  Ybl.  n.  puminnu- 
mcoonk,  a  ‘  collection  ’  (taken  in  church ) , 
contribution,  1  Cor.  16,  2;  ‘a gathering’, 
ibid.  ( pumminumdonk ,  ‘alms-giving’  (?), 
Man.  Pom.  86). 

[Narr.  pummenum  teauquash,  to  con¬ 
tribute  ‘to  the  wars’,  R.W.  149;  pum- 
menummin  teauguash,  (to)  contribute 
money  toM’ard  the  (maid’s)  dowry, 
ibid.  125.  See  *pumpom. ] 
pummuwuttauwae  komuk,pummeu-, 
the  tabernacle,  Gen.  33,  7,  8;  Ex.  26,  1; 
31,  7;  33,  7, 9, 10,  etc. ;  pdhtek6m.uk,  taber¬ 
nacle,  Ex.  25,  8,  9. 

pumohsumro,  v.  i.  it  emits  light,  shines. 
From  pdme  and  wohsum-co.  Ybl.  n.pu- 
mohmmajonk,  a  shining,  emitted  light, 
Luke  11,  36.  See  wohsum- 1  . 
pumohtaash,  pi.  (they  are  in)  a  roM-;  of 
inan.  objects,  1  K.  7,  3;  Lev.  24,  6; 

-tauuash,  tom  s,  Lev.  24,  6.  From - 

and  ohteau. 

pumosco.  See  pamcosco. 

*pumpom  (Narr. ),  “a  tribute  skin  M'hen 
a  deer  (hunted  by  the  Indians  or 
wolves)  is  killed  in  the  M’ater.  This 
skin  is  carried  to  the  sachem  or  prince, 
within  M’hose  territory  the  deer  M’as 


136 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


*pumpom — continued, 
slain.” — RAW  144.  From  pummunnum 
(freq.  pumpurnmunnurn) ,  he  habitually 
or  by  custom  offers  (it);  part.  pass. 
pumpum-munun,  ‘  offered  ’ . 
*Punachmonog  (pi.),  the  French,  C. 
pungwomuhq-uash.,  n.  pi. ‘quicksands’, 
Acts  27, 17. 

*punnetunck  (Narr. ),  n.  a  knife,  R. 
W.  51.  See  chohqu.bg;  *Chokquog. 

[Peq.  punneedunk,  Stiles.] 
punneu,  v.  i.  he  falls  down,  prostrates 
himself  (?):  punneu  ut  unxsseet-ut,  he 
fell  down  at  his  feet,  Luke  8,  41,  47. 

[Abn.  peni'ri,  il  tombe  d’en  haut.] 
punukquekontu,  penugque-,  on  the 
bank  (of  a  river),  Josh.  12,  2;  13,  9, 
16;  anuchuan  wame  up - ,  it  over¬ 

flowed  all  its  banks,  Josh.  4,  18.  Cf. 
wusdpinuk. 

puogkinnum,  v.  t.  inan.  obj.  he  dips  (it) 
in  or  into;  suppos.  puokinulc,  poagunuk, 
whenhedipped  (it),  John  13,  27;  Matt. 
26,  33.  With  an.  obj.  puogkinnau,  he 
dips  (him):  puogkinndnate  howan  en 
nippe,  to  dip  anyone  in  water,  to  im¬ 
merse,  Wun.  Samp.  ch.  29,  §  3.  See 
pwogkeil. 

puppascotam,  n.  a  prince;  pi.  -mwog, 
Prov.  8,  15,  16.  Cf.  ketassoot(am) . 
puppinashim,  n.  a  beast  (El.Gr.  9),  Ex. 
23,  29;  Rev.  4,  7;  pi.  -\-ivog  (and  in 
Gen.  1,  26,  28  fl-mtsso^). 

[Narr.  penashim-icock,  beasts.] 
puppinshaas,  n.  a  fowl,  a  bird  (avis), 
Gen.  1,  30;  2,  19;  pi.  -\-og,  Gen.  6,  20; 
Neh.  5,  18  ( puppinshaashasog ,  Lev.  11, 
46;  puppinushaog,  fowls,  Mass.  Ps. ). 
Cf.  psukses. 

[Narr.  npeshawog,  fowls.  Chip,  pe¬ 
wit' -si,  pe-na-she,  which  is  apparently 
an  an.  i.  form  of  the  Old  Alg.  pile,  ‘a 
fowl’,  Lah.] 

puppissi,  puppish,  n.  dust,  Job  38,  38; 
Dent.  28,  24.  From  pissi,  it  adheres, 
sticks  (?).  See  pissagk.  (Cf.  Sansk. 
parish,  pul  vis. ) 
puppuhke.  See  puhpuhki. 
puppuhkohteai  (for  puhpuliki-ohteau) , 
v.  i.  itishollow;  n.  ‘acave’,  John  11, 38. 
-pusk.  See  muppusk,  the  back, 
pusseog.  See  pissagk. 

*pussoqua,  adj.  ‘corrupted  or  rotten’,  ('. 
See  pissagk. 


*pussough  (Narr.),  the  wildcat,  R.  W. 

[Abn.  petS,  scent  of  an  animal, ‘piste’: 
pesSis,  chat,  which  Mr  Pickering,  in  a 
note  to  Rasies,  thought  “probably  cor¬ 
rupted  from  the  familiar  English  word 
‘puss’  or  ‘pussy’  ”;  but  cf.  Cree  piissoo, 
‘lie  scents  (as,  an  animal)’,  Howse  144. 
Chip.  (Sag.)  pee  shoe,  the  lynx;  (St 
Marys)  pizh  iew';  mis'si-hizh  iew,  (great 
lynx)  panther.  Menom.  pah  shay  ew, 
the  lynx;  maincli  pay-shay-ew,  the 
panther.  ] 

puttagham.  See  putlogham. 
puttahham,  v.  i.  he  goes  into  a  snare  or 
trap,  is  taken  or  entrapped,  Ezek.  17, 
20;  pi.  -hamwog,  Job  34,  30.  Suppos. 
noh puttuhhuk,  he  who  is  ensnared,  Ps. 
9,  16.  Vbl.  n.  puttahhamaoonk,  entrap¬ 
ping,  a  trap.  From  pel-au  and  com, 

‘  he  goes  into  ’ . 

puttahhamwehheau,  v.  caus.  he  makes 
(him)  to  be  trapped  or  snared;  suppos. 
pi.  -wehettit,  when  they  are  taken,  i.  e. 
made  to  go  into  a  snare  or  net,  Eccl. 
9,  12. 

puttahwhau  (=  puttahehlieau) ,  v.  caus. 
he  entraps,  takes  in  a  trap  or  snare; 
pass,  he  is  entrapped  or  ensnared,  Jer. 
5,  26;  Is.  24,  18;  Prov.  12,  13. 

[Abn.  ne-bi&a,  ‘j’en  prens’;  ne-pi9d- 
men,  je  l’y  prens.] 

puttogham,  puttag-,  puttughum,  v.  t. 

inan.  obj.  he  covers  over,  hides  (it)  by 
covering,  Ex.  3, 6;  Num.  4, 5  ( puttoglium • 
unat  poshkissuonk,  to  cover  one’s  naked¬ 
ness,  C. ).  From  pet-au  and  ohkhum. 
With  an.  obj.  puttoggiihu-hau,  puttog- 
quehhau,  he  covers  (him),  hides  him  by 
covering.  Adj.  an.  puttogivhosu,  (he  is) 
hid,  covered,  1  Cor.  2,  7.  Vbl.  n.  put- 
tog  whonk,  a  covering;  pi.  -onganash, 
Prov.  7,  16.  See  agquil;  appuhqudsu; 
hogki;  hogkco;  onkhumunat.  (Cf.  Sansk. 
pat,  ligare,  vestire;  put,  amplecti.) 
puttogqueohtau,  he  hides  himself  from 
(another),  John  12,  36. 
puttogquequohhou,  n.  a  covering  of  the 
person,  a  veil,  Gen.  38, 14.  Cf.  onkque- 
quohhou;  *petacaus;  ydnequohhm. 
puttogqueu,  v.  i.  he  hides  himself,  Job 
23,  9;  John  8,  59;  pi.  Gen.  3,  8;  iinperat. 
puttugquesh,  Jer.  36,  19. 
puttughum.  See  puttogham. 
puttukqui.  See  pSlukqui,  round. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


137 


puttukqunutch,  -nitch,  n.  the  fist,  Ex. 
21,18.  From  pbukqui  and  menutch(eg) , 
‘round-hand’. 

puttukquobpissegk,  v.  imperat.  pi.  ‘gird 
yourselves’,  Is.  8,  9  (see  Ex.  29,  5). 

puttukquobpus,  -obpis,  -oppis,  etc., 
n.  a  girdle,  Is.  3,  24;  Jer.  13,  1;  Ex.  28, 
4;  29,  5.  Properly  a  contracted  form 
of  v.  i.  an.  puttukquobpesu,  he  is  girdled, 
bound  about  (the  loins):  nup-puttuk- 
quobbesin,  I  am  girdled,  1  it  bindeth  me 
about’,  Job  30,  18;  pultagquobpissu  wut- 
togkodteg,  ‘  had  his  sword  girded  by  his 
side’,  Neh.  4,  18;  pi.  -pissinasli,  Rev. 
15,  6.  From  puttogque-au  (it  covers) 
and  mobpee  (hip),  with  the  intransitive 
active  or  simple  animate  affix  -ussu. 


puttukquobpus,  etc. — continued. 

[Abn.  pedeg8abis8n,  ceinture.  Yirg. 
puttaiqwapisson,  ‘a  cap  or  hat’,  Stra- 
chey.] 

pwogkeii,  v.  i.  he  dips  or  immerses  him¬ 
self,  2  K.  5,  14.  See  puogkinnum. 
pwogkusheau  en  nippekontu,  ‘it  fell 
into  the  water’,  2  K.  6,  5. 
pwohkehchuau,  v.  i.  he  sinks,  disas¬ 
trously  or  by  mischance:  nup-pwohk- 
ehchuauam,  I  sink  (in  the  mire),  Ps. 
69,  2.  S eepogkmsu. 
pwohkubbowau,  v.  i.  she  hatches  eggs, 
Is.  34,  15:  mcitta  pwohkoyeog  (from 
pvjogkeu ? ) ,  ‘does  not  hatch’,  Jer.  17, 11. 

[Abn.  p8k8h8,  oeuf  eclos.] 


Q 


quadhog,  quadhuk,  suppos.  3d  sing,  of 
quttuhham,  he  measures, 
quagwashwetam.  See  quaquoshwetam. 
quab,  interj.  ‘of  disdaining’,  El.  Gr.  22 
(chah,  fie  upon  it!  C.). 
quahtinnittimuk  (suppos.  pass.  part,  of 
qwihtehteau) ,  forbidden;  for  ‘common’, 
Acts  10,  14,  15.  See  queihtinnuh. 
*quanaDwask,  a  bottle,  C.  See  quon- 
coasq. 

quanukquesit,  suppos.  3d  pers.  of  qun- 
nukquesu,  he  is  lame, 
quanunkquaean,  suppos.  2d  pers.  sing, 
of  qunnuhkquayeu,  he  dwells  high,  in  a 
high  place,  Obad.  3.  See  qunnuhqulayeu. 
quanunon,  n.  a  hawk,  Lev.  11, 16;  but  in 
the  same  connection,  in  Deut.  14,  15, 
owohshaog  stands  for  ‘hawk’.  See 
mashquanon.  Cf.  qunnonco,  ‘lion’  (pan¬ 
ther),  and  quohqanonou,  ‘greyhound’. 

From  qunni,  long,  and  - ,  tail  (?). 

Cf.  Del.  quen-schuckuney  (long-tail) 
‘panther’;  chau  wa  lan  ne,  ‘an  eagle 
with  a  forked  tail  ’ ,  Zeisb. 
quaquadbum,  v.  freq.  of  quttuhham,  lie 
measures. 

quaquequeshont,  n.  grasshopper,  Lev. 
11,  22;  Judg.  6,  5;  pi.  -{-.aog,  Ps.  105,  34; 
Is.  33,  4  (‘locusts’).  Suppos.  part,  of 
quequeshau,  he  goes  leaping.  Cf.  chan- 
somps;  mcopau. 


quaquoshwetam,  quagwash-,  freq.  of 
quoshauwehtam,  he  prepares, 
quashinum.  See  quoshinum. 
quashkeiik,  suppos.  of  qushkeu,  he  goes 
back. 

*quattuhquohqua,  afternoon,  C.  From 
quttaueu,  he  (i.  e.  the  sun)  sinks,  goes 
downward. 

[Narr.  quttukquaquaw,  ‘after  dinner’, 
R.  W.  67.] 

*quausses  (Peq. ),  ‘  a  virgin  girl  ’ ,  Stiles. 

S eepenomp;  *squdsese  (under  squa). 
quehshau.  See  queshau. 
quehtam,  v.  t.  he  fears  (it),  stands  in 
fear  of  (it) ;  suppos.  noli  quolitag,  he  who 
fears,  Ezek.  9,  2;  Heb.  11,  27.  Cf. 
quttlanumau,  he  honors,  shows  respect 
to  (him).  See  qushau;  wabesenat. 

[Del.  qui  ta  men,  to  fear  something, 
Zeisb.  ] 

quehteau.  See  ahquehteau. 
quehtianumau,  he  honors.  See  quttid- 
numau. 

queihtinnuh,  quiht-,  quht-,  v.  t.  an. 

he  forbids  (him),  he  threatens  (him): 
uk-quihtin-nuh,  he  forbade  him,  John 
3,  14;  imperat.  2d  sing,  queihtus,  forbid 
thou;  2d  pi.  quihtinnook,  forbid  ye; 
suppos.  part,  quohtinont,  forbidding, 
Acts  16,  6;  ‘when  he  had  appeased 
(them)’  [i.  e.  caused  them  to  desist  (?)], 


138 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


queihthinnuh,  etc-. — continued. 

Acts  19,  35  ( God  quehtehchaj,  God  for¬ 
bid,  C. ).  V.  t.  inan.  and  an.  queili- 
tehteav,  qut-,  he  forbids  (it)  to  (him): 
v'oh  howan  qutehteau  nippe,  can  any  man 
forbid  water?  Acts  10,  47  ( nuk-queehftt - 
learn,  I  forbid,  C.). 
queisbontam.  See  queshadtam. 
queksco,  v.  i.  he  hisses.  See  quequssu. 
quenappu,  v.  t.  he  sits  or  rests  upon  (it); 
suppos.  noh  quenapit,  he  who  sits  upon 
(it),  Is.  40,  22  ( quenobpuuncke  [ =  quen - 
appuonk,  vbl.  n.],  a  stool,  Wood), 
quenau,  -nae,  adv.  as  soon  as,  Mark  5, 
36;  Josh.  8,  19;  Deut.  8,  9;  ‘scarcely’, 
Gen.  27,  30.  Cf.  *quenauet. 
*quenauet,  v.  impers.  it  is  wanting, 
Exp.  May  hew;  nconat  or  quenauat,  ‘to 
be  wanting  or  defective’;  adv.  quenau- 
adte,  ‘necessarily’,  C. 

[Abn.  6ska8ana,  j’ai  besoin  de.] 
quenauhikco,  v.  i.  he  wants,  is  in  need; 
or  impers.  it  is  wanting  to  him:  pamk 
kuk-quenauh ik,  ‘  one  thing  thou  lackest  ’ , 
Mark  10,  21;  1st  pers.  nuk-quenauhik,  I 
am  in  want  of,  it  is  wanting  to  me;  1st 
pi.  nuk-quenauhik-umun,  Jer.  44,  18;  3d 
pi.  quenauhik-quog.  Suppos.  3d  pers. 
sing,  quenahuk.  Vbl.  n.  quenauhikco- 
onk,  qicenauwehikooonk,  lack,  want  (of 
anything)  Job  4,  11;  38,  41.  V.  an.  i. 
quenauwussu,  he  is  wanting,  is  lacking 
(as,  to  make  up  a  prescribed  number 
of  men,  Sum.  31,  49).  Caus.  quenau- 
weehuau,  he  causes  (it)  to  be  wanting, 
Judg.  21,  3.  Augm.  quequenauanum, 
he  is  in  great  want,  need,  or  privation, 
1  Sam.  13,  6  (‘in  a  strait’).  Vbl.  n. 
-mooonk,  difficulty,  want,  ‘distress’, 
Neh.  2,  17. 

[Narr.  matta  nick-quehick,  I  -want  it 
not;  tawhitch  quenawdyean,  why  com¬ 
plain  you?;  quenowduog,  they  complain, 
R.  W.  53,  66.] 

quenikkompau,  v.  t.  he  stands  upon 
(it),  Amos  7,  7.  Cf.  quesikkompau. 
quenohtau,  v.  t.  he  lays  a  foundation 
for,  he  founds  (it),  places  (it)  upon: 
quenohtau-un,  he  founded  it  (and  pass, 
it  is  founded  or  rests  on),  Luke  6,  48; 
pret.  -unap,  ibid.  Suppos.  quenohtunk, 
when  he  places  or  supports  (it);  quenoh- 
tunhwunnutch  hassummtonganit,  ‘if  he 
leaned  his  hand  on  the  wall’,  Amos  5, 


quenohtau — continued. 

19.  With  inan.  subj.  quenohleau,  it 
stands  or  is  founded  on,  2  Chr.  4,  4; 
suppos.  ne  quenohtag,  that  which  it 
stands  on.  As  n.  a  foundation,  Judg. 
16,  29;  2  Sam.  22,  8  ( =  agwu  ohtag,  that 
which  is  under,  Ps.  18,  7). 
quenoowaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  denies  (him), 
makes  denial  to  (him),  Mark  14,  68, 
70  ( queenanvo-nat ,  to  deny;  nuk-quendo- 
wam,  I  deny,  C. ).  Elsewhere  kohkdn- 
ooau,  as  in  Luke  22,  57;  Titus  1, 16;  koh- 
kfmnoowau  God,  he  denies  God,  Ind. 
Laws  ii.  [From  ahque  and  nanvau,  he 
refrains  from  speaking  (?).] 

[Chip,  ahgwahnwatum,  he  denied  (it), 
John  18,  25.  Cree  dgooanwetum,  he  de¬ 
nies  it  (which  Ilowse  analyzes  ‘he 
st rong-back-hears  it ’ ).] 
quensin,  v.  i.  he  supports  himself,  leans; 
pi.  -mvog,  Is.  48,  2. 

quentamoo,  v.  i.  ( inan.  pass. )  it  is  wanted, 
is  missed;  mo-teag  quentumeo,  nothing 
was  missed,  1  Sam.  25,  21;  cf.  v.  15. 
quequan,  v.  impers.  it  shakes,  it  trem¬ 
bles,  Ps.  18,  7;  as  noun,  an  earthquake, 
Is.  29,  6;  pi.  +as/i,  Matt.  24,  7. 

[Abn.  kSigSan,  tremble-terre.  Cree 
kwlkivun,  it  (the  earth)  trembles.] 
*quequecum  (Narr.),  n.  a  duck;  pi. 
+  rnduog,  R.  W.;  quequeekum,  Stiles. 
Peq.  quauquaumps,  ‘black  ducks’;  qua- 
queekum,  ‘ducks’,  Stiles.  Onomatopo- 
etic,  but  the  form  is  that  of  a  verb,  ‘he 
quack-quacks’.  Cf.  Cree  ’hah-ha-way, 
the  old-wife  or  long-tailed  duck  (Anas 
glacialis),  and  Peq.  ungowd-uim  (Stiles), 
for  the  same  species.  See  *sesep. 

[Abn.  k8ik8imes8,  canard.  Del.  qui- 
quvrigus,  the  gray  duck,  Hkw.;  ‘large 
ducks’,  Zeisb.  S.  B.  28.] 
quequeshau,  v.  i.  he  goes  leaping.  Freq. 
of  queshau. 

*quequisquitch  (Peq.),  n.  a  robin,  Stiles, 
quequssu,  queksoo,  v.  an.  i.  he  quacks, 
he  hisses:  nag  quekscoog,  ‘they  hiss’, 
Lam.  2,  16.  V.  t.  an.  quequssumau, 
quekqsumau,  he  hisses  at  (him)  or  for 
(him),  Is.  7,  18;  Jer.  49,  17. 

[Abn.  k8ik8ssem,  il  sitfie;  ne-k8ik8s- 
sSman,  je  siffle  contre.] 
quesekompoonk,  n.  a  ‘scaffold’,  2  Chr. 
6,  13.  See  quesikkompau. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


139 


queshadtam,  queishontam,  v.  t.  inan. 
he  leaps  over  (it);  nuk-queshadtam,  I 
leap  over,  2  Sam.  22,  30;  Ps.  18,  29. 
queshau,  quehshau,  v.  i.  he  leaps, 
jumps,  Luke  1,  41;  John  21,  7 ;  Acts  3,  8 
(chdnsopsqucoshau,  a  grasshopper  jumps; 
nukqueeshshom,  I  leaped,  C. ).  Freq. 
quequeshau,  he  goes  leaping,  Cant.  2,  8; 
Acts  14,  10;  ‘skips’,  Ps.  114,  6.  Re¬ 
lated  to  quogqueu,  he  runs,  the  substi¬ 
tuted  esh  denoting  sudden  or  violent 
motion.  See  quaquequeshont. 

[Abn.  ne-kesi rra,  ou  ne-kes&ssi,  ‘ je 
cours,  je  vas  vite.’  Cree  kwossetow,  he 
jerks  it;  kwdskiudskoo-puthu,  it  moves 
by  leaps  or  jumps.] 

quesikkompau,  quesuk-,  v.  t.he  stands 
upon  (it),  Amos  9,1;  kuk-quesikkompau 
qussuk,  thou  standest  ujxm  the  rock, 
Ex.  33,  21.  Cf.  quenikkompau. 
quhtinnuh,  quiht-.  See  queihtinnuh. 
quinahsinnunk:  ( nashpe )  quinahsinnunk, 
‘(with)  a  pestle’,  Prov.  27,  22.  From 
qurini,  quinne,  and  hassun,  assin,  ‘long 
stone’. 

-quinne  and  (suppos.)  -quinogok,  after 
a  numeral  or  an  indefinite  quantitative 
(‘few’,  ‘many’,  etc.),  is  used  for  kesu- 
kodtash,  days,  or  (suppos.)  kesukok ,  on 
the  day;  or,  more  exactly,  for  nukoncish 
(nights),  suppos.  nohkog.  It  is  formed 
from  koueu,  he  sleeps.  “Their  age 
they  reckon  by  moons,  and  their  actions 
by  sleeps,  as,  if  they  go  a  journie,  or 
are  to  do  any  other  business,  they  say 
three  sleeps  me  walk,  or,  two  or  three 
sleeps  me  do  such  a  thing,  that  is,  two 
or  three  days.” — Josselyn’s  Voy.  pa- 
suk  kemk  .  .  .  asuh  piogkukquinne,  one 
day  ...  or  ten  days,  Num.  11,  19; 
nequtta  tahshikquinne,  for  six  days,  Ex. 
24,  16;  suppos.  nishik-quinogok,  on  the 
third  day,  Hos.  6,  2. 

[Narr.  nees-qunnagat,  ‘two  days’; 
shvck-qunockat,  ‘three  days’,  R.  W.  69. 
Abn.  kaie'kSrdSi  or  nek8t8gheni8i,  une 
nuit;  nis8gni8i,  deux  nuits,  etc.  Del. 
guto-kenak,  one  day,  Hkw.;  nguttokuni, 
one  night,  nischogunak,  two  nights,  etc., 
Zeisb.] 

quinnuppe,  (it  is)  round  about,  all 
around;  it  turns.  As  adv.  and  prep., 
quinuuppe  koueog  weekit,  ‘they  lodged 


quinnuppe — continued. 

round  about  the  house’,  1  Chr.  9,  27. 
With  an.  subj.  quinnuppu:  au  quin- 
nuppu,  he  went  about  (Galilee),  Matt. 
4, 23.  It  is,  in  fact,  an  intransitive  verb: 
quinnuppu,  he  turns,  changes  his  course; 
with  inan.  subj.  -peu;  suppos.  noh 
quinnupit,  he  who  turns  or  is  turned, 
Lev.  20,  6;  imperat.  2d  pi.  quihnuppegk, 
turn  ye,  2  K.  17,  13.  Ybl.  n.  quin- 
nuppeonk,  a  turning,  conversion  (as  in 
Acts  15,  3).  V.  t.  inan.  quinnuppenum, 
he  turns  (it)  about,  1  K.  8,  14;  suppos. 
noh  quanuppinuk,  Prov.  28,  9.  Y.  i. 
refl.  quinnuppehtau,  he  turns  himself 
about,  Mark  5,  30.  Y.  t.  an.  quinnup- 
punau,  he  turns  (him)  about,  ‘converts’ 
him;  suppos.  part.  quanuppinont,  when 
turning,  ‘converting’,  Ps.  19,  7;  James 
5,  19.  Y.  i.  inan.  subj.  quinnv.psheau, 
it  (e.  g.  a  path,  a  trail,  a  boundary) 
turns  about,  Josh.  19,  12.  V.  t.  inan. 
subj.  qidnnuppohtean,  it  encompasses, 
surrounds,  turns  itself  about, 
quinnuppekompau  [  =  quinnuppu- 
onnpau]  v.  i.  he  stands  turned  about,  is 
(and  remains)  converted;  pi.  -dog,  they 
are  converted,  Is.  60, 5.  N.  agent .-pau- 
aen(in),  one  who  is  converted,  aconvert, 
Luke  22,  32.  ‘ Sampvntteahde  Quinnup- 

pekompauaenin’  is  the  title  given  by 
Eliot  to  his  translation  of  Shepard’s 
‘Sincere  Convert’. 

quinnuppohke,  as  adv.  ‘everywhere’, 
Acts  17,  30.  For  quinnuppe-ohke,  round 
about  the  country. 

quinnupsh.au,  -pwushau,  v.  t.  he  goes 
round  about  (it);  pi.  -shaog,  Ps.  59,  6; 
imperat.  pi.  -pwshak,  go  ye  round  about 
(it),  Ps.  48,  12:  ne  quanupishunk,  (the 
river)  which  encompasses  (it),  Gen.  2, 
11,  13. 

-quinogok.  See  -quinne. 
qukqunuksheau.  See  qunnukquesu. 
*qunnamaug  (Narr.),  a  ‘lamprey’;  pi. 
-\-suck.  “The  first  [fish]  that  come  in 
the  spring  into  the  fresh  rivers”,  R.W. 
102.  {=qunni-anuivg,  long  fish. )  Cot¬ 
ton  gives  ‘ qunnamrnag,  bass’  [?].  See 
*mismckeke. 

*qunnannonk,  n.  a  blanket,  C. 
qunnassin.  See  quinahsinnunk,  a  pestle, 
i.  e.  ‘long  stone’. 


140 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


qunnegk,  n.  a  hind,  a  female  deer,  Gen. 
49,  21;  pi.  -gquaog,  Job  39.  1;  Cant.  3,  5. 
See  dhtuk. 

[Narr.  aundn,  quuritke,  a  doe;  rpinne- 
qudwese,  a  little  young  doe,  R.  W.  96.] 
qunni,  v.  i.  it  is  long;  as  adj.  long,  El. 
Gr.  15;  Mark  16,  5:  qunni  onk,  longer 
than,  Job  11,9  ( anequnnng  [ =cmue  gun- 
nag],  ‘longest’,  C.).  With  an.  subj. 
qurmessu. 

[Abn.  kSne,  kSnizS,  k8nag8at,  il  est 
long.  C'ree  kin  wow,  it  is  long;  an.  kin- 
icoom,  he  is  long,  i.  e.  tall.  Del.  guneu, 
Zeisb.  Illin.  kincoacatcoi,  bois  long, 
arbre  haut;  kinoMccoanaki,  habit  long; 
kmaoaan,  kincoaki,  long,  Gravier.] 
qunnonro,  n.  a  ‘lion’,  Is.  5,  29;  pi.  —  og. 
Cant.  4,  8;  a  panther  (?).  Cf.  quoh- 
quntmou,  ‘  greyhound  ’ ;  quanunon, 
‘hawk’.  The  name  signifies  ‘long¬ 
tailed’.  Cf.  *konooh. 

[Chip,  ginwdnowe,  it  has  a  long  tail, 
Bar.] 

qunnuliqutayeu,  v.  i.  he  dwells  on  high, 
Is.  33,  5. 

qunnukque,  adj.  high.  See  qunnuhkque. 
qunnukquesu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  lame, 
2  Sam.  19,  26;  suppos.  noh  quanvkquetit 
(and  rpmnukrpieMt),  he  who  is  lame, 
Lev.  21, 18;  pi.  -itcheg,  the  lame,  2  Sam. 
5,  8.  qukqufiukqsheau,  he  halts,  limps; 
part,  noh  quaquenukqshont,  he  who  halt- 
eth,  Zeph.  3,  19;  Micah  4,  6,  7. 

[Narr.  nick-qw&aqus,  I  am  lame.  Del. 
gulucquot,  lame,  Zeisb.  Gr.] 
qunnuilkque,  qunnuhque,  it  is  high; 
as  adv.  on  high,  Job  39,  18;  suppos. 
qunuhquodt,  when  high,  ‘of  an  high 
stature’,  Ezek.  31,  3.  qunnunkqusmi- 
mau,  he  is  tall,  1  Sam.  9.  2. 

[Narr.  qunnauqwsm,  a  tall  man,  R.  W. 
Del.  g unaquot,  it  is  long,  high;  gunaxu, 
he  is  long,  tall  of  stature,  Zeisb.] 
qunnunkquekom.uk  \_qunnunkque- 
komuk ],  n.  a  high  inclosed  place,  a 
‘tower’,  Gen.  11,  4,  5. 
qunnunktug  [ gunnunkque-h’tug ,  high 
wood],  n.  a  pole,  a  post;  pi.  —quoth, 
Ex.  38,  5,  7  (qus/nnohlakr,  a  mast,  C. ). 
See  qunuhtug. 

qunonuhquaog  (?  ,  n.  pi.  ‘fir  trees’,  Is. 
14,  8. 

qunonuhquoau.  v.  i.  he  has  long  hair; 
neg.  pi.  motto  pith  qunCnuhquocoog,  they 


qunonuhquoau — continued, 
shall  not  have  long  hair,  Ezek.  44,  20; 
suppos.  part.  quAnonuhqudani,  having 
long  hair,  Ps.  68,  21  ( =  qunuhquoant  (?), 
1  Cor.  11,  14,  15).  Vbl.  n.  qunonuk- 
quoonk,  a  long  ‘lock  of  hair’,  Num.  6,  5. 
*qunosu  Narr.),  pi.  —  og,  pickerel:  “A 
fresh  fish  which  the  Indians  break  the 
ice  in  fresh  ponds”  to  take,  R.  W.  105. 
From  qunni  and -utchan,  ‘long  nose’. 

[Peq.  quunnoote,  ‘pickerel  or  long- 
nose’,  Stiles.  Abn.  k8n8si ?,  broehet. 
Old  Alg.  kinonge  (Lah.),  whence  comes 
matkinonge  or  mutkelunjeh,  the  great 
kinonge  of  the  St  Lawrence  and  north¬ 
ern  lakes.  Chip.  (St  Marvs)  ke  no ' 
zhoi,  (Gr.  Trav. )  ke  no  zha,  (Sag. )  kee  no 
zenck .] 

qunuhtug,  -ontug,  n.  a  spear,  1  Sam. 
17,  45;  Josh.  8,  18,  26  I konnuhxhloh- 
wheg,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  35,  3);  pi.  -  quoth, 
1  Sam.  13,  19.  From  qunni  and  h’tug, 
long  wood.  “  Qunuhtug,  of  qunni,  long, 
mehtug,  wood,  or  tree;  and  this  word  is 
used  for  a  pike.” — El.  Gr.  15. 
qunusseps.  See  *tesejj,  a  duck, 
quoashau.  See  quoushau. 
quogkinnum,  v.  t.  he  dips  (it)  in  or  into, 

Lev.  9,  9;  - nog  hogkuooonk  mmpj.e- 

heongamt,  they  dipped  the  coat  in  the 
blood,  Gen.  37, 31 .  ( quogki nnome ,  ‘  dip¬ 
ping,  dipped  ’?  C.) 

quogquadtinohkonaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  wres¬ 
tles  with  (him) :  nuk-quogquadtindhkon, 
I  wrestle  with  (him),  Gen.  30,  8; 
mutual,  quogquadtinniUuog,  they  wrestle 
(one  with  the  other).  Vbl.  n.  quog- 
quadtirmittucmk,  wrestling,  Gen.  30,  8. 
quogqueii,  v.  i.  he  runs  (goes  by  run¬ 
ning),  Gen.  18,  2;  John  20,  2;  imperat. 
quogqueti,  let  me  run;  quogquith,  run 
thou,  1  Sam.  18,  23;  suppos.  noh  quag- 
quit,  he  who  runs,  1  Sam.  20,  36.  Adv. 
and  adj.  quogqueice,  running,  by  run¬ 
ning,  Mark  10,  17.  See  quethou. 

[Narr.  quoquit,  run  thou;  I  a  which 
quaunquaquean  (intens.),  why  do  you 
ran  so?  R.  W.  Old  Alg.  kegatch, 
‘quickly’  (=rpwgquish ?) ,  Lah.] 
quogquohteau,  v.  i.  he  threatens;  sup¬ 
pos.  rpjbogfpj/jhtdadt,  when  he  threatened, 
threatening,  Acts  9,  1;  ‘if  he  make 
threatening  speeches’,  Ind.  Laws,  v, 
p.  6.  Vbl.  n.  rptogquohtoaonk,  threat- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


141 


quogquohteau — continued, 
ening,  threats,  Acts  4,  29.  Cf.  queihtin- 
nuh. 

quohqunonou  (?),  for  ‘greyhound’, 
Prov.  30,  31.  See  quanunon;  qunnonco. 
quohquohquoanetau  (?),  n.  an  ass;  pi. 
-\-og,  Gen.  12,  16.  Elsewhere  the  Eng¬ 
lish  word  is  transferred  without  trans¬ 
lation. 

quohtinont,  forbidding  (him);  part,  of 
queihtinnuh  (q.  v. ). 

quornpham,  v.  t.  he  dips  (it)  up;  infin. 
quomphamun-at  nippe,  to  dip  up  water, 
Is.  30,  14.  In  Gen.  25,  30,  the  imperat. 
2d  sing,  quompal&sh  is  used,  from  a  form 
quomphatam,  he  dips  (it)? 

[Narr.  quamphash,  quamphomiinnea, 
(take  thou  up;  and)  ‘take  up  for  me 
out  of  the  pot’,  It.  W.  36.  Cree  kwoppa- 
hum,  he  scoops  or  lades  it  out,  Howse.] 
quofnphippau  [ quompham  nippe],  v.  i. 
he  dips  up  water;  pi.  -aog,  ‘they  drew 
water’,  1  Chr.  11,  18.  Cf.  vmttuhppau, 
he  draws  water. 

qu.ofhph.unk,  (inan.  part,  of  quompham, 
that  which  dips  or  takes  by  dipping),  a 
net.  Adj.  quoihpliongane  anahausuonk, 
network,  1  K.  1,11,  41. 

[Chip,  kwaubahwa,  he  fishes  with 
scoop  net,  Sch.;  ahhwabinahgun,  a  seine; 
kua  bv  a  gvn,  a  scoop  net,  S.  B.  2,  18;  a 
gua  bina  gvn,  ibid.  2,  19;  a  gwa  bi  na 
gan,  Bar.] 

quonooasq,  n.  a  gourd,  Jonah  4,  6,  10 
( qudncowask ,  ‘a  bottle’,  C. ;  i.  e.  made 
from  a  gourd?).  From  qunni,  long, 
and  n.  gen.  a.sg  (pi.  asquash),  that  which 
may  be  eaten  raw.  Cf.  askcotasq;  mon- 
askootasq. 

quoshae,  -oe,  -aue,  it  is  beforehand,  in 
anticipation  of;  it  goes  before,  in  time; 
as  adv.  quoshoe  naum,  he  foreseeth, 
Prov.  27,  12:  quoshae  missohhamwog, 
they  prophesy,  Num.  11,  27;  quosh6au 
ncowau,  he  promises,  Heb.  12,  26. 
quoshappu,  v.  i.  he  is  (remains)  ready; 

imperat.  2d  pi.  quoshappegk,  Luke  12, 40. 
quoshauweheau,  v.  t.  caus.  he  makes 
(him)  ready,  prepares  (him);  more 
common  in  the  freq.  form,  quaquash- 
weheau  and  quagquash-,  as  in  Jonah  4,  7. 
With  inan.  obj.  quoshauwehtam,  he 
makes  (it)  ready,  prepares  (it),  and 
freq.  quaquoshwehtam,  quagquoshwehtam,  I 


quoshauweheau — continued. 

Jonah  4,  6;  Prov.  30,  25.  See  quoshwe- 
onk. 

quoshinum,  quash-,  v.  t.  he  takes  (it) 
beforehand,  has  (it)  in  readiness: 
quashinumwog  uk-kounkquodioh,  ‘they 
make  ready  their  arrow’,  Ps.  11,  2. 
quoshkinnum,  he  turns  over  (see  title- 
page  of  Indian  Bible);  ‘translated’, 
quoshoau,  v.  i.  he  promises;  infin.  quo- 
shoonat,  to  ‘vow’  (to  say  beforehand), 
Eccl.  5,  5. 

[Abn.  ne-ketteSe,  je  promets,  je  lui  dis 
par  avance.] 

quoshodtum,  v.  i.  he  says  beforehand, 
predicts,  prophesies;  imperat.  quoshod- 
tush,  -odtsh,  prophesy  thou,  Ezek.  30,  2; 
34,  2.  Vbl.  n.  quoshodtuonk,  a  prom¬ 
ising,  i.  e.  the  subject  of  a  promise,  the 
thing  promised;  pi.  -ongash,  ‘the  prom¬ 
ises’,  Heb.  6,  12.  X.  agent,  quoshod- 
tumwaen-in,  one  who  predicts  some¬ 
thing,  a  prophet,  Deut.  13, 1 ;  Matt.  13, 
57.  Cf.  kosukquom,  ‘a  witch’. 

[Cf.  Abn.  k8ssigahn,  divination, 
‘fausses  observations  de  futuro’,  etc.; 
see  Rasies  under  jongleur,  jonglerie.] 
quoshoe.  See  quoshae. 
quoshohteau,  v.  i.  inan.  subj.  it  is  made 
ready,  prepared,  or  provided,  Matt. 
22,  8:  wame  quoshahtaush,  ‘all  things 
are  ready’,  ibid.  v.  4. 
quoshoir.au,  v.  t.  an.  he  says  beforehand 
to  (him),  promises  (it)  to  (him):  kuk- 
quoshom,  thou  promisest  or  hast  prom¬ 
ised  (him),  2  Sam.  7,  28;  1  Chr.  17, 
26;  suppos.  part,  quoshomont,  vowing, 
promising,  Mai.  1,  14;  Heb.  6,  13;  noli 
quoshomont,  one  who  is  pledged,  ‘be¬ 
trothed’,  Lev.  19,  20;. Deut.  20,  7.  Vbl. 
n.  quoslidmaonk  (-muwaonk),  a  promis¬ 
ing,  saying  beforehand,  Acts  1,  14; 
2  Pet.  3,  9;  pass.  part.  inan.  ne  quo- 
shomuk,  that  which  is  promised,  being 
promised. 

quoshquechin.  See  quosquechin. 
quoshquodchu,  v.  i.  he  feels  cold,  suffers 
from  cold  [shakes  with  cold?]  ( quos - 
quatchoo,  C. ) ;  infin.  -chinat,  as  noun,  2 
Cor.  11,  27. 

[Narr.  nuck-qusqaatch,  lam  cold, R.  W. 
Chip,  nin  gikadj,  I  am  cold,  Bar.] 
quoshqussausu  (?),  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  cir¬ 
cumcised,  Gen.  17,  10,  26.  Y.  t.  an. 


142 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


quoshqussausu — continued. 

quos  (h)  qusxvau,  he  circumcises  (him), 
Ex.  4,  25.  V.  t.  inan.  quoshkussum 
weyaus,  he  circumcised  the  flesh,  Gen. 
17,  23;  suppos.  ne  quoshkussuk,  that 
which  is  circumcised,  Gen.  17,  24.  Ybl. 
n.  quoshqusausuonk,  circumcision,  Ex.  4, 
26;  John  7,  22. 

quoshweonk,  an  ‘alarm’,  Num.  10,  5,  6 
(vbl.  n.  from  quoshauwelieau,  he  makes 
or  causes  him  to  be  prepared);  a  ‘note 
of  preparation’;  or  perhaps  directly 
from  qushehheau  (caus.  of  qushail,  he 
fears),  he  makes  afraid,  alarms, 
quosquechin,  quosh-,  v.  i.  it  ‘hangs 
over’  (extends  beyond?),  Ex.  26, 12, 13. 
quoushau  (?),  quoasbau,  v.  i.  it  spills, 
is  spilled,  Mark  2,  22;  Luke  5,  37; 
inan.  subj.  quouhteau  (?),  it  is  spilt; 
suppos.  ne  quouhteamuk,  that  which  is 
spilt,  2  Sam.  14,  14 ;  ukquouhkonuh, 
‘he  spilled  (it)’,  Gen.  38,  9. 
qushaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  fears  (him),  is  afraid 
of  (him),  Prow  14,  2;  with  affixes, 
uk-qmh-uh,  he  fears  him,  2  Sam.  3,  11; 
imperat.  2d  sing,  qush;  2d  pi.  qusheuk 
or  -a>k.  Ybl.  n.  qushaonk,  fearing,  fear, 
Prow  14,  27;  20,  2;  ‘reverence’,  C. 

[Narr.  nuck-qusha  [ nuk-qush-uh ],  I 
fear  him.  Cree  goost&chu,  he  is  afraid; 
goostayoo,  he  fears  him;  goos-tum,  he 
fears  it.] 

qushkeu,  v.  i.  he  goes  back,  returns,  2 
K.  15,  12;  Josh.  10,  15;  suppos.  quash- 
ke'ik,  Jer.  40,  5:  nuk-qnshkem,  I  go  back, 
turn  back,  Neh.  2,  15  ( nuk-quishkeem , 
C.).  Vbl.  n.  qushkeonk,  turning  back, 
James  1,  17.  Adj.  and  adv.  qushkee, 
backward,  in  return,  Is.  1,  4. 

[Cree  kew-nyoo,  he  "returns;  kuisk- 
issoo,  he  is  turned  over.] 
qushkodteau  (?),  v.  i.  he  passes  over 
[fords?],  goes  across  (ariver)  [on  foot?], 
Gen.  31,21;  Josh.  3, 17;  4,10:  xeip  ne  v:oh 
mo  qushkodtiomuk,  a  river  that  could 
not  be  passed  over,  Ezek.  47,  5;  qushod- 
teaog  Jordan,  they  passed  over  Jordan, 
2  Sam.  2,  29. 

qusseashkcD,  v.  t.  he  swallows  (it),  Job 
5,  5;  Ex.  7,  12  ( qushaequnneat ,  to 
swallow,  Job  7,  19).  V.  i.  qusseash- 
quinneau,  he  swallows,  Obad.  16.  Cf. 
mwhe&shkm. 

[Abn.  ne-kSssihada,  ou  -dS,  j’avale.] 


qussinausu,  v.  adj.  an.  she  is  menstru- 
ous;  as  adj.  and  adv.  -»ue,  Lev.  15,  19, 

25,  26;  suppos.  qnssinausit,  when  she 
is  menstruous,  Lev.  15,  25;  20, 18.  Ybl. 
n.  -ausuonk,  menstruation,  Lev.  12,  2. 

[Narr.  qushenaicsui,  ‘a  woman  keep¬ 
ing  alone  in  her  monthly  sickness’, 
R.  TV.  53.] 

qussuk,  n.  a  rock,  El.  Gr.  10;  Ps.  78,  20; 
pi.  -j -quanash ,  Ps.  78,  15:  wutchqusmk- 
quan-6htu,  from  (among)  the  rocks,  Jer. 
51,  25;  dimin.  pi.  qusmkquanes-ash,  1 
Sam.  17,  40.  Cf.  hassun;  ompsk. 

[Narr.  qussucqun,  heavy;  kuck-qussa- 
qun,  you  are  heavy;  quss&ck,  a  stone. 
Del.  ksuc-quon,  heavy,  Zeisb.] 
qussukquaneutunk,  n.  a  (stone)  wall, 
Prow  24,  31;  Gen.  49,  22  ( quissukquan - 
nutonk,  C. ). 

qussukquanush  (?),  n.  ‘the  kite’,  Lev. 

11,  14;  but  weenont,  kite,  Deut.  14,  13. 
qut,  ‘conj.  discretive’,  but  (El.  Gr.  22), 
yet,  and  yet,  except  that  (“qut  oncli 
sometimes  is  used  for  but,  because,  yet 
so,  but  also,  but  even,  nevertheless”, 
C. ) ;  qut  matta,  but  not,  unless  there  be, 
Job  6,  6.  See  kuttumma. 
qutclielilieu,  v.  t.  an.  caus.  he  makes 
trial  of  (him),  proves  (him),  tempts 
(him) ;  imperat.  qutcheh,  prove  thou 
(them);  qutcheheh,  prove  thou  me,  Ps. 

26,  '2;  prohib.  qutcheheuhkon,  do  not 
tempt,  Deut.  6,  16  ( quiche ,  try  thou; 
nuk-qutchuwam,  I  prove,  C. ).  Adj.  and 
adv.  qutchehwae,  -uhde,  of  temptation, 
tempting,  Ps.  95,  8.  N.  agent,  qutchu- 
abi-in,  one  who  tries,  a  tempter,  1  Thess. 
3,  5.  Ybl.  n.  qutchhuwaonk,  a  trying, 
trial,  temptation,  Luke  4,  13. 

qutchehtam,  qutch.tam,  v.  t.  he  tastes 
(it),  tries  by  tasting;  pret . n u k-qutch tam- 
up,  I  tasted  (it),  1  Sam.  14,  43;  suppos. 
quadjtog,  quajtog,  when  he  tasted  (it), 
John  2,  9;  Dan.  5,  2;  Matt.  27,  34.  (qut- 
chehtam-unat,  to  taste;  vbl.  n.  quteheh- 
tamooonk  [the  sense  of]  taste,  C. ). 

[Abn.  ne-kStadamen,  je  goute,  pour 
voir  s’il  est  bon.] 

qutchehteau,  v.  t.  he  makes  trial  of  (it), 
he  proves  (it)  by  trial;  imperat.  2d  pi. 
-teocdk,  prove  ye  (all  things),  1  Thess. 
5, 20.  Ybl.  n.  qutchehteoonk,  pi.  - ongash , 
trials,  attempts,  C. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


143 


quthum,  =  quttuhham,  he  measures  or 
weighs  (it). 

*quttauatu  (Narr. ),  sixpence  or  its  value 
in  bead  money;  otherwise quttatashadm- 
seat,  six-penny’s-worth,  R.  W.  128,  129. 
quttaueu,  kuttauweu,  v.  i.  he  sinks,  goes 
down  (in  mire,  Jer.  38,  6;  in  water, 
Luke  5,  7;  in  a  pit,  Ps.  9, 15) :  ahque  kut- 
taiveli,  let  me  not  sink,  Ps.  69,  14.  Of. 
-quttunk,  the  throat;  quttuhham,  he 
weighs;  quttidnumau,  he  shows  respect; 
m’kuituk  {mukkuttuk),  the  knee. 

[Abn.  ne-gheddhamen,  ‘  je  l’enfonce 
dans  l’eau,  et  va an  fond’;  ghedarra,  il 
enfonce  dans  l’eau.] 

*quttaunemun,  ‘to  plant  corn’,  R.  IT. 

91.  F or pauquttaunemun  (?). 
quttaushau,  quttuhshau,  v.  i.  he  sinks 
disastrously  or  by  mischance;  he  is 
drowned,  Amos  9,  5;  pi.  qutluhshauog 
onatuh  qussuk,  they  sank  to  the  bottom 
like  a  stone,  Ex.  15,  5,  —  quttauushccog, 
v.  10.  From  quttaueu,  with  sli  of  mis¬ 
chance.  With  inan.  subj.  quttansheau,  it 
sank,  1  Sam.  17,  49;  ‘ qutonkamaomco 
koomshcorri’ ,  it  sinks  thy  boat,  Samp. 
Quinnup.  156. 

quttiantam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  honors,  shows 
respect  to  (it). 

quttianum.au,  v.  t.  an.  he  honors,  shows 
respect  to  (him),  Dan.  11,  38:  nuk- 
quehtidnum  ketasscot,  I  honor  the  king, 
Dan.  4,  37;  imperat.  quttidnum  kaosh, 
honor  thy  father,  Ex.  20,  12;  suppos. 
part,  noli  quttianumont,  he  who  honors, 
shows  respect  to,  Prov.  14,  31.  Ybl. 
n.  quttianumoonk,  (showing)  respect, 
honoring;  pass,  qutlidnittuonk,  being 
honored,  respect  or  honor,  as  referred 
to  its  object.  Cf.  qu&htam,  he  fears, 
and  see  quttaueu,  he  sinks, 
quttompaghcoteg,  n.  a  balance,  a  weigh¬ 
ing  instrument,  Jer.  32,  10;  Deut.  25, 


*rame  (Quir.),  within,  in,  Pier.  48,  49, 
and  passim. 

*ramuk  (Quir. ) ,  as  postposition  and  prep¬ 
osition  for  under:  nippe  ramuk  okke, 
waters  under  the  earth,  Pier.  46.  Cf. 


quttompaghooteg — continued. 

13:  quttompaghcotau,  he  weighed  (it)  in 
a  balance,  2  Sam.  14,  26.  Ybl.  n.  qut- 
tompaghcotoonk,  weighing,  C.  See  omp- 
skot,  a  penny,  and  examples  there¬ 
under. 

*quttow,  n.  a  log  (?),  C. 
quttuhham,  quthum,  v.  t.  he  measures 
or  weighs  (it),  Ezek.  40,  28,  32;  Job 
28,  25;  suppos.  noh  quadhuk ,  he  who 
measures;  pass.  part.  inan.  quttuhumuk, 
quthumuk,  measured,  Jer.  31,  37;  an. 
quttuhhvi,  qutwhut,  (he  is)  measured, 
Dan.  5,  27;  frecj.  quaquthum;  suppos. 
quaquadhuk  {-hook,  Is.  40,  12);  t.  an. 
quttuhhamau-au,  he  measured  (it)  to  or 
for  (him),  Gen.  23,  16.  Adj.  and  adv. 
quttuhamcoe,  quthumde,  by  measure,  by 
weight.  Ybl.  n.  quttuhhammonk,  meas¬ 
ure,  weight.  Cf.  ogketamunat,  to  count, 
quttuhheg,  n.  (suppos.  inan.  or  instru- 
mentive  of  quttuhham)  that  which  meas¬ 
ures,  a  measuring  instrument,  Ex.  26, 
2;  Deut.  25,  14;  pl.-f-mJi,  1  Chr.  23,  29; 
quttuhhonk  (vbl.  n.  act.),  a  measuring, 
measure:  quttuhhongan-it,  by  measure, 
‘  in  a  measure  ’ ,  Is.  40,  12. 
quttuhshau.  See  quttaushau. 
quttuhwhosu,  adj.  and  adv.  measured, 
by  measure,  by  weight,  Ezek.  4,  10; 
1  K.  4,  22;  pl.-j-ffisA,  1  K.  5,  11;  18,  32. 
Properly,  v.  i.  an.  he  measures,  is  meas¬ 
uring  ( nuk-quttdluvhous ,  I  measure,  C. ). 
quttukqsheau,  v.  i.  inan.  subj.  it  turns, 
bends,  makes  an  angle  (of  a  boundary 
line,  Num.  34,  4).  Vbl.  n.  quttukshunk, 
‘the  turning’  or  bend  (of  a  wall,  Neh. 
3,  19,  25).  Cf.  mukkuttuk,  the  knee, 
-quttunk,  n.  throat;  uk-quttunk ,  his 
throat.  From  quttau-eu,  it  goesdown  (?). 
See  mukquttuk. 

[Narr.  quttuck.  Del.  gunla,  swallow 
it,  Zeisb.] 


*rout  (Quir.),  fire;  rowtag,  Pier.  67.  See 
ncotau. 

*rowat,  rouwat  (Quir.),  of  old  (?):  nali 
roivat,  of  old  (in  old  time),  Pier.  29; 
rouwat  eo  podpe,  long  ago  (?),  ibid. 
36. 


r  arne. 


144 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


s 


sabae.  See  saupae. 

sabaheg  (suppos.  inan.  of  saupahheau ), 
made  soft,  softened  (by  water?);  n. 
‘pottage’,  2  K.  4,  38;  sobaheg,  Gen.  25, 
29;  sebaheg,  Judg.  6,  19,  20;  adj.  sabah- 
hegane,  2  K.  4,  40;  neepataush  sabaheg, 
‘seethe  pottage’,  v.  38.  See  saup&e. 
sabasum,  v.  t.  he  melts  (it);  infin. 
-umunat,  Ezek.  22,  20;  suppos.  inan.  or 
part.  pass,  sabasumuk,  when  it  is  melted, 
Ezek.  22,  22.  Vbl.  n.  sabassumcoonk, 
a  melting,  a  furnace  for  melting;  and 
suppos.  instr.  sabasseg,  a  melting  instru¬ 
ment,  a  furnace,  Ezek.  22, 18,  20.  Adj. 
sabasumwe,  molten,  2  Chr.  34,  4;  v.  adj. 
an.  sabasosu,  sdbohsom,  he  melts  or  is 
melting,  Jer.  6,  29;  inan.  subj.  sabohteau, 
it  melts,  is  melted.  ( noh  sobpasit, 

when  he  melteth,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps. 
58,  8.) 

*sabuck,  n.  gunpowder,  C.  See  *sau- 
puck. 

♦sachim  (Narr. ),  pi.  -\-adog,  n.  ‘king’, 
R.  W.  120.  Ybl.  n.  sachim&iionck,  ‘a 
kingdom  or  monarchy  ’ ,  ibid.  See  lah- 
scotam. 

[Peq.  sunjum,  king,  Stiles.  Micm. 
shahmcin.  Abn.  sahgmah,  capitaine; 
ne-sahgmahi,  je  suis  capitaine.  Del.  sag- 
kimau,  he  is  a  chief,  Hkw.  Mass,  sach- 
im,  sagamore,  a  king,  Wood.  The  com¬ 
parison  of  these  forms  shows  the  iden¬ 
tity  of  the  names  ‘  sachem  ’  and  ‘  saga¬ 
more’,  the  latter  representing  the  3d 
sing,  indie,  of  the  verb  sohkqhuau,  or 
sohkauau  (as  Eliot  wrote  it),  ‘he  pre¬ 
vails  over’,  ‘has  the  mastery’.  Cf. 
sontim.] 

‘sachimmaacommock  [for  sachimmoe- 
hm.uk']  (Narr.),  ‘a  prince’s  house’, 
R.  W.  120. 

*sachimoa-chepewessin  (Narr.),  n.  a 
strong  northeast  wind,  R.  W.  83. 
sagket,  saket,  saketog,  suppos.  of 
sohkeii,  soohkeu,  or  suhkou,  he  pours  out, 
ejects:  noh  sagket,  he  who  urinates,  1 
K.  16,  11;  ( sdgkelog )  1  Sam.  25,  34;  2 
K.  9,  8. 

[Abn.  ne-seghi,  mingo;  seg8di,  urina.] 
sagkompanau,  -pagun.au,  v.  t.  an.  he 
leads  (them),  directs  (them),  Is.  40,  11 
( nus-sogkompaginnuwam ,  I  lead,  I  rule, 


sagkompanau,  etc. — continued. 

C.);  pi.  -anaog,  Matt.  15,  14;  suppos. 
part,  -pagunont,  when  he  leads,  lead¬ 
ing,  ibid.;  sagkompagunuh,  he  led  (i.  e. 
continued  to  lead)  them,  Ex.  13,  17, 18; 
ahque  sagkompaginnean,  Luke  11,  4, 
=  ahque  sagkompagunaiinnean,  ‘lead  us 
not’,  do-not  lead-thou-us,  Matt.  6,  13. 
N.  agent,  sagkompaginnuen,  one  who 
leads,  a  leader, 
saket,  saketog.  See  sagket. 

*sammee,  oil  (?),  C.  See  pummee. 
samogkinumuk,  suppos.  pass,  (inan.) of 
summagunum,  that  which  is  stretched 
outor  held  forth,  as  a  staff,  the  hand,  etc. 
*samp.  See  saupae. 
sampco,  v.  i.  he  is  a  guide,  he  directs 
right;  t.  an.  sampmau,  he  is  a  guide  to 
(him);  nus-sampmvmn,  I  am  a  guide  to 
(them),  Rom.  2,  19. 

sampeoau,  v.  t.  an.  he  confesses  to  (him) : 
nus-sampeoam,  I  confess  (my  sins)  to 
(him),  Ps.  32,  5;  inan.  sampooantam,  he 
confesses  (it);  pi.  -tamwog,  Neh.  9,  2; 
v.  i.  sampwe-antam,  he  is  frank-minded 
(cf.  Abn.  sanhiSi,  ‘franchement,  sans 
feinte  ’ ,  under  sampwi) .  (Primarily,  he 
is  honest  or  frank  toward. ) 
sampshanau.  See  sampwushanau. 
sampwe.  See  sampwi. 
sampwenehlieau,  v.  caus.  an.  he  causes 
(him)  to  be  just,  makes  (him)  just  or 
upright,  ‘justifies’.  Suppos.  part,  noh 
sampwenehheont,  he  who  justifies,  a 
justifier,  Rom.  3,  26.  Pass,  sampwe- 
nihit,  he  is  justified,  Rom.  3, 24.  Ybl.  n. 
sample ei leh heaon k,  justifying,  justifica¬ 
tion  (act.);  -ehhitluonk,  being  justified, 
justification  (pass.). 

sampweogquanumau,  v.  t.  an.  he  ac¬ 
counts  (him)  just  or  right,  reckons 
( him )  as  j ust.  Suppos.  part,  sampweog- 
quanumont,  one  justifying  (himself), 
Job  32,  2.  From  sampwe  and  ogquanu- 
mau. 

sampweiissealiheau,  v.  caus.  an.  he 
causes  (him)  to  do  justly,  makes  (him) 
righteous  or  upright;  pass,  he  is  made 
righteous;  pi.  -heoog,  they  are  made 
righteous,  Rom.  5,  19. 
sampwi,  -we,  v.  i.  it  is  (1)  straight; 
(2)  right,  just,  upright,  en  samp- 


TRUMBULL] 


N ATIC K— EN CtLISH  DICTIONARY 


145 


sampwi,  -we — continued. 
we  may-ut,  in  a  straight  way,  Jer.  31,  9; 
in  the  right  way,  Ps.  107,  7;  suppos. 
(rarely  used)  sampoi,  if  it  be  right, 
I’rov.  20, 11  [?]*.  Sup.pos.  inan.  tie  samp- 
wag,  that  which  is  right,  2  K.  22,  2. 
Adj.  inan.  samptve  yeii,  Ezek.  45,  11. 
Y.  adj.  an.  sampwesu,  he  is  straight, 
upright,  ‘an  upright  man’,  Job  1,  1; 
suppos.  noh  samjrwesit,  he  who  is  up¬ 
right,  Micah  7,  4.  Y.  adj.  inan.  sam- 
pohteau,  it  is  straight,  upright;  caus. 
sarapfwehte.au,  he  makes  (it)  straight: 
sampwehteaush  bum-may,  make  thy 
way  straight;  part,  sampwehteau-un, 
straightened.  Y.  adj.  an.  act.  samp- 
weusseu,  he  does  straight,  uprightly. 
Adj.  and  adv.  -ussede,  doing  justly, 
uprightly,  2  Pet.  27,  7;  righteous,  Ps. 
11,  7.  Ybl.  n.  sampweusseoiik,  up¬ 
rightness  (hi  doing),  justice,  righteous¬ 
ness,  Deut.  24,  13;  Ps.  11,  7.  N.  agent. 
-usseaen,  he  who  does  right  or  justly,  a 
just  man.  (Cf.  Sansk.  samci,  (1)  siniilis, 
sequalis;  (2)ajquus;  (3) integer;  sampdd, 
perfectio,  felicitas.  Lat.  similis;  Engl, 
same. ) 

[*Note.— Marked  “  No!  ”  by  the  compiler  in 
the  manuscript.] 

[Narr.  saumpi,  straight.  Quir.  som- 
pdio,  (it  is)  right,  Pier.  Abn.  sanbiSi, 

‘  franchement,  sans  feinte’,  but  the  ex¬ 
amples  given  show  that  the  word  was 
used  in  the  sense  of  fairly,  justly.  Cree 
simmutz,  perpendicular;  simmutinum,  he 
erects  it.] 

sampwuslianau,  sampshanau,  v.  t.  an. 

he  guides  (them):  ken  samp wushan-op, 
thou  didst  guide,  lead,  Ps.  10,  1.  Part, 
suppos.  sampshanont,  pi.  -oncheg,  they 
who  guide,  guides,  Is.  9, 16.  N.  agent. 
sampwushaen,  a  guide  ( =  sarnpivoshds - 
sean,  Ps.  55,  13). 

*sanaukamuck  (Narr.)  n.  land;  nis- 
savmdwkamuck,  my  land,  11.  W.  88. 
(Probably  land  inclosed  and  cultivated, 

a  field:  from - and  kdmuk,  inclosed 

place.  See  sonbin,  it  grows,  and  cf. 
Abn.  8sankan8r,  ‘la  terre  produit’. 
Perhaps  the  same  as  soivanohkomuk 
(Josh.  15,  19),  ‘south  land’,  a  field 
with  southern  exposure  (see  sowaniyeu). 
Cf.  *ohteuk. 


*sannegkroonk  (?),  ‘to  sneeze’,  C. ;  but, 
by  its  form,  a  verbal  noun,  sneezing  (?). 
Perhaps  for  nanagkeoonk,  C. 

[Abn.  nenekkSanmS,  I  sneeze.] 
sanukkuhkau.  See  sunnukkuhkau. 
sasamatahwhutteaonk,  vbl.  n.  pass, 
punishment  received;  being  punished, 
Gen.  4,  13;  pi.  -ongash,  ‘  scourgings  ’ , 
Heb.  11,  36. 

sasamatau,  v.  t.  he  chastises  (him): 
nus-sasamat-oh,  I  punish  him,  Jer.  23, 
24;  I  chastise  (him),  Luke  23,  16,  22 
( nus-sohsamatoh ,  I  chastise;  nus-sdsamit- 
tahhcoam,  I  punish,  C. ).  Caus.  scisa- 
matahwhau  (-ahhooau),  he  punishes 
(them),  causes  (them)  to  be  chastised; 
suppos.  pass,  sasamatahiehuf,  when  he 
is  punished,  Prov.  21,  11. 

[Narr.  sasaumilaiachitch,  let  him  be 
whipped,  II.  IV.  122.  Abn.  nS-sanmt- 
tehah,  je  le  bats  (legerement).] 
*sasaunckap amuck  ( Narr. ),  n.  ‘  the  sas¬ 
safras  tree’,  R.  W.  90. 

[Abn.  sasang8bhnak8 ,  ‘bois  puant 
pour  faire  vomir’;  ma'kSann,  bon  a 
manger.] 

*sasemin-eash.  (Narr.),  pi.  cranberries, 
R.  W.  90. 

*sash.kontcDwaonk,  n.  ‘a  shrill  tone,  or 
voice’,  C. 

sasiogokish,  pi.  difficult  (very  hard) 
things,  Ex.  18,  26.  Suppos.  pi.  of 
sasiogke,  freq.  of  siogke,  it  is  hard,  diffi¬ 
cult. 

sassadt,  n.  ‘a  crane’,  Is.  38,  14.  Cf. 
tannag,  crane,  Jer.  8,  7.  See  Cree 
thathicke,  tears,  rends;  and  cf.  tannogki. 
*sassakussue  puppinashimwog,  ‘  wild 
beasts’,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  50,  11  (for  touoh- 
komukque  puppinashimwog,  El. ) . 
*sassammauquock  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  eels, 
R.  W.  103. 

[Del.  schachamek,  an  eel  (cf.  schach- 
achki,  straight;  wscliaclieu,  smooth, 
glossy,  slippery),  Zeisb.  Gr.] 
*sassaqushauog  (Narr.),  v.  i.  they  are 
'  slow;  nickqussakus,  I  am  slow.  See 
sesegenam,  he  is  slothful. 
*saunketfppo  (Narr.),  n.  a  hat  or  cap, 
R.  W.  107. 

*sauoppunk,  a  rod,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  2,  9. 
saup,  adv.  tomorrow  (El.  Gr.  21),  Ex. 
8,  23;  1  Sam.  20,  5. 


B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 10 


146 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


saup — continued . 

[Narr.  sadop.  Abn .seba.  Micm.  sha- 
bey,  ce  matin;  shabonSk,  demain.  Cree 
vdppak-e,  tomorrow  ( ivqpuch ,  soon). 
Chip,  wabang,  tomorrow;  jeba  (shaiba), 
in  the  morning.  Del.  sedpok,  tomor¬ 
row  morning,  Zeisb.] 
saupae,  sabae,  it  is  softened,  made  soft 
by  water;  as  adj.  ‘miry’,  Dan.  2,  43; 
saupde  manoonsk  (softened  clay),  ‘mor¬ 
tar’,  Gen.  11,  3.  Suppos.  concrete,  sa- 
baheg,  that  which  is  made  soft,  ‘pot¬ 
tage’,  boiled  food  (perhaps  from  a 
causative  form,  saupahheau,  he  makes 
it  soft);  hence,  sappaen  (modern  sup- 
pawn,  sepavm,  sepon,  Webst. )  for  saupd- 
un,  softened.  “The  crushed  corn  is 
daily  boiled  to  a  pap  called  by  them 
suppaen.” — Descr.  of  N.  Neth.,  1671. 
Cf.  s&baxum,  he  melts,  softens  by  heat. 

[Narr.  nasaump,  “a  kind  of  meal  pot¬ 
tage,  unparc.hed;  from  this  the  English 
call  their  samp”,  etc.,  R.W.  33.  Abn. 
ntsanbann,  sagamite;  ntsanbS,  fais-en; 
kesanbS,  8ios-sanb8,  bouillon  de  chair; 
names-sanbS,  bouillon  de  poisson,  etc. 
Chip,  nis-sdbawe,  lam  wet  (with  rain), 
Bar.] 

*saupuck  (Narr.),  n.  gunpowder,  R.  W. 
149;  sabuck,  C. 

[Abn.  sdsanbigSdk,  il  fait  des  eclairs. 
Del.  sasappiwak,  lightnings;  scipiechtite, 
when  it  lightens,  Zeisb.  ] 
saushkisashaii,  siashk-,  v.  t.  an.  he 
scares,  frightens  ( him ) :  kus-siashkisash- 
eh,  thou  scarest  me  (by  dreams),  Job 
7,  14. 

sauskshanittuonk,  vbl.  n.  being  terri¬ 
fied,  terror,  fright;  pi.  -ongash  nukko- 
ndeu,  terrors  by  night,  Ps.  91,  5. 

[Abn.  ne-seghesi,  je  suis  epouvante.  ] 
sauuhkissu,  v.  i.  (adj.  an.)  he  pants 
(is  very  weary,  exhausted)  ( sauuhkis - 
sinneat,  to  pant;  nus-sauuhkis,  I  pant, 
C. ) ;  suppos.  saakussit,  when  he  pants, 
Ps.  42,  1. 

[Abn.  sankdtesse,  il  tombe  en  defail  - 

lance  de  marcher;  mnkStesi,  -  de 

chaleur,  etc.  Del.  schauxsin,  to  be 
weak,  Zeisb.  Gr.  104.] 
sauunum,  v.  i.  he  is  weary,  ‘his  strength 
faileth’,  Is.  44,  12;  nus-sauunum,  I  am 
weary,  Gen.  27,  46  ( pogkodche  nus-souu- 
num,  I  am  very  weary,  C. ) ;  suppos.  noh 


sauunum — continued. 

sauunuk,  he  who  is  weary,  Job  22,  7. 
Y.  t.  an.  sauunuman,  he  wearies  (him). 
Ybl.  n.  sauunumdonk,  weariness,  faint¬ 
ness,  Lev.  26,  36. 

[Narr.  nissdwanis,  I  am  weary.  Abn. 
ne-saS-sdi,  je  suis  las  de  marcher;  ne-saS- 
arokkd,  ‘  je  suis  fat  igue  du  travaille  ’ ,  etc. ; 
sa8i8i,  lassement.  Del.  schauwewi,  tired, 
weak,  Zeisb.  Gr.  104;  schauwussu,  he  is 
weak,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  28;  schauwalami,  to 
faint  with  hunger,  ibid.  55.] 

*sawhoog  (Narr.),  loose,  unstrung  beads 
or  shell  money,  R.  W.  131.  (For  seah- 
whdog,  they  are  scattered.  Seeseahham.) 

[Cf.  Abn.  sa'i8i,  ‘nonchalamment, 
sans  l’accommoder,  sans  le  her’,  etc.] 
seahham,  seoh-,  v.  t.  he  scatters  (it), 
sprinkles  (it),  Prov.  20,  8;  Ps.  53,  5; 
Lev.  3,  2.  Freq.  seseahham,  Prov.  11, 
24  (with  inan.  suffix).  With  an.  obj. 
seahwhau,  seaehheau,  he  scatters,  dis¬ 
perses  (them),  Prov.  20,  26;  Is.  24,  1; 
nag  seahwhdog,  they  are  scattered,  Ezek. 
34,  5;  suppos.  (pass.)  Seahwhulteadg, 
when  you  ai;e  scattered,  Ezek.  6,  8. 
With  augm.  of  mischance,  seahshau  and 
(intens. )  seakshau,  he  scatters  disas¬ 
trously,  2  K.  25,  5;  1  Sam.  11, 11.  With 
augm.  of  continued  action,  seauhkonau, 
seaookau,  he  habitually  scatters,  goes  on 
scattering  (them).  (These  forms  are 
all  causative.  The  primary  verb  is  not 
used  by  Eliot,  except  perhaps  in  Luke 
11,  23,  sedeiyeu  [=8<’-d-ei-M],  he  scat- 
tereth. )  See  nanwiyeu;  naswaeu. 

[Narr.  sawhoog,  sawhosachick,  (pi.) 
loose  (scattered).  Abn.  sai8i,  ‘non¬ 
chalamment’;  sa'i8i  pits,  ‘mets  cela 
dans  le  sac,  sans  l’accommoder,  sans  le 
lier,  simplement  comme  il  est’.  Del. 
sasehemen,  to  scatter.] 
seauhteau,  seaoht-,  v.  t.  he  makes  (it) 
scatter,  he  sprinkles  (it),  Lev.  4,  6  ( nus - 
sewauhteam,  I  sprinkle,  I  scatter,  C. ). 
sebaheg,  n.  pottage,  bouillon.  See 
mbaheg. 

see,  it  is  sour;  adj.  sour;  ‘see  wine’,  for 
‘vinegar’,  Num.  6,  3;  Ps.  69,  21;  see 
pelukqunnunk,  leavened  (fermented) 
bread,  Ex.  34,  25.  Suppos.  concrete 
seog,  that  which  is  sour,  when  sour; 
nukkone  seog,  ‘leaven’,  Ex.  13,  7.  Adj. 
seane  (of  unripe  fruit),  Is.  18,  5;  Jer.  31, 


Trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


147 


see — continued. 

29.  30,  (of  drink)  Hos.  4,  18.  Cf.  siogke, 
it  is  hard,  difficult. 

[Cree  seui  ssu,  he  is  sour  or  salt;  $t- 
wdppwooy,  sour  liquor,  i.  e.  vinegar. 
Chip.  (St  Marvs)  she  irun,  I  Sag. )  seewan. 
Menom.  shayteon.  Del.  shu  won,  Sch.  ii, 
478;  sch  won,  Zeisb.Yoc.  6.] 
seep.  See  sqm,  a  river, 
seepsin,  sepsin,  v.  i.  i  he  extends  him¬ 
self,)  he  lies  down,  Ruth  3,  7;  Jonah  1, 
5;  imperat.  2d  sing,  sepsish,  lie  down; 
suppos.  sepsinon,  when  I  he  down,  Job 

[Abn.  saiisadSsin  (etendu)  or  saii- 
satS.  Del.  sopsin,  to  be  naked;  sopsu, 
he  is  naked  (?),  Zeisb.] 

*segauo  (Narr.),  a  widower,  R.  IV.  See 
sekousq. 

[Del.  schikuwak  (pi.),  widowers, 
Zeisb.] 

segenam,  v.  i.  he  is  indolent,  slothful. 
More  common  in  the  freq.  and  intens. 
sesegenam,  he  is  habitually  idle,  lazy: 
nag  sesegenamwog,  they  are  idle,  Ex. 
5,  8.  Cf.  with  ahque  segenamaok,  be  not 
slothful  or  remiss  (in  a  particular  mat¬ 
ter),  Judg.  18,  9;  ahque  sesegenamwk,  be 
not  slothful  (by  habit),  Rom.  12,  11. 
Adj.  and  adv.  -amwe,  Prov.  10,  4;  Matt. 
20,  3,  6.  Ybl.  n.  segeneamcoonk,  and 
saseg-  ( sdsekeneanubonk ,  C.),  slothful¬ 
ness,  idleness. 

[Narr.  kus-sdsaqus,  you  are  slow. 
Abn.  sk8anik,  le  dernier  (?) ,  or  sac'gh 7 re, 
‘iln’est  pas  ceinture,  il  va  a  la  negli¬ 
gence’.] 
seip.  See  sepu. 

se'ippog  [set-pug] ,  n.  ‘salt  water’,  James 
3,  12.  Elsewhere  in  Eliot’s  translation 
the  English  word  ‘salt’  is  transferred, 
sekeneam,  sekenam,  v.  t.  (1)  he  re¬ 
fuses,  rejects;  (2)  he  manifests  aversion 
to;  (3)  he  hates,  .(it),  Gen.  37, 35;  Jer.31, 
15;  Prov.  13,  5.  Suppos.  noli  sekenog, 
he  who  refuses,  hates,  Prov.  15,  27. 
With  an.  obj.  sekeneau,  he  refuses, 
rejects,  hates  (him),  Gen.  27,  41:  nus- 
sekeneau,  I  hate  him,  1  K.  22,  8;  2  Chr. 
18,  7;  suppos.  noh  sekeneait,  pi.  -iteheg, 
they  who  hate  (him),  Prov.  8,  36. 
Ybl.  n.  act.  sekeneaudonk,  hating, 
hatred  felt,  2  Sam.  13, 15;  sekeneausuonk, 


sekeneam.  etc. — continued. 

hatred  in  exercise,  active  hatred;  pass. 
sekeneadluonk,  -eoadtuonk,  being  hated; 
hatred  received,  Gen.  3,  15;  Eccl.  9,  1; 
recipr.  or  mutual,  sekeneadluonk,  enmity, 
mutual  hatred,  Prov.  10,  12. 

[Narr.  sekineam,  I  have  no  mind  to  it; 
nis-sikineug,  he  likes  not  me;  sekinneau- 
hettuock,  they  hate  eaclf  other.  Abn. 
ne-sigandam,  je  ne  le  veux  pas.  Del. 
schinginarnen,  to  hate  something;  -galan, 
he  is  hated,  Zeisb.] 

*sekontcowau,  ‘lisping’  [he  lisps?],  C. 
sekousq  [for  sekomqiui],  n.  a  widow  (se- 
kduishq,  C. );  pi.  -squaog,  Lev.  21,  14; 

1  Tim.  5,  3:  nen  sekousq,  I  am  a  widow, 

2  Sam.  14,  5.  As  a  verb,  imperat.  2d 
sing,  sekousqu/iish ,  be  thou  a  widow, 
Gen.  38, 11.  From  asuhkau  (she  comes 
after)  or  sequnau  (she  is  left)  and  sqiut, 
a  left  woman,  a  relict.  See  sequnau. 

[Narr.  segauo,  widower;  segousquaw , 
widow.  Del.  schikochqueu,  Zeisb.] 
seohham.  See  seahham. 
sep,  a  river.  See  sepu. 
sepagenum,  sepak-,  sepag-k-,  v.  t.  he 
spreads  out,  extends  (it),  2  Sam.  17, 19; 
Ps.  105,  39.  Suppos.  noh  sepagenuk,  he 
who  spreads,  extends.  Adj.  sepagen- 
umwe,  extended,  spread  out,  Jer.  10, 9. 
sepaghunk,  n.  a  sail,  Acts  27,  40  (sepak- 
hunk,  C.).  Suppos.  inan.  of  sepagkeu, 
it  spreads,  that  which  extends  or  is 
extended.  See  *seppagham. 

[Narr.  sepdkehig,  a  sail;  sepagehom- 
mauta,  let  us  sail.  Abn.  ne-si.be ghlhima, 
je  vas  a  la  voile.] 

sepagkeu  (pi.  -eog),  v.  i.  they  extend, 
spread  (themselves),  2  Sam.  5,  18;  1 
Chr.  14,  13.  Pass.  inan.  sepagkemo ?, 
sepakemco,  it  is  spread,  it  spreads,  ex¬ 
tends.  Suppos.  sepakemcouk,  if  it  be 
spread  (as  leprosy,  Lev.  13,  22,  27). 
sepakehtamoonk,  n.  the  firmament, 
Gen.  1,  7.  (This  verbal,  from  a  form 
sepakehtam,  was  perhaps  formed  by 
Eliot. ) 

sepakenum.  See  sepagenutn. 
sepe,  (it  spreads  out,  extends;  hence)  it 
is  long,  a  long  time,  Josh.  6,  5;  Matt. 
23,  14;  ‘a  good  while’,  Gen.  46,  29: 
sepe  mahche,  long  after,  Josh.  23,  1. 
Cf.  qunni;  sesekeu.  (Cf.  Greek  6it d-siv, 


148 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


sepe — continued. 

to  draw  forth;  dni'^eiv,  dittvb-eiv 
(dneid-stv),  to  pour  out  a  liquid;  Goth, 
and  Ang.-Sax.  gpinnan,  spannan. ) 

[Cree  seep-issu,  he  is  durable,  lasting. 
Abn.  sipiSi,  enfin.] 

sepepomantam,  v.  i.  he  is  long-lived, 
lives  long,  is  ‘stricken  in  years’,  Gen. 
18, 11;  24, 1.  From  sepe,  and  pomantam 
(he  lives). 

sepham,  v.  t.  he  offers,  he  sacrifices  (it); 
v.  t.  an.  sephamau,  he  offers  or  sacrifices  ; 
(it)  to  (him),  1  Cor.  10,  20. 
sephausu,  v.  i.  he  sacrifices,  offers  sac¬ 
rifice;  pi.  -uog,  Hos.  4,  13.  Ybl.  n. 
-uonk,  a  sacrificing,  an  offering,  Ezra  9, 

4;  Ps.  118,  27;  pi.  -uongash  ( sephausu , 
it  is  offered  or  sacrificed,  C. ).  N.  agent. 
sephausuaen,  one  who  offers,  a  priest, 
Lev.  1,9.  N.  collect,  sephausuenexicoonk, 
priests  collectively,  the  priesthood,  1 
Pet.  2,  5.  [See  Rasies  under  jongleur, 

JONGLERIE.] 

sepliausuau,  v.  t.  he  offers  or  sacrifices 
to  (him). 

sepohtaeu,  v.  i.  he  is,  or  continues,  long 
(in  a  place?);  suppos.  noh  sepohtadt, 
‘when  he  had  been  there  a  long  time’, 
Gen.  26,  8.  Adj.  and  adv.  sepohtae, 
(long)  continuing,  Jer.  30,  23.  Par¬ 
ticipial  sepahtau-un,  long  continuing, 
‘durable’,  Prov.  8,  18. 

*seppagham,  he  sails,  C.  (i.  e.  sepag-atm, 
he  goes  by  spreading  out,  by  a  sail),  i 
See  sepdghunk. 
sepsin.  See  seepsin. 
sepu,  seip,  seep,  n.  a  river,  Dan.  8,  3,  7; 
Gen.  2,  10,  14;  pi.  -uash,  Ezek.  47,  9. 
Literally,  ‘it  extends,  stretches  out,  is 
long’,  a  continuing  stream.  See  sepe. 
The  inseparable  generic  name  for  river 
used  in  all  compound  words  was  -tuk 
(q.  v. ),  from  tukkco,  fluctuat,  undat.  ut  ! 
sepu-ut,  by  the  river;  nashaue  sepuwehtu, 
in  the  midst  of  rivers,  Ezek.  29,  3;  sepu- 
pog,  a  river  of  water,  Ps.  119,  136;  Rev. 
22,1.  Dimin.  sepuese,  sepuwus,  pi.  -hush, 
‘brooks’,  Job  20,  18. 

[Narr.  seip,  R.  W. ;  sepe,  se.be,  Stiles; 
dimin.  sepoese,  a  little  river;  sepoemese, 
a  little  rivulet,  R.  W.  88.  Old  Alg. 
sipim,  a  river  [sUnkinan,  to  pour  out), 
Lali.  Atm.  sipS,  [4.  sip8ar.  Cree seepee, 


sepu,  seip,  seep — continued, 
pi.  +  v .  Chip,  sebe,  seepee,  pi.  +  wun. 
Del.  si  po,  Zeisb.] 

sequan,  (it  is)  summer,  Ps.  74, 17;  Matt. 
24,  32;  rather,  early  summer  ( sequan , 
spring,  C.  and  R.  W. ).  Cf.  nepun. 
Adv.  and  adj.  sequ&ne,  of  summer,  in 
summer,  Dan.  2,  35;  Prov.  26,  1.  The 
radical  perhaps  signifies  ‘  dry  ’ ;  cf.  Abn. 
sigSan,  with  sikkaaiisS,  ‘  le  ruisseau  est, 
tari’.  In  the  Catechismo  Algonchino, 
p.  22  (qu.  28 ) ,  sdkwaninik  (in  the  spring) 
is  translated  ‘diffluente  arborum  hu- 
rnore’,  Fr.  ‘quand  la  seve  coule’.  But 
there  is  no  ‘arbor’  in  the  synthesis. 
It  means  probably  ‘when  water  runs’ 
(i.  e.  when  it  thaws?). 

[Quir.  sequoks,  in  summer,  Pier.  28. 
Abn.  sig8dn,  le  printemps.  Cree  sek- 
wun,  it  is  spring.  Chip,  segivun,  spring. 
Del.  si  quon,  spring,  Zeisb.] 
*sequanamauquock  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  [se- 
quane-dmaug,  pi.  -\-quog,  early-summer 
fish],  ‘bream’,  R.  W.  The  same  spe¬ 
cies  as  mishcup-patiog.  “Of  this  fish 
there  is  abundance  which  the  natives 
dry  in  the  sun  and  smoke.”  Probably 
the  species  now  known  as  ‘scuppaug’ 
and  ‘porgy’  (Pagrus  argyrops,  Cuv.). 
sequnau,  v.  i.  he  remains  behind,  is  left, 
(nen  webe  nus-sequinit,  1  remain  alone, 
am  left,  1  K.  18,  22);  suppos.  noh  sequ- 
nut,  -it,  he  who  is  left;  pi.  nag  sequ- 
nutcheg,  ‘the  remnant  that  are  left’, 
1  K.  14,  10;  2  K.  19,  4  ( =ashqunutcheg , 
Neh.  1,  3).  Inan.  serqunneau,  it  re- 
maihs,  is  left;  suppos.  ne  sequnuk,  as~ 
qunuk ,  ashqunuk,  that  which  remains, 
the  remainder,  the  remnant;  Lev.  2,  3; 
14,  17;  19,  6.  N.  coll.  (?)  ashqshunk,  pi. 
4-  ish,  what  (things)  remain,  Lev.  27, 18. 
Cf.  asuhkaue,  (it  comes)  after;  nus.-e- 
qunneat,  to  remain  alone. 

[Abn.  sk8dnik  pemSsse,  he  last  comes, 
‘  il  vient  des  derniers  ’ ;  ne-n8ss8ka8aii, 
je  le  suis,  sequor.  Narr.  segauo,  he  is  a 
widower  [a  relict],  is  left.] 
sequnittuonk,  pass.  vbl.  n.  that  which 
has  been  left  by  another,  a  remnant, 
Ezra  9,  8. 

sequnnumau,  v.  t.  an.  he  leaves  a  re¬ 
mainder  to  (him);  negat.  maita  sequn- 
numcmieo-co-og,  they  leave  not  a  re¬ 
mainder  to  (him),  2  Sam.  14,  7. 


TRUMBUCL] 


N ATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


149 


sequttahwhau,  v.  t.  he  remains  (of  a 
number),  he  is  left,  of  (them),  Dent. 

3,  11.  Otherwise  written  ashqueht-,  j 
asqueteah-,  asqut-,  ushqueht-,  etc.  Sup- 
pos.  pi.  neg  sequttnhwhutcheg ,  they  who 
are  left  of,  the  remnant  of,  Deut.  3,  11 
( asquttahwutcheg ,  1  K.  9,  21). 
sequtteaumuk,  ashqueteamuk,  pass, 
suppos.  inan.,  that  which  is  left,  the 
remnant;  pi.  -\-ish,  the  leavings,  Ex. 
12,  10;  Matt.  15,  37. 

sesegenam,  v.  i.  he  is  habitually  idle, 
slothful;  freq.  of  segenam,  q.  v. 
sesegk.  Bee  sesekq. 

[sesekeu,  v.  i.  he  stretches  himself  (in 
bed  or  when  lying  down) :]  matta  woh 
wuttit  sesekein,  he  can  not  stretch  him¬ 
self  thereon,  Is.  28,  20.  Cf.  sesepaeu, 
he  stretches  himself  (and  remains 
stretched ) . 

[Abn.  ne-sd  sdgliesin,  ‘je  m’etens, 
etant  couche’.  Del.-  schachachgeu, 
straight  along,  Zeisb.  ] 
sesekq,  sesegk,  n.  a  venomous  serpent, 
‘adder’,  Gen.  49,  17;  Prow  23,  32; 
‘viper’,  Acts  28,  3;  pi.  -qudog.  Per¬ 
haps  this  name  was  applied  by  the 
Indians  only  to  the  rattlesnake,  and 
is  onomato poetic.  Cf .  sesekco,  ‘  he  peeps  ’ 
(as  a  bird),  Is.  10,  14;  sausauag  (sup¬ 
pos.) ,  when  it ‘tinkles’,  1  Cor.  13,1;  and 
cf.  askcok,  snake;  quequsm,  he  ‘hisses’. 
(Cf.  Greek  dither,  Tonga,  sisi;  Polish, 
hszyk,  to  hiss. ) 

[Narr.  sesek,  rattlesnake,  R.  W. ; 
seasicke,  Wood.  Abn.  sisik8e,  serpent  a 
sonnettes;  8sig8ian ,  la  sonnette;  sessegS, 
il  crache.] 

*sesep,  qunusseps,  n.  a  duck,  C.  See 
*quequecum.  This  name  perhaps  signi¬ 
fies  a  diver.  [Cf.  Abn.  netsapi,  ‘je  me 
plonge  dans  l’eau’;  3d  pers.  tsa8ap8, 
from  which  freq.  tse-tsa8ap8  or  tse-tsap8 
would  be  regularly  formed.*] 

[*N'ote. — Marked  “doubtful”  in  the  mar¬ 
gin.”] 

[Cree  seeseep,  pi.  -fttA".  Chip,  shee- 
sheep,  pi.  +•«</.] 

sesepaeu,  v.  i.  he  stretches  himself, 

2  K.  4,  34;  suppos.  noh  sesepauet,  he 
who  stretches  himself;  pi.  nag  sesepaui- 
cheg,  Amos  6,  7.  From  sepe  ( sepdeu ,  he 
extends),  with  augm.  reduplication. 


sesepaeu — continued. 

Cf.  kou-eu;  sepsin;  sesekeu.  (Sansk.  si, 
jacere,  dormire;  svap,  dormire,  jacere; 
svdpna,  somnium. ) 

shehteaen  [for  nushehteilen ],  n.  agent,  a 
murderer. 

shpun-au.  See  uspunau&nat. 

shuog,  for  nishuog,  an.  pi.  three,  Jer. 
36,  23.  See  nishwe. 

shwe,  pi.  inan.  shwi.nash,  for  nishwenash, 
niskwinash,  three. 

shwinchag,  for  nishwinchag,  thirty, 
Num.  31,  44,  45. 

shwosuk  tahshe,  num.  eight,  El.  Gr. 
14;  pi.  inan.  shwosuk  tohshinash;  an. 
sliwosuk  tahsuog ,  Gen.  8,  23:  shwosuk 
tahshishquanogkod,  eight,  cubits  (meas¬ 
ures  of  length),  Ezek.  40,  9;  shwosuk 
audtahshikquinapit,  (when)  eight  days 
old,  Gen.  17,  12;  nabo  shwosuk,  eighteen; 
shwosuk  tahshinchag,  eighty;  pi.  an. 
shwosuk  tahsldnkodtog;  inan.  shwosuk 
tahshinkodlash.  Otherwise  written  nish- 
wosuk,  from  n’ shwe  {nishwe),  three,  the 
third  finger  of  the  second  hand,  or 
5+3. 

[Narr.  shwdsuck,  eight;-  piuck-nabna 
shwosuck,  eighteen;  swoasuek  la  shin- 
check,  eighty,  R.  W.  41,  42.  Abn. 
ntsahsek,  eight.  Old  Alg.  nissouassou, 
eight,  Lah.  Cree  su’dss/ik,  eight.  Chip. 
slwjus  we,  eight;  (Ojibwa)  nish  was  swi. 
Del.  chamch,  Zeisb.] 

siashkisashaii.  Bee  saushkisashai't . 

*sickfssuog  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  clams,  Mya 
arenaria  or  long  clam  ( shkkissuog ,  C. ). 
Peq.  sucksawaug,  Stiles.  For  sohkissu  or 
mhkissu,  he  spits,  squirts  water.  Adj. 
v.  from  sohkeu,  suhkou,  he  spits.  Bee 
sulikou. 

sinnukkutchahheau.  Bee  sunukkuh- 
kau. 

siogke,  it  is  hard,  difficult;  as  adv.  siogke 
nechau,  ‘she  had  hard  labor’,  Gen.  35, 
16,  17.  Suppos.  ne  siogkok,  siogok,  that 
which  is  hard  or  difficult,  ‘a  hard 
thing’,  2  K.  2,  10;  pi.  +  ish.  Augm. 
(suppos.)  sa-siogokish,  (very)  hard  mat¬ 
ters,  Ex.  18,  26.  Vbl.  n.  siogkegeuonk, 
a  hard  matter,  a  being-hard,  ‘  hard  say¬ 
ing’,  John  6,  60.  Y.  adj.  an.  siogkussu, 
he  is  hard;  kus-siogkus,  thou  art  a  hard 
man,  Matt.  25,  24.  From  see,  sour  (so, 


150 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


siogke —continued. 

Greek  ostig;  Lat.  acerbus,  asper;  Ang.- 
Sax.  sorghe;  Eng.  sour,  sore,  sorrow). 
See  scmogoldsh. 

[Narr.  sidckat,  hard;  siuckissdog,  ‘they 
are  stout  men  ’ ,  i.  e.  hard  lighters.  Cree 
sasdgissu  ( —  m-siogkusm ? ) ,  he  is  nig¬ 
gardly.  Chip,  sanagdd,  it  is  difficult, 
hard,  disagreeable;  suppos.  senagak, 
Bar.  Abn.  san'ghere,  cela  est  dur;  prefix 
8aaghi.  ] 

siogkod  [for  siogkoht  ( sidckat ,  R.  W. ), 
from  siogkohteau,  v.  i.  inan.  sub j.  ] ,  it  is 
hard,  difficult,  Prov.  13,  15;  Mark  10, 
24. 

siogkoowaonk,  n.  a  proverb  (?),  Ezek. 
18,  2,  3;  a  riddle  (?).  See  nupwoaonk. 

-sip,  -sup,  in  compound  words  signifies 
to  drink.  It  represents  a  primary  verb 
which  is  not  found  separately  in  Eliot. 
Possibly  related  to  saupde  (q.  v. ).  Cf. 
nontsippam;  mimppan;  kogkeissippam; 
ohksippam,  C,;  tdpsippam,  etc.  To  this 
corresponds  the  inseparable  -uppco, 
-ippoo,  ‘to  eat’,  which  is  found  in  a 
similar  group  of  compounds.  See  wut- 
tattamunat. 

[Note. — The  entire  definition  is  marked 
“Dele  |  to  exude  ]  soh-’ippe”  \  preceded  by 
“or  ‘to  sup’  bouillon?”  The  following  two 
incomplete  definitions,  -sippa[eu]  and  sissipik- 
quoshau ,  appear  on  a  memorandum  slip  inserted 
in  the  manuscript.] 

[-sippa[eu].  Heier  to  missippano;  mus- 
suppeg;  suppikq-  (?).  Cf.  Chip.  -aubo.~\ 

[Cree  menis-appwooy  [rneni-sdp- 
pwooy  (?)],  berry  liquor,  Howse  19; 
min-dppwooy,  berry  juice,  p.  179.  Chip. 
min-dhboo,  ibid,  [n’ippe  (?);  soh’ippe , 
juice  (?),  exude.]  Del.  wsup-pi,  ‘sap  of 
trees’,  Zeisb.Voc.  13;  si  spi  gau,  it  leaks, 
drops,  ibid.  29.] 

[sissipikquoshau,  ‘he  winketh  with  his 
eyes’,  Prov.  6.  13;  noh  sampikqudit,  he 
that  winketh  with  his  eyes,  Prov.  10, 
10;  wus-suhpequdeh  tarn  un,  he  winked 
at  it,  Acts  17,  30;  suppikquaehtdm,  he 
shuts  his  eyes,  Prov.  16,  30;  suhpig- 
quaeog,  they  shut  their  eyes,  Matt.  13, 
15.]  ' 

[Del.  scho  pin  queel,  shut  your  eyes, 

-  Zeisb.  Yoc.  29.] 

*sftchipuck  (Narr.),  the  neck,  R.  W. 

See  mussittipuk. 


skannem(in),  pi.  skannemunash ,  seed, 
Gen.  1,  11,  12.  More  commonly  used 
with  the  3d  pers.  pron.  prefix  wuskan- 
nem,  q.  v. 

[Narr.  skannemeneash,,  seed  corn,  R. 
W.  91.] 

*skat  (Narr.),  ebb  tide;  mittdeskat,  a  low 
ebb,  R.  W.  100. 

[Abn.  Ssi'kkcit,  decroit.] 

-skeesuk,  the  eye,  the  face.  See  mu- 
skesuk. 

*skunk.  See  *squnck. 
soanaiyeu.  See  sownniyeu,  of  the  south, 
southern.  ' 

sobaheg,  sobaheg.  See  sabaheg,  pot¬ 
tage,  bouillon. 

sobososit,  suppos.  and  pass,  of  sdbosasu, 
he  melts  (it).  See  sdbasum. 

*soch.epo  (Narr.),  snow,  it  snows;  sochep- 
imtch,  when  it  snows,  R.  W.  ( muhpcbwi , 
it  snows,  C. ;  mmvpaw,  Wood).  See 
muhpco. 

[Abn.  psan,  ‘il  nege’;  kesi’pS,  kesip- 
saiin,  ‘il  nege  beaucoup’,  Rasies. 
Micm.  peshak,  it  snows;  m8  peshanSk, 
it  does  not  snow.  Cree  mispoon,  it 
snows.  Chip,  sogipo  ( g  hard),  it  snows, 
Bar.  Alg.  sokipo,  il  neige.  ] 
soggohtunkan-ompsk,  n.  a  flinty  rock, 
flint,  Deut.  8,  15;  Ps.  114,  8  ( siogke , 
hard?). 

[Abn.  sagahaii,  ‘bate-feu’;  sagahana- 
peskS,  la  pierre.] 

sogkemas  [ sogkem-oaas ,  biting  creature; 
or  sogke-mcosuhq,  biting  fly],  n.  a  ‘gnat’, 
Matt.  23,  24.  See  mcosuhq;  cocliaus. 

[Abn.  ne-sagamek8,  elle  me  pique. 
Chij).  sagime,  a  mosquito,  Bar.  ] 
sogkepco,  v.  i.  he  bites;  sogkepcoau  ( nm - 
sogkepobam,  I  bite,  C. ),  v.  t.  an.  he  bites 
(him),  Eccl.  10,  8;  pi.  -maog,  -vmog, 
they  bite,  Num.  21,  6,  pish  wus-sogktp- 
woh,  he  shall  bite  him,  Eccl.  10,  8;  noh 
sogkeputtog  (suppos.  t.  inan.),  he  who 
biteth  (it),  when  he  biteth  it,  Gen. 
49,  17.  From  sogkeu,  it  catches  hold, 
and  -uppco,  v.  gen.  he  eats,  he  holds  for 
eating  or  by  eating. 

[Abn.  ne-sdghe,  jemords;  ne-sagaman, 
je  le  mords.] 

sogkodtunk,  n.  milk  (of  animals,  though 
wrongly  used  by  Eliot  in  his  earlier 
translations  for  milk  from  the  female 
breast.  See  *meninnunk),  Gen.  18,  8; 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


151 


sogkodtunk — continued. 

Prov.  30,  33;  Joel  3,  18  (sogkodunk,  C. ); 
pi.  -ngash,  teats,  dugs,  Ezek.  23,  8,  21; 
Luke  23,  29.  A  verbal  (suppos. )  from 
sohkodtirmum,  he  draws  forth,  that 
which  is  drawn  out. 

[Abn.  ne-seregh inehighe,  je  tire  le  lait 
(v.  g.  de  la  vache).] 

sogkunau,  v.  t.  an.  he  catches  hold  of 
(him),  1  K.  2,  28. 

sogkussohhou,  n.  an  earring,  Job  42, 11; 
Prov.  25,  12;  pi.  -\-nash,  Ex.  35,  22. 

[Abn.  ne-saghe-sihi,  pi.  -hSnar,  mes 
pendants  d’oreille.] 

sogkuttin,  v.  t.  inan.  (subj.  and  obj.), 
it  catches  hold  of  (it),  2  Sam.  18,  9; 
freq.  sohsogkuttin;  suppos.  sohsogkittik, 
that  which  catches  hold  of,  as  n.  coll, 
‘hooks’,  Ex.  26,  32;  from  which  is 
_  formed  sohsogkittikeu,  it  hooks,  Ex.  26, 
*  37. 

soh-,  as  a  prefix,  signifies  forth  from,  out 
from,  movement  from  the  place  where 
or  in  which  the  action  of  the  verb 
begins.  It  is  opposed  to  pe,  pd,  signi¬ 
fying  approach  to,  or  toward:  pe-yau, 
he  comes  to;  soh-ham,  he  goes  forth,  out 
from.  (Cf.  Sansk.  su,  se  movere,  effun- 
dere,  and  its  derivatives;  or  si,  sal.  Lat. 
se-,  sine,  separative  particle. ) 
sohham  [ soft-corn] ,  v.  i.  he  goes  forth, 
Matt.  13,  3;  Is.  42,  13  ( suhham ,  Mass. 
Ps. ) ;  imperat.  2d  sing,  sohhash,  go  forth ; 
suppos.  sohhog,  if  or  when  he  goes  forth ; 
inan.  part,  sohhamun,  gone  forth.  Vbl. 
n.  sohhamdbonk,  a  going  forth,  departure, 
Heb.  11,  22. 

[Narr.  savrwhush,  pi.  sawheke,  go  forth; 
wussauhemiUta  (?) ,  let  us  go  forth,  R.  W.  ] 
sohhcoquaeu,  v.  i.  he  looks  forth,  looks 
out  (as  from  a  door,  or  window),  Judg. 
5,  28  ( sonkcoquaeu ,  Gen.  26,  8).  See 
nuliquainat;  uhquae. 

sohhcowunau,  v.  t.  an.  he  puts,  brings, 
or  thrusts  (him)  out;  infin.  -wunonat, 
to  bring  (them)  out,  Is.  42,  7;  Ex.  3,  8. 
With  inan.  subj.  sohhcowuttau,  he  brings 
or  puts  (it)  out.  Cf.  sohwunum. 

[Narr.  kus-sawhdki,  do  you  put  me 
out  of  doors?;  nis-sawhocunckewd  (?) ,  he 
puts  me  out  of  doors.  ] 
sohkau,  sonqhuau,  v.  i.  he  overcomes, 
prevails,  has  the  mastery:  nus-sonqueh, 
1  have  prevailed,  Gen.  30,  8;  kum- 


sohkau,  soxiqhuau — continued. 
micheme  sohkau,  thou  prevailest  forever, 
Job  14,  20;  suppos.  noh  sohkog,  he  who 
overcomes,  has  the  mastery,  Rev.  3,  21. 
With  an.  obj.  soh kf man,  sohqhuav.au, 
he  prevails  over,  has  the  mastery  of 
(him);  suppos.  noh  sohkauont,  he  who 
overcomes,  1  John  5,  5;  Luke  11,  22; 
pi.  nag  sohkauoncheg,  Rev.  15,  2. 

[C'ree  sdkoo-hayoo,  he  overcomes,  sub¬ 
dues  him;  sdkoo-tow,  he  overcomes  it, 
Howse  165.  Chip,  nin  ge  shdhgooje-6g, 
I  have  overcome  them,  Jones  in  ibid.] 
sohkenum,  sok-,  seek-,  v.  t.  he  pours 
forth,  pours  out;  — —  nippe,  he  pours 
out  water,  Num.  24,  7  ( sookunum ,  Mass. 
Ps.) ;  imperat.  2d  sing,  and  pi.  sohkin- 
ush,  -oak,  pour  out;  suppos.  noh  solike- 
nuk,  he  who  pours,  2  K.  3,  11.  From 
sohkeu,  it  pours,  with  the  formative 
’num,  denoting  action  of  the  hand. 
See  sokanon;  *sokenug,  etc. 

[Abn.  ne-s8gnemen,  je  verse,  manu.] 
sohkenumau,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan.  he 
pours  (it)  out  to  (him),  Job  16,  20. 
[sohkeu,  v.  i.  it  pours  forth,  emits.  This 
primary  verb  is  not  perhaps  used  by 
Eliot;  but  he  has  its  pass.  (inan.  subj. )] 
sokemco,  it  is  poured  out,  1  K.  13,  5. 
From  its  base,  sohk,  sook,  are  formed 
t.  inan.  sohkinnum,  he  pours  (by  hand) ; 
sokanon,  water  pours,  it  rains;  suhkou, 
suhquonlam,  he  spits,  urinates  (expels 
water),  etc.  Cf.  sonkin,  it  springs  up 
(as  a  plant),  it  grows.  (Cf.  Sansk.  su, 
effundere;  sic,  emittere,  inspergere,  bu¬ 
rn  ectare,  irrigare,  perfundere;  shikdra, 
pluvia  tenuis;  Old  Germ,  seihjan,  min- 
gere;  seich,  urina. )  See  sokanon. 

[Abn.  s8gherahn,  il  pleut.] 
sohkom,  v.  t.  inan.  heovercomes,  prevails 

over  (it);  - -  otan,  he  took  the  city, 

Judg.  9,  45;  - muttaok,  heovercomes 

the  world,  1  John,  5,  4;  imperat. 
sohkash  machuk,  overcome  evil,  Rom. 
12,  21.  See  sohkau. 

sohkomaii,  v.  t.  an.  he  feeds  (him), 
provides  food  for.  See  assamau. 
sohkosu,  v.  i.  (an.  act. )  he  gains  the 
mastery,  prevails,  conquers,  Rev.  6,  2; 
is  victorious,  is  prevailing;  suppos.  noh 
sohkausit,  he  who  is  victorious,  Rev.  3, 5. 
Vbl.  n.  sohkosuonk,  -kausuonk,  mastery, 
victory. 


152 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN'  25 


sohkunkquodt,  as  n.  height;  adv.  in 
height  (measured altitudeorelevation) ; 
ne  sohkunk,  ne  sohkunkquok,  its  height, 
Rev.  21, 16;  Ex.  25,  23  [i.  e.  suppos.  that 
to  which  it  has  grown,  gone  up  to?]. 
From  sontin  (?).  A  great  number  of 
forms,  of  several  roots,  are  employed  by 
Eliot  to  express  ‘height’,  ‘in  height’, 
and  ‘high’.  Besides  those  noted  are 
ne  sohkonkog,  the  height  of  it,  1  K.  6,  2; 
ne  aslipohtag,  Ex.  37, 1,  ne  ashpuhtag,  v. 
10,  and  ne  ohshpohtag,  v.  25;  ne  kudt.unk- 
quog  (of  a  small  object),  Ex.  30,  2;  ne 

ancohque  spohtag, - spoonogkog, 

■ - spongok,  its  height  from  bot¬ 

tom  to  top,  Gen.  6, 15;  Ex.  25,  10;  27,  1. 

[Abn.  spigannS,  la  cabane  est  haute; 
ni  espigannik,  voila  de  combien  (elle  est 
haute ) .  ] 

sohmagunum.  See  summdgunum,  he 
stretches  forth,  holds  out  (his  hand  or 
something  with  his  hand), 
sohq.  See  smkq,  saliva,  spittle, 
sohqshanau,  v.  t.  an.  he  tears  (him)  in 
pieces  (as  a  wild  beast  his  prey),  rends 
(him):  ishkont  sohkwushdnau,  lest  he 
tear  (me),  Ps.  7,  2;  with  inan.  obj. 
sohqshadtau,  heteareth  (it);  sokshadtoh, 
Deut.  33,  20;  suppos.  sohqshadtunk, 
when  he  tears,  ‘rends  it  in  pieces’,  Ps. 
7,  2;  pass.  inan.  -adtau-un,  it  is  (vio¬ 
lently)  broken  or  torn  in  pieces,  Is.  30, 
14. 

sohquennum.  See  sohqunnum. 
soh.quettah.ham.  See  sohquttahham. 
sohquhkauau,  scoquhk-,  v.  t.  he  con¬ 
tinues  tearing  or  rending  (him);  with 
the  characteristic  -uhk  of  continuing 
action. 

sohqui,  (it  is)  in  small  pieces,  fine,  in 
dust  or  powder;  adv.  sohque  puppissi, 
‘small  dust’,  Is.  29,  5;  suppos.  ne  soh- 
quag,  that  which  is  in  small  pieces,  in 
dust  or  powder,  Deut.  28,  24.  Adj. 
inan.  sukquiyeue,  in  powder,  2  Sam.  22 
43.  See  pasquag. 

sohqunnum,  sohquen-,  v.  t.  he  breaks 
(it)  in  pieces,  he  pulls  (it)  to  pieces, 
Mark  6,  41;  Is.  5,  5;  Jer.  1,  10.  From 
sohqui ,  with  trans.  formative  -nnum, 
denoting  action  performed  by  the  hand. 
*sohquompooo  (?),  a  coward;  - ompcoonk , 
cowardice,  C. 


sohqussum,  v.  t.  he  cuts  (it)  small, 
makes  it  small  by  cutting:  sohqsum-un, 
he  cuts  it  in  pieces,  2  K.  24,  13;  nus- 
sohqus,  I  cut  (her)  in  pieces,  Judg.  20, 
6.  From  sohqui,  with  formative  -sum, 
denoting  cutting,  etc.  (see  Howse,  Cree 
Gr.  87). 

sohquttahham,  sohquet-,  v.  t.  he 

breaks  (it)  in  small  pieces,  pounds  (it) 
or  beats  (it)  small  The  formative  tah- 
1mm,  according  to  Howse  (Cree  Gr.  86), 
“implies  he  beats  or  batters  the  object, 
after  the  manner  of  the  root.”  Inan. 
pi.  sohqiUtahhamunash,  they  (grains  of 
corn,  Is.  28,  28)  are  broken;  otherwise 
scohq-,  sukq-.  Adj.  and  adv.  sohqultah- 
hde,  pounded;  pi.  sohquttuhhash,  whence 
the  adopted 'name  succotash.  Cf.  poh- 
qunnum. 

[Cree  Seekwa-tahum,  he  beats  it  into 
smaller  pieces.  ] 

sohqutteahhau,  v.  i.  he  is  faint-hearted, 
cowardly  ( sohkutteahhaue ,  adj.  faint¬ 
hearted,  C. ) ;  pi.  -hdog,  they  are  faint¬ 
hearted,  Jer.  49, 23;  suppos.  -lioni,  when 
he  is  faint-hearted,  Deut.  20,  8.  Cf. 
sequttahwhau,  he  remains. 

[Abn.  skSitehe,  il  a  peur  (v.  g.  des 
tourments),  il  craint  le  chatiment,  etc.; 
v.  i.  sighesi,  il  a  peur;  an.  seghes8,  il 
craint.  Cree  segissu,  he  shrinks,  he  is 
afraid;  segehayoo,  he  frighteneth  him; 
sakoo-tay-dyoo,  he  is  faint-hearted,  cow¬ 
ardly.  (By  this  division  of  the  word 
Howse  marks  a  derivation  from  ’lay 
{ m’tah ,  El.),  ‘heart’  (?).)] 

sohsumcomco,  v.  pass.  inan.  it  shines 
(forth),  emits  light,  is  bright  (cf.  iroh- 
sumcomunneal,  to  shine) :  wequai  sohsu- 
mcoma)  pohkenahtu,  the  light  shineth  in 
darkness,  John  1,  5.  Adj.  and  adv. 

sohkumwde,  shining  (forth) ;  - wequai, 

a  shining  light,  John  5, 35;  - - -ketassmt, 

‘king  of  glory’,  Ps.  24,  9.  Vbl.  n.  soh- 
summoonk,  a  shining-forth  (used  by 
Eliot  for  ‘glory’):  wut-touohkomukque 
sohsumoonk,  his-forest  glory,  ‘the  glory 
of  his  forest’,  Is.  10, 18.  (In  preparing 
a  list  of  words  selected  from  Eliot  s 
Bible  Mr  Duponceau,  misled  perhaps 
by  the  order  of  words  in  this  verse-(Is. 
10, 18),  inserted  solisumdonk  for  ‘forest’, 
and  on  his  authority  it  appears  with 
that  meaning  among  the  ‘Select  Words 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


153 


sohsumcomco  -continued. 

from  Eliot’s  Translation’,  incorporated 
into  the  index  of  Air  Pickering’s  edi¬ 
tion  of  Eliot’s  Grammar.) 
sohsumwae.  See  wohsumde,  adj.  bright, 
shining. 

eohteaii  [soh-ohteau],  v.  i.  it  extends,  j 
is  extended,  is  long  (relatively  or  by 
measure).  Found  only  perhaps  in  the 
suppos.  ne  sahteag,  the  extending  of  it, 
its  length:  ne  sahteag  kali  ne  koskag  kah 
ne  sohkunk , 1  the  length  and  breadth  and 
height  of  it’,  Rev.  21,  16;  aetaeu  nesah- 
teag,  ‘on  the  two  ends’  (i.  e.  on  both 
sides  of  the  length  of  it),  Ex.  25,  19. 
Vbl.  n.  sohteaonk,  length,  measure  of 
length,  Eph.  3,  18. 

sohwunum,  v.  t.  he  puts  forth  (his 
hand  or  something  with  or  in  his 
hand),  Gen.  38,  28.  Cf.  summ&gunum. 
sohwushau,  v.  i.  it  goeth  forth,  goes  on 
(of  a  boundary  line,  Josh.  19,  11,  13). 
sohwutchuan,  v.  i.  it  flows  forth,  flows 
out  from:  nippe  sohwutchuan,  water  is¬ 
sued  out,  ran  out,  Ezek.  47, 1,  2.  From 
soli  and  wuiche-u,  it  proceeds  from.  Cf. 
pamitchuan. 

sokanon  [it  pours],  it  rains;  as  n.  rain, 
Matt.  7,  25  ( sookunnon ,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps. 
105, 32;  sookenonni,  it  rains;  sun  scokenon, 
does  it  rain?;  onndhquat,  raining,  C.); 
suppos.  sokanonk,  sokenunk,  when  it 
rains,  Deut.  32,  2:  nashpe  pahkontaut 
mahche  sokanonk,  ‘by  clear-shining 
after  rain’,  2  Sam.  23,  4.  Cf.  sokanon 
naotau,  it  rained  fire,  Luke  17,  29,  with 
sokanum  ncotau,  he  rained  (poured  out) 
fire,  Gen.  19,  24.  Caus.  sokanonteau, 
he  causes  it  to  rain,  Ex.  9,  23.  From 
solik,  solikeii,  it  pours,  with  a  formative 
denoting  rain  or  water  falling,  as  dis¬ 
tinguished  from  -pog,  water  at  rest. 
This  formative  or  generic  is  -’  non,  -nnon, 
or  -nnoon  (Abn.  -Warm;  Del.  -  Ian).  It 
is  found,  besides  in  sokanon,  in  mogkin- 
non  ( mogke-non ),  it  rains  excessively; 
mishinnon,  it  rains  much;  nishkenon,  it 
mists  or  drizzles;  ahqunnon  (ahque-non) , 
the  rain  ceases,  it  holds  up;  and  in  its 
suppos.  form  in  onnohquat,  ‘raining’,  1 
•  (when  it  rains),  C.,  =dnaquat,  ‘rain’, 
R.W.  See  sohkenum.  (Cf.  Sansk.  unna, 
madidus  ( und ,  madidum  esse) ;  ran,  ire. 
Goth,  rann,  currere,  fluere.) 


sokanon — continued. 

[Narr.  sokenun,  dnaquat,  rain;  soke- 
nitch,  when  it  rains;  mishunnan,  a  great 
rain,  R.  W.  81,  82.  Abn.  s8gherann,  il 
pleut  (probably  from  soli-kenum,  to 
pour  forth;  but  cf.  Sansk.  ttkara,  pluvia 
tenuis,  from  sic  and  sik,  irrigare,  hu- 
mectare;  scut,  effundere;  sdyut,  stillare, 
fluere);  kisrann  il  a  plu;  e'kSraiin  ( ah¬ 
qunnon i,  El.),  il  cesse.  Cree  kimme- 
wun,  it  rains  (cf.  Old  Alg.  kimiouan, 
Lah.);  seke-slum,  he  spills  it;  seeke-pu- 
thu,  it  spills;  seekoo-num,  he  empties  it; 
seekee-num,  he  pours  it.  Del.  sokelan,  it 
rains;  k’schilan,  it  rains  hard,  Zeisb. 
Chip,  khniwan,  gimiwan,  it  rains  (sigi- 
nan,  he  pours  it  out,  spills  it,  Bar.).] 
sokemoo.  See  solikeii. 
sokenippash,  imperat.  2d  sing.,  for  sok- 
inush  nippe,  pour  out  water,  Ezek.  24, 3. 
*sokenug  (Narr.),  ‘a  heap’  (of  corn); 
suppos.  inan.  of  sohkenum,  that  which 
is  poured. 

sokenum.  See  sohkenum. 
sokhippag,  imperat.  2d  pi.  ‘draw  out’ 
water,  John  2,  8.  See  vmttuhppa [ enat ]. 
sonkashkod  \_sonk{in)-(m’)ashkeht ],  n. 
the  coming  up  of  grass:  nahohtoeu  son¬ 
kashkod,  ‘the  second  growth’,  Amos 
7,  1. 

sonkehteau,  v.  i.  it  puts  forth,  springs 
out  (as  buds  or  shoots  from  plants); 
infin.  -auuncit,  Job  38,  27. 

[Cree.  sak-etin,  it  is  (come)  forth.] 
sonkin,  -un,  v.  unipers.  it  springs  up, 
shoots  up  (from  the  earth,  as  a  plant), 
Ps.  85,  11;  Is.  55, 13;  pi.  nish  sonkinash, 
they  spring  up,  Matt.  13,  5;  suppos. 
sonkuk,  when  it  springs  up,  springing 
up,  Heb.  12,  15;  Mark  4,  27. 

[Abn.  sankekirar  (le  ble)  pousse, 
parait.  Del.  saken,  pi.  sakenoll,  Zeisl*. 
Gr.  162.] 

sonkippog,  -uppog,  n.  cool  water, 
Prov.  25,  25;  Matt.  10,  42;  pi.  -\-ash, 
‘the  cold  waters’,  .Ter.  18,  14.  From 
sonkqui,  cool,  and  -pog,  water. 

[Narr.  saunqui  nip,  is  the  water  cool?; 
saun  kopaugot,  cool  water,  R.  W.  34.] 
sonksq,  sonkusq,  sunkisq,  n.  queen, 
mistress,  a  woman  who  rules,  2  Chr.  9, 
1;  Esth.  1,  9,  11,  15;  Nah.  3,4:  kehchis- 
sunkisq,  =  kehchi-sunkisq,  chief  mistress, 
great-queen,  Esth.  1, 12.  [sohqhuau,  or 


154 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


sonksq,  etc. — continued. 
sohkau,  and  aqua;  cf.  *sdchim .]  Often 
written  sunk-squaw  and  rnnck  squa. 

[Narr.  saunks,  the  queen  or  sachem’s 
wife;  pi.  sauncksquCiaog,  R.  W.  120; 
saunck  squauh,  Stiles.] 
sonkun.  See  sonkin. 
sohqhu.au.  See  sohkau. 
sonqui,  (it  is)  cold,  cool,  Matt.  24,  12; 
v.  adj.  an.  sonquesu,  he  is  cold  ( sonkqui , 
-queu,  cold;  ohke  sonkqui,  the  earth  is 
cold;  nus-sonkqus,  I  am  cold;  annum 
sonkquesu,  the  dog  is  cold,  C.  In  the 
last  example  sonkquesu  is  not  appro¬ 
priately  used;  sonqui  denotes,  not  the 
sensation,  but  a  quality  of  the  object 
which  imparts  sensation;  being  cold, 
not  feeling  cold).  Cf.  tohkaeu;  tohkoi. 

[Narr.  saunqui  nip ,  is  the  water 
cool?  R.  W.  34.] 

sontim,  n.  master,  Matt.  26,  18,  25;  a 
prince,  Cant.  7,  1:  nus-sontimom  ketas- 
scot,  ‘my  lord  the  king’,  2  Sam.  13,  33; 
pi.  -moog.  Vbl.  n.  sontimooonk,  sover¬ 
eignty,  C.  See  *sdchim;  sohkau. 

• 

sowamyeu,  soanaiyeu,  sowamu,  it  is 

southward,  to  or  at  the  south  (or,  more 
exactly,  the  southwest),  Gen.  12,  9;  13, 

1,  14;  Job  9,  9.  Adj.  and  adv.  sowane, 
southern,  of  the  south,  Matt.  12, 42;  pi. 
sowanish,  soanish,  things  of  the  south, 
Ps.  89,  12;  Is.  43,  6:  sowanolike  [ sowane - 
ohke],  the  south  country,  Gen.  24,  62; 
sowanohkomuk  [sowane-ohke-komuk], 
‘south  land’,  Josh.  15, 19  (i. e.  inclosed 
land,  field). 

[Narr.  sowaniu,  the  southwest  (see 
note  to  sowansh-in).  Del.  schawaneu, 
southerly,  Zeisb.  Gr.  164.] 
sowansh-in,  the  wind  blows  from  the 
SQuth ;  soivansh  (suppos.  ‘when  it 
blows’),  as  n.  the  south  wind,  Job  j 
37,  17;  Cant.  4,  16. 

[Narr.  touwuttin,  the  south  wind; 
sowwanishen,  the  southwest  wind  blows. 
“This  is  the  pleasingest,  warmest  wind 
in  the  climate,  most  desired  by  the  In¬ 
dians,  making  fair  weather  ordinarily; 
and  therefore  they  have  a  tradition 
that  to  the  southwest,  which  they  call 
sovnvainiu,  the  gods  chiefly  dwell;  and 
hither  the  souls  of  all  their  great  and 
good  men  and  women  go.” — R.  W.  83. 


sowansh-in— continued. 

Quir.  perdu  kon  saiiandiduk,  ‘in  another 
country  to  the  southward’,  Pier.  28.] 
*sowwanand  [sowane-  (m’)dn  it],  ‘the 
southern  god’,  R.  W.  110.  See  note  on 
sorvansh-in  above. 

scohq,  sohq,  n.  saliva,  spittle,  1  Sam.  21, 
13;  Job  7,  19.  See  suhkou. 
soohqkuhkom,  v.  t.  inan.  it  bursts  (it) 
in  pieces  (as  wine  a  bottle),  Mark  2,  22; 
Luke  5,  37. 

scokenum.  See  sohkenum. 
sookussun-it  (?),  v.  (when  be  began  to) 
amend,  recover  from  sickness,  John  4, 
52,  =  sooksehp,  Mass.  Ps. 
scoquhkauau.  See  sohquhkauau. 
soowampaguneheg,  n.  a  sling,  1  Sam. 

17,  40;  pi.  -f -ash,  2  Chr.  26,  14. 
spadtauwompaeu  (for  usp-),  he  looks 
upward,  Is.  38,  14  (infin.  - pinneat ); 
imperat.  spadtauompsh,  ‘lift  up  thine 
eyes’  (look  up),  Is.  49,  18.  See  ush- 
puhqu&inat. 

spuhhro.  See  uspuhhco. 
spuhhcowae.  See  uspuhhcowde. 
spuhhcowaonk,  vbl.  n.  See  usphmwaonk , 
a  refuge. 

spuhquaeu.  '  See  ushpuhquainat,  to  look 
upward. 

spukquodt,  as  n.  the  taste  or  flavor  of  a 
thing,  Ex.  16,  31:  ne  dshpukquok,  the 
taste  of  it  (when  tasted),  Num.  11,  8; 
Job  6,  6. 

[Narr.  tedqua  aspuckquat,  what  does 
it  taste  of?  Abn.  8ri-p8g8at,  cela  a  bon 
gout;  matsi-p8g§at,  cela  a  mauvais  gout. 
Cree  rnetho-spuckoosu,  he  is  well-tasted; 
mutche-spuckwun,  it  is  ill-tasted.  Del. 
machtschipoquot,  it  tastes  ugly,  Zeisb.  ] 
spunauonat.  See  uspunauonat. 
squa,  female;  as  n.  one  of  womankind, 
a  female;  pi.  squaog,  women,  1  Tim.  5, 
14  (where  the  prefix  nunk  was  probably 
omitted  by  error  of  the  press);  but 
rarely  used  by  Eliot  except  in  com¬ 
pound  words.  Yb.  subst.  squaiyeuoo, 
she  is  female,  Gen.  6,  19.  In  comp. 
nunksqua,  a  girl ;  sonksq{ua ) ,  a  queen,  etc. 
( eshqua ,  C. ).  With  the  termination 
denoting  a  living  creature  ( -ds  for  odas) ; 
squaas,  squdus,  a  woman  (femina); 
as  adj.  female,  Num.  5,  3;  Deut.  4,  16; 
Matt.  19,  4.  Cf.  mUtarmcus(sis),  mulier, 
uxor.  See  nompaas,  a  male. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


155 


squa — continued. 

[Narr.  squaws,  pi.  -suck,  woman, 
women;  diinin.  squdsese,  a  little  girl 
(squauhses,  Stiles).  Cree  iskwdyoo.  Del. 
ochqueil,  woman;  och  quetschitsch,  girl, 
Zeisb.] 

*Squantam.  ‘  ‘  They  acknowledge  a  God 
who  they  call  Squantam,  but  worship 
him  they  do  not.” — Josselyn’s  Yov. 
“The  good  god  they  call  Tantum,  and 
their  evil  god,  whom  they  fear  will  do 
them  hurt,  they  call  Squantum — Hig- 
ginson’s  N.  E.  Plantation.  The  name 
is  clearly  the  contracted  form  of  mus- 
quantam,  he  is  angry.  “If  it  he  hut  an 
ordinary  accident,  a  fall,  etc.,  they  will 
say  .  .  .  musqudntum  manit,  God  is 
angry.” — R.  W.  109. 

squashim,  squoshim,  a  female  quadru¬ 
ped,  Deut.  7,  14;  adj.  squdshimwe,  Lev. 
4,  28,  32;  5,  6.  Cf.  nomposhim,  male 
quadruped. 

[Narr.  squashim,  R.  W.  Del.  och- 
quichurn,  Zeisb.  In  the  Abnaki,  Rasies 
says  “the  small  animals  ("including 
the  otter,  the  marten,  etc.)  were  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  nanbekik8,  male,  and 
sk8ekik8,  female;  the  moose  and  both 
species  of  deer  by  aiahbe,  male;  he  rar, 
female,  and  the  lynx,  ‘lion’  [panther], 
hare,  and  some  others  by  nahbessem, 
male,  and  sk8essern  [  =  squashim,  EL], 
female.”] 

squehtahwh.au.  See  sequttahwhau,  he  is 
left,  remains  of. 

squi.  See  musqui,  red,  bloody. 

*squnck  (mod.  skunk),  Josselyn’s  Yoy. 
82,  85. 

[Abn.  segai\k8,  bete  puante.  Chip. 
(St  Marys)  shi  kaug,  (Gr.  Trav. )  shegog. 
Peq.  ausounch,  Stiles.] 
squontam,  squont,  squoant,  n.  a  door, 
a  gate,  John  10,  9;  1  Cor.  16,  9;  Gen. 
21, 17  ( usquont ,  a  door,  C. );  pi.  -amash, 
Acts  16,  26  ( ushquontamash ,  Job  38,  10). 
Adj.  and  adv.  -amme,  the  door  of,  or  by 
the  door:  imtch  squontame  kek-it,  from 
or  out  of  the  door  of  thy  house,  Josh. 
2,  19.  Probably  from  the  root  of  sequn- 
nau,  to  be  left  (see  sequnau).  Cf.  Chip. 
ishktvdndem,  ‘door’,  with  ishkwdnddn, 
‘he  leaves  it’ — the  opening  left  in 
(building)  the  house. 


squontam,  etc.  — continued. 

[Narr.  squauntdumuck,  at  the  door, 
R.  IV.  51.  Chip,  ishkwdndem,  Bar.; 
(Sag.)  squon  dem,  (St  Marys)  ish  kw6n 
daim,  Sch.] 

squoshim.  See  squdshim. 

*squtta  (Narr.),  fire,  R.  W.  47  ( squitta , 
a  fire  spark,  Wood).  Cf.  nashqutteau; 
nootau.  (Sansk.  usha,  actio  urendi, 
ardor;  ush,  urere. ) 

[Abn.  skStai,  -tar,  feu;  sk8t,a8io,  il  y 
en  a.  Cree  esk' ootdyoo,  (there  is)  fire. 
Muh.  stauw  ( ?),  Edw.] 

*stoh,  eshtoh  (Mull.), no,  not,  Edwards;  ' 
eschta,  Gallatin  Yoc. 

*succotash.  See  sohquttahhavi  and  cf. 

*msickquatash,  corn  boiled  whole. 
*suckauanausuck  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  the 
black  shells.  F rom  sdcki  and  andwsuck 
(R.  W. ),  shells,  i.  e.  shell-fish. 
*suckauhock  (Narr.),  ‘black  money’. 
“They  break  out  of  the  shell  [of  the 
poquadhock)  about  half  an  inch  of  a 
black  part  of  it,  of  which  they  make 
their  suckauhoek  or  blackmoney,  which 
is  to  them  precious.” — R.  IV.  104,  130. 
From  sdcki,  black,  dark-colored,  and 
hogki,  shell  [cf.  mowhackees,  Wood, 
from  mcoi,  black,  and  hogki-ash  (pi. )]. 
*sucki  (Narr.),  black,  dark  colored,  pur¬ 
ple.  V.  adj.  an.  suckesu,  he  is  black,  a 
blackmail.  “They  call  a  blackamoor 
suckduttakone,  .  .  .  for  sucki  is  black,  and 
wadtacone,  one  that  wears  clothes.” — 
R.  W.  60. 

[Del.  sucked,  v.  adj.  (it  is)  black, 
Zeisb.] 

suhkou,  v.  i.  he  spits,  Mark  7,  35  (suh- 
quinneat,  ‘spitting’,  C. ;  but  it  is  in  the 
form  of  the  so-called  infinitive,  to  spit: 
nuteeskouous,  I  spit;  nis-suke,  I  am  mis¬ 
chievous,  spiteful  (?),  C. ).  The  pri¬ 
mary  meaning  appears  to  be  to  eject, 
discharge  liquid;  hence  noh  sdgket,  noli 
sdgketog,  qui  mingit.  See  scoliq,  saliva. 
V.  adj.  an.  suhkesu,  he  is  a  spitter,  he 
ejects  water  ( sukkissu ,  -og,  C. ;  sickissu, 
-og,  R.  W.,  long  clams,  ‘spitters’). 

[Abn.  sessekS,  crachat;  sessegS,  il 
crache;  nesesekS,  salive;  ne-segld,  mingo. 
Del.  n’sissuk,  spit,  Zeisb.] 
sukoshkodtaeu  (?),  adv.  stooping, 
crouching,  Gen.  49,  9. 


156 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


sukquiyeue,  adj.  and  adv.  in  fine  pow¬ 
der,  in  small  pieces.  See  sohqui. 
sukqush.a-og,  v.  i.  they  are  broken,  Dan. 
11,  22. 

sukquttahham,  v.  t.  he  beats  (it)  small. 
See  sohquttahham. 

*sumhup  (Narr..),  n.  pi.  +  patiog,  bea¬ 
vers,  R.  W.  95.  Cf.  *amisque;  *noomp; 
tumrritink.  noosup  and  stimhup  probably 
correspond  with  Abn.  n8se-mesk8,  the 
female,  and  atsi-mexkS,  the  male  beaver, 
summagunum,  sohm-,  samogkin-,  v. 
t.  he  stretches  forth,  holds  out  (his 
hand  or  something  in  or  with  his 
hand),  Is.  5,  25;  Gen.  22, 10;  Ex.  15, 12 
( nu s-summog kinnitchaem,  I  stretch  out 
my  hands,  C. ).  Suppos.  mmmaginuk, 
when  he  held  out  (his  hand,  Josh.  8, 
19).  Pass,  nienutcheg  ne  samogkinuk, 
the  hand  which  is  held  out,  Is.  14,  26. 
With  inan.  subj.  (v.  i.)  summagolxteau, 
(his  hand)  is  held  out,  Is.  14,  27. 
With  inan.  obj.  and  an.  ending,  surn- 
magunumauau,  he  holds  out  (his  hand) 
to  or  against  (him),  Is.  5,  25.  From 
soh-  and  magco  (he  gives,  presents), 
with  formative  (-’num)  denoting  action 
of  the  hand. 

sun  is  called  by  Eliot  (Gr.  21)  an  ‘adverb 
of  asking’,  signifying  ‘is  it?’:  sunna- 
matta,  ‘is  it  not?’;  mn  wunnegen  wun- 
nesen,  is  it  well  to  do  good?  etc.,  Mark 
3,  4;  mn  net),  god,  etc.,  am  I  a  god?  2 
K.  5,  7;  mnnamatta  yeu  .  .  .  ,  is  not 
this  .  .  .  ?  Job  4,  6. 

[Cree  nah.  Chip.  ua.~\ 
sunkisq.  See  sonksq. 
sunk-squaw.  See  sonksq. 

*sunnadin,  nanummatin  (Narr. ),  the 
north  wind,  R.  W.  From  soivane-adt 
(sowan-it),  to  or  toward  the  south  (?). 
*sunnuckhig  (Narr.),  a  falling  trap  for 
wolves,  loaded  ‘with  a  great  weight  of 
stones’,  R.  W.  143;  a  crushing  instru¬ 
ment.  From  the  same  root  with  the 
following  words. 


*sunnuckhig — continued. 

[Del.  sill  k i  te  lie  men,  to  squeeze  close, 
to  press,  Zeisb.  (cf.  achsiin-hittehican,  a 
steel  trap  (?),  Zeisb.).] 
sunukehteau,  sunugqueht-,  sanuk-, 
v.  caus.  he  crushes  (by  a  weight),  he 
causes  to  be  crushed.  Suppos.  pass, 
(inan.)  ne-sanukehtamuk,  that  which  is 
crushed,  Is.  59,  5.  With  an.  obj. 
-tahheau,  -lahwhau,  he  crushes  (him), 
makes  a  weight  to  fall  upon  (him);  mn- 
nugquetahwhunnean,  fall  (ye  mountains) 
on  us,  Luke  23,  30.  The  primary  verb 
(sunukkeu  (?),  it  falls  heavily,  it  op¬ 
presses  or  presses  down )  is  not  found 
in  Eliot. 

[Abn.  ne-sekkikkamen,  je  le  foule;  ne- 
sekekenemen,  je  leserre,  manu;  ne-segSs- 
kika8un,  je  F6cra.se.] 

sunukkuhkau,  sanuk-,  v.  t.  he  crushes 
(him)  (by  a  falling  weight  [ hassun , 
stone]  is  implied,  or  by  force  from 
above):  nus-sunukkuhkuk,  he  crushes 
me,  Jer.  51,  34. 

-sup.  .See  -sip. 

*suppawn.  See  saupde. 
suppequash,  n.  pi.  tears.  See  mus- 
suppeg. 

sussequnnum,  v.  t.  he  anoints  (it), 
Lev.  8, 10;  t.  an.  sussequnnau,  he  anoints 
(him):  nus-sussequn,  I  anoint  (him), 
Ps.  89,  20.  Vbl.  n.  mssequeonk,  anoint¬ 
ing,  ointment,  Prow  27,  9,  16;  Ex.  40, 
15.  Pass.  -quniUuonk,  being  anointed, 
1  John  2, 27.  Cf.  sohkenum,  he  pours  out. 

[Cree  sooskoosu,  lie  is  smooth;  soos- 
kviow,  it  is  smooth.] 

sussippoeu,  -poi,  it  is  on  one  side  of,  on 
the  border  of:  sussippoeu  Lebanon,  on 
the  side  of  Lebanon  (Lebanon  on-the- 
side),  Is.  37,  4;  nequt  sussippoi,  .  .  .  og- 
komaeu,  on  the  one  side,  ...  on  the 
other,  Ezek.  41, 2;  mssippoe  squont,  ‘the 
sides  of  the  door’,  ibid, 
sussippohkomuk,  n.  the  wall  of  the 
house,  Ezek.  41,  6;  2  Chr.  3,  11;  sus- 
supponkomuk,  Lev.  14,  37. 


trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


157 


’t.  See  adt. 

tabach,  ‘let  it  suffice’,  Ex.  44,  6;  imperat. 

3d  sing,  of  tdpi,  q.  v.  See  uxime. 
tabepco.  See  tapepu. 
tabhum.  See  taphum. 
tabuttantam,  v.  i.  lie  is  thankful,  gives 
thanks,  Dan.  6,  10;  Luke  22,  17;  with 
an.  obj.  -tuniau,  he  thanks  (him)  ( kut-ta - 
botomish,  I  thank  you,  C. )  Adv.  -tum- 
we,  -tamwe,  thankfully  ( tabattdntamcoe , 
C. ).  Vbl.  n.  -tamdonk, thanksgiving. 

[Narr.  taubot  neanawdyean,  I  thank 
you  (?),  R.W.  30.] 

*tackqiuwock,  n.  pi.  twins,  R.  W.  45 
( togquos ,  ogquos,  a  twin ;  pi.  -\-uog,  \ 
C. );  togquonsuooog,  they  are  twins  (?), 
Gen.  25,  24;  cf.  tagwohm,  Gen.  38,  27. 

[Abn.  tagiSiSi,  tous  deux,  ‘ensemble-  i 
ment’;  tagdessSak,  ils  sont  jumeaux. 
Del.  tacquiwi,  together,  Zeisb.] 
tadtamswau  wuhkassoh,  he  pares  his 
nails,  Deut.  21,  12.  See  turn mussuin . 
*tah,  in  dialect  of  the  Vineyard,  at  or 
on,  =adt,  at  (Eliot). 

-tab.  See  rnStah,  the  heart, 
tahncoche,  adv.  in  vain,  causelessly,  Ex. 
20,  7;  Lev.  26, 16;  Prov.  26,  2;  ‘vanity’, 
i.  e.  of  no  account,  Is.  40,  17  ( tohnooche ,  i 
vainly,  C. ). 

[Chip,  cirmhct,  vainly,  without  effect, 
for  nothing,  Bar.] 
tahshe.  See  tohsii. 

tahshin,  v.  i.  he  lifts  himself,  raises  him¬ 
self:  nut-tahshin,  I  lift  up  myself,  Is.  33, 
10;  imperat.  2d  sing,  tdlishin  Jcuhhog, 
lift  up  thyself,  Ps.  94,  2.  Pass,  kuttah 
tahshemoo,  thy  heart  is* lifted  up,  Ezek. 
28,  2. 

tahshinum,  tohsh-,  v.  t.  inan.  obj.  he 
raises  (it),  lifts  (it)  up,  Gen.  40,  20 
( tashun -,  Mass.  Ps. ) ;  imperat.  tohshinush 
kenutcheg,  lift  up  thy  hand,  Ps.  10,  12; 
suppos.  noli  tahshinuk,  he  who  lifts  it 
up,  when  he  lifts  it,  Is.  18,  3.  (Pri¬ 
marily,  he  lifts  with  the  hand,  tahshe- 
num.)  With  an.  obj.  talishinau,  toh- 
shinau,  he  lifts  (him)  up;  pret.  tohshin- 
ohp  [-®p]  askook-oh,  he  lifted  up  the 
serpent,  John  3,  14;  suppos.  part,  tah- 
shinont,  when  lifting  (him);  pass,  -ini- 
muk,  when  he  is  lifted,  John  12,  32. 


T 

tahscotam  [v.  i.  (?)],  as  n.  a  king;  pi. 
-mwog,  Gen.  35,  11.  Vbl.  n.  tahsmta- 
maoonk,  a  kingdom;  pi.  -ongash,  Zeph. 
3,  8 ;  Matt.  4,  8.  Adv.  tahsootamde, 
-tamwe,  of  a  king,  Hag.  2,  22;  Ezek. 
26,  16.  See  ketassoot  ( keh  tassootam?) ; 
*sdchim. 

[Marginal  Note. — “Lifted  up?  —  cf.  so? i- 
tim.”] 

tahtippadtau,  v.  t.  he  quenches  or  cools 

(it)  (?); - nenan,  he  cools  my  tongue, 

Luke  16,  24.  Cf.  uhtappa.ttauunat. 
tannadtuppco,  v.  i.  he  feeds  (as  sheep 
or  cattle),  grazes,  Gen.  41,  18;  Ezek. 
34,  14.  Vbl.  n.  -paoonk,  pasturage, 
pasture,  Ezek.  34,  14;  45,  15. 
tannag,  n.  a  crane,  Jer.  8,  7  (see  sas- 
sadt).  From  tanni,  harsh,  hoarse,  a 
tearing  sound.  See  tannogki. 

[Narr.  taunek,  pi.  -j-  kadog,  R.  W.  87. 
Abn.  taregan,  pi.  -aiik  (cf.  taraghi, 
dfichire,  imjferat.).  Del.  tal  le  ka, 
Zeisb.  S.  B.  29.] 

*tanne  ontowaonk,  ‘a  hoarse  voice ’ ,  C. 
See  tannogki. 

tannegen,  tannekin,  adtannegen, 
dtannegen,  v.  i.  it  brings  forth,  pro¬ 
duces,  yields  (as  the  earth  plants,  a 
tree  fruit),  John  12,  24;  Matt.  7,  17; 
13,  26;  suppos.  tannegik,  -kik,  dlanneg- 
kuk,  Gen.  1,  29;  Luke  13,  9;  ne  tan¬ 
negik,  that  which  grows,  is  produced, 
fruit.  With  an.  obj.  tannetu,  he  grows; 
pi.  dtannetuog,  Ps.  92,  13. 
tannogki,  v.  L  it  is  torn;  adj.  torn:  tan¬ 
nogki  petasquishdonk,  a  torn  coat,  C. 
From  tanni,  it  tears,  makes  a  tearing 
sound.  With  tanni,  tannogki  (Abn. 
taraghi),  it  ‘tears’,  tannag,  ‘a  crane’, 
cf.  Sansk.  dar  ( af ),  ‘lacerare,  dilace- 
rare,  tindere’;  Gr.  depoo;  Russ,  dra-tj, 
scindere;  Goth,  ga-tar;  Ang.-Sax.  txr-an, 
tir-an;  Sw.  tdra;  Dan.  tare,  to  tear;  and 
Greek  ypv  (a  sound,  a  grunt),  ypv^eiv, 
ypvXX?/,  yepavot,  a  crane;  Lat.  grus, 
gruere  (Engl,  ‘the  crane  crunketh’); 
grunnire,  to  grunt ;  Ang.-Sax.  cram; 
Dutch  and  Germ,  kraan;  Sw.  trana; 
Dan.  trane,  a  crane. 

[Narr.  tanocki,  tanocksha,  it  is  torn  or 
rent,  R.  W.  134.  Abn.  taraghi  rre,  cela 
est  dechire  (ou  creve) ;  imperat.  taraghi, 


158 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


tannogki — continued. 

dechire;  tarokSesS,  (le  loup)  hurle. 
Del.  ta  lackat,  cracked,  split,  Zeisb.] 
tannogkinnum,  v.  t.  he  tears  (it),  as 
cloth  or  a  garment,  1  Sam.  15,  28. 
From  tannogki,  with  the  formative 
-num,  denoting  action  performed  by  the 
hand. 

[Narr.  kum-mache-tannakunnam-ous, 
I  have  torn  it  off  for  you.  Abn.  ne- 
dararaghinahadSn,  I  tear  (my  dress); 
ne-taraghenemen,  je  le  creve  de  la 
main.] 

tannogsheau,  v.  i.  it  tears,  is  torn  with 
violence  or  by  force,  1  Sam.  15,  27. 
From  tannogki,  with  sh,  characteristic  of 
forcible  or  violent  action, 
tanohketeaonk,  adtan-,  vbl.  n.  a  gar¬ 
den,  Gen.  2,  8,  10;  Cant.  4,  12.  From 
( ad)tanohketeau ,  he  plants,  cultivates. 
Suppos.  inan.  adtanohketeamuk,  when 
planted,  cultivated;  used  for  ‘garden’, 
Gen.  2,  9. 

tanohtoadtu,  v.  i.  he  casts  lots,  deter¬ 
mines  by  lot,  gives  or  takes  by  lot;  pi. 
-\-og,  Ps.  22,  18.  Ybl.  n.  -tuonk,  deter¬ 
mination  by  lot,  Num.  26,  55;  Prov.  18, 
1(3.  See  adtoau,  he  buys. 

*Tantum.  “The  Penobscots  call  their 
god  Tantum.” — Capt.  J.  Smith.  “The 
good  god  they  call  Tantum,  and  their 
evil  god,  whom  they  fear  will  do  them 
hurt,  they  call  Squantum.” — Higgin- 
son’s  N.  E.  Plantation.  Probably  con¬ 
tracted  from  keihtanntttwm,  ‘my  great 
god  ’ .  See  Keihtannit;  manit;  Squantum. 
tanuppogguhliamcbonk,  vbl.  noun,  a 
threshing  floor,  Jer.  51,  33.  From  ad- 
tau(un)  and  poggohham,  a  place  appro¬ 
priated  for  or  to  threshing;  =ahhut- 
tannuppoghamuk,  2  Sam.  24,  21. 
tapantam,  v.  i.  he  is  satisfied,  contented, 
lit.  enough-minded,  Deut.  38,  23;  im- 
perat.  2d  pi.  -mcok,  be  ye  content  with, 
Luke  3,  14. 

[Del.  tipelendam,  Zeisb.] 
tapeneam,  v.  t.  he  accepts  (it),  receives 
(it)  with  satisfaction,  Eccl.  9,  7;  imperat. 
2d  sing,  tapeneash,  Deut.  33, 11;  3d  sing. 
tapeneaj,  let  him  accept  it,  1  Sam.  26, 19. 
With  an.  obj.  tapeneauau,  he  accepts 
(him),  is  satisfied  with  (him);  suppos. 
part,  tapeneauont,  Esth.  6,  6.  Ybl.  n. 


tapeneam — continued. 

(pass.)  tapeneaumcoonk,  acceptance,  be¬ 
ing  accepted. 

[Del.  tepihilleu,  it  is  enough,  Zeisb.] 
tapenum,  v.  i.  he  is  able,  is  sufficient, 
Dan.  3,  17;  2  Cor.  9,  8;  suppos.  noli  ta- 
penuk,  he  who  is  able;  pi.  neg  tapenukeg, 
theywho  areable,  ‘such  as  had  ability’, 
Dan.  1,  4;  Ex.  18,  21.  From  tdpi.,  with 
the  characteristic  -num  of  action  per¬ 
formed  by  the  hand:  he  is  enough¬ 
handed. 

tapepu,  tabepco,  tapupwco,  v.  i.  he  is 
satisfied  with  food,  enough-eats  [tdpi- 
uppaT],  Nah.  2,  12:  pish  tahepooog,  they 
shall  be  satisfied,  Ps.  22,  26. 

[Chip,  nin-dibismi,  I  ate  enough,- 
Bar.  ] 

tapheau,  v.  caus.  an.  he  makes  (him) 
satisfied,  satisfies,  contents  (him) ;  pass, 
he  is  satisfied,  made  content,  Prov.  14, 
14;  suppos.  part,  tapheunt,  when  satis¬ 
fying,  Prov.  6,  30.  With  inan.  +  an. 
obj.  (traditive)  tapehteau ,  he  satisfies 
(him)  with  (it),  makes  (it)  satisfy 
(him);  nut-tapehteau,  I  satisfy  (them) 
with,  Ps.  132,  15;  Jer.  31,  14. 
taphum,  tabhum,  v.  t.  he  buys,  i.  e. 
makes  satisfaction  for  (it),  Gen,  47,  20; 
1  K.  16,  24.  With  an.  obj.  taphou  (?): 
nut-tapcoh,  I  bought  (them),  Luke  14, 
19. 

tapi,  taupi,  v.  impers.  there  is  enough, 
it  suffices,  Prov.  30,  15,  15;  with  pron. 
prefix  nut-tapet,  there  is  enough  for  me, 
Gen.  33,  9;  imperat.  3d  sing,  tabonh, 
‘let  it  suffice’,  Ezek.  40,  6.  (Cf.  Sansk. 
tarp,  satiare;  Greek  TEpnoo.)  See 
wame. 

[Narr.  taubi',  it  is  enough.  Abn.  tebat, 
c’est  assez.  Micm.  tebia,  assez,  Maill. 
Del.  tepi,  Zeisb.] 
tapupwco.  See  tapepu. 

*taquattin  (Narr. ),  it  freezes:  seip  taqudt- 
tin,  the  river  is  frozen;  auke  taqudtsha, 
the  g-ound  is  frozen,  R.  W.  ( togqu&ttin , 
it  congeals,  stiffens,  Ex.  15,  8).  From 
tohkoi  ( tahki ,  R.W.),  it  is  cold.  (Cf. 
Sansk.  tvae,  tegere;  Lit.  dengiii. ) 

[Abn.  tagSaden,  cela  est  geld,  fige; 
tag8ats8,  il  est  geld.  Cree  tak'&w,  it  is 
cold;  awk'wuttin,  it  is  frozen.  Del.  tax 
quat  ten,  frozen;  ta  tax  can,  thick,  stiff, 
Zeisb.  S.  B.  29,  30.] 


trumbull] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


159 


*taquonek  (Narr. ),  n.  ‘  fall  of  leaf  and  | 
autumn’,  R.  W.  Vbl.  from  tohkoi  ( lahki , 
R.W.),  freezing,  when  frost  comes. 

[Abn.  tag8ahgS.  Cree  luckwdkin,  it  is 
autumn.  Powh.  taqultock,  ‘the  harvest 
and  fall  of  leaf’,  Smith’s  Virginia.  Del. 
taehquoacu,  Zeisb.] 

tashkuhkom,  task-,  v.  t.  he  treads 
upon  (it);  freq.  tattashkuhkom,  Hos. 
10,  11  (infin. );  suppos.  tattashkukog, 
when  he  treadeth  out  (the  corn,  Deut. 
25,  4;  1  Cor.  9,  9).  With  an.  obj.  tash- 
kuhkauau;  freq.  tattcishkuhkauau,  he 
treads  upon  (him),  2  K.  14,  9;  2  Chr. 
25,  28;  (infin.)  Luke  10,  19. 

[Abn.  ne-dakesk&men,  je  le  foule  aux 
pieds.  Cree  takooskum,  he  treads  on 
it,  -skum  “  implying  with  certain  roots 
the  use  of  the  leg  or  foot”,  Howse,  87.] 
*tashpcoonk,  tasp-,  n.  a  table,  C.  [This 
has  the  form  of  an  active  vbl.  n.,  and 
can  not  mean  ‘table’,  though  it  may 
signify  a  meal,  eating  what  is  held  up; 
from  tahshe-uppoo.)  Eliot  transfers  the 
word  ‘  table  ’  without  translation. 
*tashunum.  See  tahshinum. 
*tatackommau-og  (Narr.),  n.  pi.  por¬ 
poises,  R.W.  103.  From  tatagkom  (he 
keeps  striking),  with  -rndu,  generic  for 
‘fish’:  the  fish  which  keeps  striking 
(the  water). 

*tatagganish.  (Narr. ),v.  t.  (imperat.  2d 
sing.)  ‘shake  this’,  R.  W.  54.  Cf.  tat- 
tciuunum. 

*tataggoskituash  (Narr. ),  n.  pi.  ‘afresh 
meadow’,  R.  W.  [ tataggn-oskeht-ucish , 
shaking  grass  (?).] 

[Chip,  totogan,  ‘a  trembling  piece 
of  ground  in  a  marsh  or  swamp’, 
Bar.  Del.  tataxan,  stiff,  close  (?).] 
tatta,  I  know  not,  I  can  not  tell,  John 
9, 12;  20, 13  ( tatto ,  Mass.  Ps.) .  Augm.  of 
toll,  ‘it  may  be’,  an  adv.  ‘of  doubting’, 
as  Eliot  calls  it  (Gr.  22).  * 

[Narr.  tattd.  Abn.  tannega,  je  ne 
sais,  qu’en  sais-je?  Del.  taktdani,  Hkw. ; 
taktani,  ‘be  it  who  it  may’  (adv.);  ‘I 
don’t  know  where’;  atta,  ’ta,  no,  not; 
matta  tani,  in  no  way,  Zeisb.  Gr.] 
tattagkomaii,  v.  t.  an.  (freq.  of  tog- 
komau )  he  strikes  him  repeatedly,  beats 
(him):  wut-tattagkom&uh,  they  beat 
him,  Acts  18,  17;  suppos.  tattogkomont, 
when  he  beats  (him),  Luke  12,  45. 


tattagkomaii — continued. 

With  inan.  obj.  tattogkodtam,  he  beats 
(it);  suppos.  noh  tolitogkodtog,  he  who 
beats  (it),  1  Cor.  9,  26.  See  togkodtam. 
tattamwohtaii,  v.  t.  (caus.)  he  incloses 
(it)  with;  pi.  -taUog  gmsukquanash,  they 
set  in  (it)  stones;  pass.  inan.  hassunash 
tattamwohtau-un-ash  .  .  .  ut  pohquag, 
‘stones  inclosed  in  ouches’,  Ex.  39,  10, 
6.  Vbl.  n.  tattamwohtauonk,  setting,  in¬ 
closing,  Ex.  28,  20. 

tattauunum,  v.  t.  he  shakes  (it),  Acts 
18,  6.  The  formative  -num  implies 
action  performed  by  the  hand.  Caus. 
iattauwohteau,  he  makes  (it)  shake, 
causes  (it)  to  shake;  tattauwohteash 
kuhhog,  shake  thyself,  Is.  52,  2. 
tatteohtaii  menutcheg,  he  smites  (him) 
with  the  fist,  Is.  58,  4;  suppos.  (noh)  tdd- 
teadt,  he  who  smites  (him)  with,  Is. 
3,  17. 

*tattuppunnohkonat,  v.  i.  (infin.),  to 

spin,  C.  See  tuppindhteau;  tuttuppun. 
[tatuppagin,  v.  i.  it  rolls  (on  its  axis 
or  about  itself).]  From  tatuppe, all  the 
same,  motion  about  a  center  without 
advance  (?).  V.  adj.  -ginausu,  it  is 
rolled  together  or  on  its  axis;  pi.  -mash, 
things  rolled  up,  Is.  34,  4.  With  sh  (of 
involuntary  action  or  mischance  ?), 
tatuppagsheau,  it  rolls  itself  or  is  rolled; 
suppos.  -shunk,  ‘when  rolled  together’, 
‘a  scroll’,  Rev.  6, 14.  See  tuppindhteau; 
tuttuppun. 

[Abn.  ne-datebip8d8n,  je  roule  (v.  g. 
pierre,  arbre,  etc.);  ne-datebenemen,  je 
le  roule.  Cree  tetippe-puthu,  it  turns 
(on  its  axis).] 

*tatuppauntuock  (Narr.),  v.  i.  pi.  they 
are  weighing  (with  scales  or  balances), 
R.  W.  136. 

tatuppe,  v.  impers.  it  is  equal;  as  adv. 
alike,  equally,  Job  21,  26:  ne  tatuppe,  ne- 
tatup,  ‘like,  so’,  El.  Gr.  22  (tatdppeyeu, 
just  so;  -yeue,  equally,  C. ) .  Adj.  tattup- 
peyeu,  pi.  -yeuash,  equal  (things),  Is.  40, 
15; Rev.  21, 16.  V.  subst.  tatuppeyeuco,  he 
is  (or  it  is)  the  same  as,  equal  to:  wame 
weyaus  tatuppemoskehtuco,  all  flesh  is  (the 
same  as)  grass,  Is.  40,  6;  pi.  -yeuaoog, 
they  are  equal  to,  the  same  as,  Is.  40, 22; 
Luke  20,  36;  suppos.  -yeucokish,  things 
when  equal,  Ps.  17.  2.  From  tdpi,  it 
suffices,  by  intens.  reduplication. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


160 

tatuppe — continued. 

[Xarr.  netdtup,  ‘it  is  all  one’.  Abn. 
tetebi8i,  a  l’egalite,  egalement.  Cree 
tabiskooch,  alike;  e-dp- itch,  the  same. 
Chip,  tibishko,  equal,  like,  similar,  Bar. 
Del.  tpisqvi,  exactly  so,  Zeisb.] 
tatuppehteau,  v.  caus.  inan.  he  makes 
(it)  equal,  equalizes  (it),  Ps.  33,  15. 

[Abn.  t&tebaghendSe,  il  le  divise  egale- 
ment.] 

tatuppequanum,  v.  t.  he  rolls  (it)  along, 
Matt.  27, 60;  28, 2.  Suppos.  pass,  tatuppe- 
guanumuk,  when  rolled,  that  which  is 
rolled;  hence,  as  n.  ‘a  wagon’,  Xum.  7, 
3;  pi. -mugish and -rnugquash,  ‘chariots’, 
Ex.  14,  9.  Suppos.  inan.  tatuppequash- 
nnk  (from  tatuppequasheau,  v.  i.  it  rolls), 
when  it  rolls;  as  n.  that  which  rolls,  ‘a 
rolling  thing’,  Is.  17,  13. 
tatuppin,  n.  a  thread,  Cant.  4,  3.  See 
tuttuppun. 

*taubut,  taubot  (Xarr.).  See  tabuttan- 
tam,  he  is  thankful, 
taiimaog.  See  tauumaog. 

*taunek  ( Xarr. ),  n.  a  crane.  See  tannag. 
taucomaog.  See  tauumaog. 
taupi.  See  tdpi. 

*taupowaw  (Xarr. ),  ‘  a  wise  speaker’ ;  pi. 
taupowauog.  “Their  wise  men  and  old 
men  (of  which  number  the  priests  are 
also)  .  .  .  they  make  solemn  speeches 
and  orations  or  lectures  to  them,  con¬ 
cerning  religion,  peace  or  war  and  all 
things.” —  R.W.  64, 112.  Probably  from 
tdpi  ( tatibi ,  R.  IV.),  and  perhaps  the 
same  as  v.  caus.  tapheau,  tapehlieau,  he 
give*  satisfaction,  satisfies,  says  what  is 
enough.  Cf.  pauwau,  a  priest. 

[Cree  tbpwayoo,  he  true-says.  Chip. 
tapir  a,  he  true-speaks  (nin  debvre,  I 
speak  truth,  Bar.).] 

*taut  [tautau],  pi.  t.autauog  (Narr. ),  the 
name  of  a  species  of  fish,  ‘sheeps- 
heads’,  R.  W.  This  name,  in  the 
plural,  is  now  popularly  given  to  the 
Labrus  americanus  Bloch  (Labrus  tau- 
toga  of  Mitchell). 

tauumaog,  taum-,  tauoom-  (?),  n.  a 
street,  Dan.  9,  25;  Rev.  21,  21:  tauum- 
maogquehtu,  into  the  street,  Josh.  2, 19. 

[Xarr.  eatau-may  would  be  ‘old  way’ 
or  ‘long  used  way’  (?).  See  eatav'us. ] 
tauwohpahham.  See  touopham.  . 


tauwutchashunk-ish,  ‘breaches’,  Amos 

9,  11.  See  touwvtchathamcoonk. 
*tawishonk,  adv.  in  the  meantime, 

meanwhile,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  4.  31,  =na 
ncoche,  El. 

teflg,  as  n.  thing,  object  (chose):  ne 
leap  .  .  .  matta  ieag,  or  niatteag,  some¬ 
thing  .  .  .  nothing,  Luke  22,  35;  Prow 
9, 13;  ne  teag  peyasik,  a  very  little  thing 
(suppos.),  Is.  40, 15. 

teaguas,  pi.  -assinish,  n.  things,  matters, 
which  are  not  tangible  or  material,  Js. 
42,  9:  ne  teaguas,  something  (spoken, 
Luke  11,  54).  Augm.  tanteaguassinash 
(with  v:ame,  all),  things,  Gen.  24,  1; 
Prov.  26, 10;  Is.  44, 24.  The  primary  sig¬ 
nification  of  tedg  seems  to  be  property, 
possession,  something  had:  ne  ohtunk, 
what  he  hath;  ne  ohtag,  what  is  (se 
habet).  See  ohtauundt;  ohteuk. 

[Xarr.  tedqua,  what  is  this?;  teaqua 
naiintick  ewo,  what  comes  he  for?; 
teaqua  cun-ndtinne,  what  look  you  for?; 
tedg  yo  auguhdttiek,  what  hangs  there?; 
nit-teauguash,  my  money,  R.  IV.] 
teaguash,  teauguash,  pi.  things,  pos¬ 
sessions;  used  by  Eliot  for  ‘money’; 
Gen.  23,  13;  Matt.  17,  27,  etc. 
teagwe,  teague,  adj.  and  adv.  ‘any’, 
Rev.  7, 1:  teague, .  .  .  ne  teague,  of  money, 
...  of  anything,  Deut.  23,  19.  As  an 
interrog.  what?:  teagwe  woi  mishonta)- 
wai,  what  shall  I  cry?  Is.  40,  6.  See 
ch&gwas. 

teanuk,  adv.  presently,  El.  Gr.  21; 
quickly,  immediately,  Gen.  18,  7;  Acts 

10,  29,' 33. 

[Narr.  tedno,  ‘by  and  by’.  Micm. 
temk,  d’abord;  temkeSei,  premierement, 
Maill.  Quir.  chcLraque,  quickly.] 
teaogku,  adv.  ‘rather,  unfinished’,  El. 
Gr.  21  [‘on  the  way  to’  an  end  not  yet 
attained  (?),  or  ‘shortly’;  cf.  tidhqui] . 
See  nogque. 

teashiyeuonk,  teateash-,  vbl.  n.  a 
family,  Deut.  29,  18;  Jer.  33,  24 
( chashiyeuonk ,  teashinnunneonk,  C. ). 
tenogkequas.  See  tinogkukquas. 
tetequshin,  v.  i.  it  trembles,  ‘pants’  (of 
the  heart,  Ps.  38,  10).  From  tatagkom 
(see  tattagkornau) ,  he  beats,  with  sh, 
characteristic  of  violent  action. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


161 


tiadche,  adv.  unexpectedly,  El.  Gr.  22; 
1  Sam.  6,  9;  suddenly,  John  11,  7 
( wachM ,  immediately,  Mass.  Ps.,  John 
6,  21 ); 

-tin,  -tinne.  Eliot  calls  these  “supple¬ 
tive  syllables  of  no  significance”,  etc. 
See  wuttinne +,  vault'd- \~. 
*tinnogkohteas,  n.  a  toad;  pi.  -\-mog,  C. 
tinogkukquas,  tenogkequas,  n.  a  frog; 
pi.  -\-suog,  Ex.  8,  2,  10;  Ps.  105,  30  ( tin - 
nogkoliquase,  -suog,  C.).  Cf.  *kopiauss; 
mohmoskuhteas.  From  a  verb  signi¬ 
fying  to  jump,  with  as  (Mas),  animal: 
the  creature  which  moves  by  jumping. 
See  tannag,  crane  (‘croaker’?). 

[Abn.  arikda8,  il  saute.] 
tiohqui,  tiuhque,  it  is  short;  adv.  and 
adj.  short,  Num.  11,  23;  Ps.  89,47;  Rom. 
9,  28  ( nuttiohquem ,  ‘in  short’,  i.  e.  I  am 
brief,  I  will  speak  briefly,  C.).  Y. 
adj.  an.  tiohqussu,  he  is  short,  of  low 
stature.  Y.  caus.  inan.  tiohquehtiau,  he 
shortens  (it),  makes  (it)  short:  kut- 
tiohquehte-oh,  thou  makest  (it)  short  to 
him,  Ps.  89,  45. 

[Narr.  tiaquonqusm,  he  is  short,  RAY. 
60.  Quir.  taioquiah,  is  short  (of  life), 
Pier.  39.  Abn.  tacik8ess8,  il  est  court; 
ta8ak8at,  cela  est  court.  Del.  taquetto 
(adv.),  short,  Zeisb.] 
tiohquonkque,  (it  is)  low;  suppos.  tioh- 
qunkquodt,  when  it  is  low,  Is.  32,  19. 
-tipimon  (?):  nut-tipimon,  my  shoulder- 
blade,  Job  31,  22.  See  mohpegk;  mut- 
tugk. 

tfpukok,  suppos.  when  it  is  dark.  See 
*tuppaco. 

tisasquodt:  mahche  lisasquodl,  after  (the 
season  of)  mowing,  Amos  7,  1. 
toanneu,  v.  i.  he  gapes,  yawns  ( nut - 
toiwunneem,  I  gape,  C. );  with  an.  obj. 
toannehtau,  he  gapes  at  (him);  nut 
tdunnektongquog,  they  gape  at  me,  Ps. 
22,  13. 

togguhwhonk,  toguh-,  togwonk,  vbl. 
n.  (from  toglium)  the  pounding  (of 
corn,  etc. ) ;  hence  a  mortar  or  place 
for  pounding:  ut  toygvlmvnganit,  ‘in  a 
mortar’,  ‘in  mills’,  Num.  11,  8.  Adj. 
and  adv.  togguhwongane,  of  grinding,  of 
a  mill;  toguhwonganompisk,  togioonka- 
nompsk,  a  millstone,  Job  41,  24;  2  Sam. 
11,  21;  Is.  47,  2. 

B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25- 


togguhwhonk,  etc. — continued. 

[Narr.  tdckunck  or  weskunck,  ‘their 
pounding  mortar’,  R.  IV.  Abn.  tag§a- 
haiigan,  la  pile.  Del.  tachquoahoacan, 
Zeisb.] 

toghum,  togguhhum,  v.  t.  he  grinds  (it) 
( togguhhum-un-at ,  to  grind,  C. );  umt- 
toghumun-eau,  they  ground  it,  Num. 
11,  8. 

[Narr.  tackhummin,  to  grind  corn,  R. 
W.,  i.  e.  to  beat  it  in  a  pounding  mor¬ 
tar.  Abn.  8da’kh8amen,  il  pile  quelque 
chose  dans  la  pile  (hie,  viande,  etc.).] 
togkodtam,  v.  t.  he  strikes  (it)  with  a 
stick  or  some  implement,  Ex.  7,  20; 
Num.  20,  11;  suppos.  noli  togkodtog,  he 
who  strikes  (he  when  striking),  Is.  41, 
7;  Ezek.  7,  9.  Freq.  tohtogkodtam,  tat- 
tagk-,  he  strikes  repeatedly,  beats  (it); 
suppos.  noli  tolitogkodtog,  he  who  beats 
(it),  1  Cor.  9,  26.  Ybl.  n.  togkodtuonk, 
a  blow,  a  striking,  Ex.  21,  25;  freq. 
todtogkodtuonk,  talogk-,  a  beating,  Dent. 
17,  8;  21,  5  (pi.  tattagkodtuongash, 
‘stripes’,  Ind.  Laws).  With  an.  obj. 
togkomau ,  he  strikes  (him) ;  suppos.  noli 
togkomont,  he  who  strikes  or  may  strike, 
Ex.  21, 12,  15;  freq.  tattagkomau  (q.  v. ), 
he  beats  him.  Ybl.  n.  act.  togkomco- 
waonk,  a  blow  given,  Ps.  39,  10;  pass. 
togkomitteaonk,  a  blow  received,  a  being- 
struck,  Job  23,  2.  See  togku. 
togkodteg,  n.  (a  striking  instrument), 
a  sword,  Lev.  26,  6;  1  Sam.  17,  45;  pi. 
-egasli,  -eganash,  Ps.  59,  7.  From  tog¬ 
kodtam.  (Cf.  Sansk.  tug,  ferire,  vul- 
nerare,  tremere;  tad,  pulsare,  ferire; 
tat,  percutere,  ferire.  Ilib.  tathaim,  I 
kill;  tathog,  ‘a  slap’.  Cf.  Lat.  tignum, 
with  Ind.  n.  gen.  -uhtug,  wood,  a  beam, 
a  stick. ) 

[Narr.  n’  tatakcum-muckqun  ewb,  he 
struck  (beat)  me,  R.  W.  148.  Abn.  ne- 
da’khSamen,  je  pile  (quelque  chose); 
ne-dagamaii,  je  le  bats  (v.  g.  lapide); 
ne-taglwt8n,  je  frappe  avec  cela.  Cree 
takatum,  he  stabbeth  (?)  it;  taka-cliega- 
yoo,  he  stabbeth;  ootommahun,  he  beat- 
eth  it;  ootonimaheggun  (a  beating  instru¬ 
ment),  a  hammer,  tomahawk;  but  cf. 
turnmehtam,  tummigquohwhau.  Micm. 
taktem,  je  frappe.  Powh.  tockahacks, 
pickaxes;  tomahacks,  axes,  J.  Smith. 
Del.  tangamuk,  he  stabbed  or  pierced; 


■11 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25- 


162 


togkodteg — continued. 
tan  ga  mend,  pierced;  tangandican,  tan- 
gamican,  a  spear,  Zeisb.] 
togkogku,  v.  i.  it  stops,  stays,  is  stayed 
(of  the  progress  of  pestilence, '2  Sam. 
24,  5);  nut-togkdgkem,  I  stop,  C.  With 
ksh,  characteristic  of  sudden  or  violent 
action,  togkogqshau,  it  was  stopped, 
stayed,  Xum.  16,  48,  50,  =  togkogqush- 
oma>  (pass,  form),  Xum.  25,  8,  =  on- 
tap  ym,  Ps.  106,  30.  Cf.  togkushin. 
[togku,  v.  i.  he  strikes  (with  some  in¬ 
strument),  deals  a  blow;]  intin.  togko- 
nat  qussukquanash  asuh  kounkquttash,  ‘to 
hurl  stones  or  arrows’,  1  Chr.  12,  2. 
With  inan.  subj.  togkeu,  it  strikes;  sup- 
pos.  togkunk  (that  which  strikes),  an 
ax,  Is.  10,  15;  Judg.  9,  48;  pi.  -\-ash, 
Ezek.  26,  9  ( togkong ,  C. ;  tockucke,  a 
hatchet,  Wood);  freq.  tadtugkonat,  to 
beat,  C. 

togkuhwhosu,  v.  i.  he  is  grinding,  he 
grinds,  Judg.  16,  21;  pi.  -osuog,  Matt. 
24,  41.  N.  agent,  -whosuen,  a  grinder; 
pi.  -enuog,  Eccl.  12,  3. 

[Abn.  tag8aham8,  on  le  pile;  dakSassi, 
il  pile  dans  la  pile.] 

togkun,  v.  i.  it  holds,  2  Chr.  4,  5.  See 
tohqunnum. 

togkuppinau,  v.  t.  an.  he  holds  (him) 
fast  by  bonds,  Judg.  15,  10  (infin. ). 
Augm.  and  intens.  tohtogk-,  iattagk 
tculohtogkuppino-uh,  they  bound  him, 
Judg.  15,  13;  suppos.  part,  tohlogkup- 
pinont,  Matt.  12,  29.  Double  trans. 
toglcuppinauau,  he  binds  (him)  fast  to 
(him).  From  tohqunau,  he  holds  fast; 
with  the  characteristic  of  binding  or 
tying  (-pi). 

[Cree  tahkoop-moo,  he  is  tied  up; 
-itldyoo,  it  is  tied  up  ( iappee ,  a  line  or 
cord).  Chip,  (suppos.)  tahkoobezood, 
bound  fast,  John  11,  44.] 
togkushin,  v.  i.  it  strikes  (with  violence), 
is  stopped  (by  a  violent  or  unexpected 
obstacle):  ishkont  kus-seet  togkushin  qus- 
mkquanit,  lest  thy  foot  ‘dash’  or  strike 
with  violence  on  a  stone,  Matt.  4,  6. 
Cf.  togkogku. 

togkussittassun,  v.  i.  he  stumbles,  John 
11,  10;  pi.  -unwog,  they  stumble,  Rom. 
11,  11  ( nut-togkmitamn ,  I  stumble,  C. ). 
From  togkushin  and  m’seet  (musseet),  the 
foot. 


togquattin.  v.  i.  it  congeals,  Ex.  15,  8; 

stiffens,  freezes.  See  *taqudttin. 
*togquos,  a  twin,  C.  See  ogquos;  *tack- 
qiuwock. 

toguhwhonk.  See  togguhuhonk. 
togwonk.  See  togguhwhonk. 
toh,  ‘adv.  of  doubting’,  El.  Gr.  22;  ‘it 
maybe’;  (2)  adv.  ‘of  wishing’;  used  as 
an  annex  ‘  to  every  person  and  varia¬ 
tion  in  the  optative  mood’,  signifying 
‘O  that  it  were!’  ( utinam );  would  that, 
El.  Gr.  34,  65:  ‘  neo-waadchanun  toh ,  I 
wish  I  keep  him’;  (3)  with  the  suppos. 
mood,  in  what  manner,  how:  ahque- 
teaucok  toh  nootamdg,  take  heed  how  you 
hear,  Mark  4,  24;  toh  dnukque  ne  nussin, 
as  he  bids  me,  so  (or  that)  I  speak, 
1  K.  22,  14.  Cf.  uttoh. 

[XIoh.  taugh,  taukh,  Edw.  and  Pray¬ 
ers,  i,  6,  7.] 

toh,  tohhen,  interrog.  particle,  how? 
where?  what?  It  supplies  the  place  of 
the  interrog.  pronoun,  inanimate,  as 
houan  [ewo-uri],  who?,  does  that  of  the 
animate.  In  some  dialects,  for  example 
the  Cree,  tohhen  or  its  representative 
has  sing,  and  pi.  an.  and  inan.  forms; 
but  as  used  by  Eliot,  it  is  indeclinable. 
See  tohneit;  tolmoh;  tohivutch,  etc. 

[Narr.  tou  vmtttin,  where  lives  he?; 
tuckowekin  \toh  kowekin],  where  dwell 
you?;  taliena  [ toh  liennoii],  ‘what  is  his 
name’,  how  is  he  called?;  tahettamen 
[ toh  hettamun ],  ‘what  call  you  this’, 
how  is  it  called?  Abn.  tarini  aiahian,  quo 
vadis?;  tarini  Sernan,  unde  venis?;  aren- 
aiibes  tarini,  combien  d’ homines!;  tahna, 
quiconque.  Micm.  do,  “note  interrog¬ 
ative,  comme  num,  ou  ne,  en  latin”; 
interrog.  pron.  (an.)  tan,  pi.  tanik; 
(pret. )  tanak,  pi.  tannkik,  celui  que; 
(inan.)  tan,  pi.  tanel;  (pret.)  tune!,  pi. 
tannkel,  ce  que; 1  ‘  tan  est  aussi  ad verbe  de 
temps,  et  signifie  quand”;  “est  encore 
adverbe  de  lieu,  et  signifie  ou,  en  quel 
lieu,  en  ce  lieu”,  Maill.  Cree  tana ,  in¬ 
terrog.  pron.  an.  which;  pi.  tdn-dnekee; 
inan.  t&n-emah,  pi.  tdn-anehee,  Howse  189 
(but  in  the  examples,  p.  280,  the  in¬ 
flections  are  transferred  to  the  verb  or 
verbal  to  which  tun  is  prefixed,  its  use 
corresponding  with  that  of  toh  (in- 
decl.),  by  Eliot).  Del.  ta,  tani,  where?" 
Zeisb.]  ’ 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENC4LISH  DICTIONARY 


163 


tohkaeu,  adv.  ‘in  cold  weather’,  Prov.  ! 
25,  20.  See  tohkoi. 

tohkekom  [=  tohkoi-  k-oomoo,  it  comes 
cool  (?)],  n.  a  spring  .(of  water),  a  ! 
fountain,  Lev.  11,  36;  pi.  -kommuash, 
Josh.  15,  19.  Adj.  and  adv.  -kommue, 
of  fountains,  Cant.  4,  15;  Xeh.  3,  15: 
tohkekommupog,  springs  of  water  {-}iog), 
Xum.  19,  17;  Josh.  15,  19. 

I  [Abn.  tekebi,  eau  froide;  tekepighe, 
fontaine.  Cree  tdke-gumu,  cold-liquid- 
is-it;  it  is  cold  (?).  Chip.  (Sag.)  tack- 
keebea,  Sch.  ii,  462;  takigami,  spring 
water,  Bar..;  tukagumi,  the  water  is  cold, 
S.  B.  Shawn,  tuk-ee-kum-ee.  Miami 
taw-keng-gaw-me.  ] 

tohkequn,  tuhkekun,  v.  i.  it  is  heavy, 
Prov.  27,  3;  Job  6,  3;  23,  2;  pi.  -\-ash, 
Matt.  23,  4:  tukkekhukqunash,  they  are 
heavy  (for  me),  Ps.  38,  4;  snppos.  tuh- 
kequog,  when  it  is  heavy,  Ps.  38,  4;  ne 
tuhkequok,  the  weight  of  it,  1  K.  10,  14; 
unuttuhkequane,  by  weight,  of  the  weight 
of;  pi.  -anash,  Xum.  7,  86. 

[Xarr.  qussiicqun,  heavy;  kuk-qussuck- 
qun,  you  are  heavy  (cf.  qussuk,  a  rock). 
Abn.  tekigSr,  il  est  pesant ;  tekigSan,  cela 
est  pesant.  Del.  tak-achsun  (heavy 
stone),  lead,  Zeisb.] 

tohkoi,  v.  impers.  it  is  cold,  cold  is;  as  n. 
cold,  Job  37,  9;  John  18, 18:  koone  tohkoi, 
the  cold  of  snow,  Prov.  25,  13;  suppos. 
(concrete)  tohkag,  when  it  is  cold,  Job 
24,  7;  pi.  -gish,  Xah.  3,  17  ( mcocheke 
tohkoi,  it  is  very  cold  (weather),  C. ).  The 
primary  signification  is,  perhaps,  con¬ 
gealed,  stiffened,  or  made  hard,  solid  (by 
cold).  Cf.  togqudttin  (Xarr.  taquattin),  it 
congeals,  it  freezes;  *taquonk,  and  with 
these  togkogku,  it  is  stopped,  obstructed. 

[Xarr.  tahkl,  tatakki,  ‘cold  weather’; 
tahkees,  cold  [cool,  dimin.  (?)];  taki- 
tippocat,  it  is  a  cold  night.  Abn.  tag- 
Saden,  tkai,  (la  sagamit4)  est  froide, 
cela  est  gele,  fige;  tekighen,  la  terre  est 
froide;  tekitebakat,  il  fait  froid  la  nuit, 
etc.  Cree  tcLk'ow,  it  is  cold.  Del.  tekek 
[suppos.  =  tohkag  (?)],  cold,  Zeisb.  Gr. 
42.  Chip,  tu  ka  gu  mi,  ‘the  water  is 
cold’,  S.  B.] 

tohkokquok,  suppos.  when  it  is  cold 
weather,  in  a  season  of  cold,  ‘in  the 
cool  of  the  day’,  Gen.  3,  8. 

[Xarr.  taukocks,  cold  weather.] 


tohkonogque,  conj.  although,  El.  Gr. 
22;  tok-,  Job  13,  15. 

*tohkcosin,  v.  i.  [he  raises  himself  (?)], 
he  climbs:  nut-tohkcos,  I  climb;  tohkoosin- 
neat,  to  climb,  C. 

tohkrotaau,  v.  t.  he  climbs  upon  (it) : 

- - metug,  he  climbed  the  tree,  Luke 

19,  4;  pi.  tohkcotaudog  weetudmehtu,  they 
climb  up  upon  the  houses,  Joel  2,  9; 

- kumnnpskoiyeu-ut,  they  climb  up 

upon  the  rocks,  Jer.  4,  29.  Ybl.  n. 
tohkootauonk,  a  ladder,  Gen.  28,  12  (tah- 
koosowontuk,  C.).  With  the  character¬ 
istic  of  forcible  or  violent  action  (sh) , 
togkcoshaau;  pi.  togkooehdog;  hassaneu- 
tunk,  they  scale  the  wall,  Joel  2,  7.  Cf. 
tcokeu ,  ‘  he  wakes  ’ ,  rises  (?) . 

[Xarr.  n’ taquatchuwaumen,  ‘I  go  up 
hill’;  tagnatchbwash,  go  (thou)  up  hill, 
E.  W.  76.] 

tohneit,  conj.  if,  El.  Gr.  22:  tohne.it  nenag , 
if  it  be  so,  Dan.  3,  17. 
tohnoh,  adv.  interrog.  whence?  Gen.  42, 
7 : - uoh  au,  whither  can  he  go?  John 

7,  35  ( tonnoh ,  whither,  where;  tonnoh- 
witch,  whence,  C. ).  See  toh,  tohhen. 

[Xarr.  tunna  co-wdum,  whence  came 
you?;  tunnock  kuttbme,  whither  go  you? 
R.  W.  28  (cf.  p.  73).  Abn.  tanni  8eman, 
unde  venis?;  tanni  aianian,  quo  vadis? 
Micm.  tan,  ou,  en  quel  lieu,  en  ce  lieu. 
Cree  tdn-itte,  what  place?  where?;  tan’ittk 
dbtclie,  from  which  place?  whence? 
Del.  ta  table,  where?  Hkw.] 
tohqunnum,  v.  t.  he  lays  hold  of  (it), 
takes  fast  hold  of,  seizes  (with  the 
hand),  catches;  pi.  -umwog,  Is.  5,  29. 
Ybl.  n.  tohqunnumoonk,  a  seizing, 
‘prey’,  Ezek.  19,  3.  With  an.  obj. 
tohqunau,  he  lays  hold  of  (him),  holds 
him  fast,  Ps.  10,  9;  Judg.  8,  14  (pass, 
he  is  seized  or  taken,  Ezek.  19,  8); 
vmtohqun-ouh,  they  caught  him,  Mark 
12,  3.  From  togqun,  tohqun,  it  holds, 
with  formative  -num,  denoting  action 
by  the  hand.  Cf.  togkogku;  togkushin. 

[Cree  t&kwa-num,  he  grasps,  holds  it 
with  the  hand;  tdkwdlum,  he  holds  it 
in  his  mouth.  Abn.  ne-kerlian,  ‘  je  prens 
(v.  g.  une  marte)dans  l’attrape’;  kera- 
higan,  attrape  (aux  ours).] 
tohsahke,  adv.  whilst,  so  long  as,  1  Cor. 

8,  13.  Cf.  nisohke. 
tohshinum.  See  tdhshinum. 


164 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  -5 


tohsii.  tohsheu,  adj.  or,  as  Eliot  classes 
it,  a  ‘distributive  pronoun’,  signifying 
how  much:  “pi.  tohmog ,  tohsunash, 
how  many”,  El.  Gr.  8.  Elsewhere 
i  p.  14)  he  gives  “tohsu,  or  tahshe,  which 
is  varied  [in  the  pi.]  tohmog,  tohsuash, 
or  tohshinash”,  as  an  ‘additional’  or 
‘word  suppletive,  which  signifieth 
nothing’  added  to  the  numerals  from 
5  to  9  (inclusive),  and  ‘which  receiv- 
eth  the  grammatical  variation  of  the 
things  numbered,  animate  or  inani¬ 
mate’:  napanna  tahshe,  five;  an.  pi. 
napanna  tohsuog;  inan.  pi.  napanna 
tohsuash  [or  tahshinash] ;  yeu  tolisheu, 
for  so  much?;  nux,  ne  tohsheu,  yes, 
for  so  much,  Acts  5,  8;  vmnneese  tah¬ 
she,  twice  as  much,  Job  42,  10;  nequt 
pasukme  tahshee,  a  hundredfold  (times 
so  much),  Luke  8,8  ( tohshe ,  so  much; 
ne  tohshit,  so  often,  so  many  times,  C. ). 
PI.  an.  tohsuog,  how  many  (persons); 
inan.  tohshinash,  tahshinash,  tohsuash, 
how  many  (things);  ne  adtahslie,  ne 
ahhut  tahshe,  [that  which  is  to  or  at  so 
many]  so  many  as,  the  sum  of,  2  Sam. 

2,  23;  Mark  6,  56;  2  K.  4,  8;  suppos. 
inan.  ne  adtahsik,  the  whole  number, 
the  sum,  Rev.  13,  18  ( ne  audtahsinit, 
‘the  sum  of  the  number’,  1  Chr.  21,5); 
suppos.  an.  pi.  ne  adiahshehettit,  they 
l>eing  (when  they  were)  so  many,  as 
many  of  them  as,  Judg.  3,  1;  1  Tim. 
6,1.  As  a ‘suppletive’ to  the  numerals  I 
from  5  to  10,  the  signification  of  tahshe 
( tohsu )  is  obscure,  though  Eliot  was 
certainly  wrong  in  supposing  it  without 
significance.  It  may  not  improbably 
be  related  to  tahshin,  he  lifts  himself, 
raises  tip,  and  tahshinum,  he  holds  up 
or  raises  (his  hand  or  something  in  his 
hand).  With  an  inan.  subj.  tahshin 
becomes  tahsheu,  it  lifts,  or  is  lifted  up. 
The  Algonquian  system  of  numbers  was 
quinary,  and  borrowed  doubtless  from 
the  lingers  of  the  hand.  At  five 
( napanna ,  naho  napanna,  or  sometimes 
napanna  tahshe),  one  hand  was  put  up 
(neepa>,  neepau-un,  stood  upright);  at 
six,  5+1,  one  finger  of  the  second  hand 
was  raised,  nequtta  tahshe,  and  so  on. 

[Narr.  tashin  eom-mesim,  how  much 
shall  I  give  you?;  pi.  inan.  tashinash. 
Abn.  kessdaknaSa,  ou  tahni  kessSihidit, 


tohsu,  etc. — continued, 
combien  sont  ils?;  kessenSmaSa,  ou  kes- 
sen8ar,  combien  .  .  .  de  ces  c hoses?;  ni 
ake  si  nail,  voilil  tout,  voilfl  toutes  (des 
poires);  negSdahs,  six;  pi.  an.  negSdaiis- 
kessSak;  inan.  -kessenSr.  Micm.  tach, 
combien?;  tachigek,  combien  sommes- 
nous?;  tachigigik,  combien  sont-ils?  etc. 
(coniine  un  verbe) ;  an.  pi.  ajSgom  dkrhi- 
gik,  six;  dkch  s’emploie  ordinairement 
apres  lesnombres6,  7,  8, 9, 10, 100, 1000, 
etc.  Cree  ‘ ‘ from  t ditto,  number  (?),  are 
formed  it-tussu-ulc  (an.  i.),  they  are,  or 
number,  so  many;  ■it-tAhtin-wah  (inan. 
i.)”,  etc.;  nickool-wdssik,  six.  Del. 
tschitsch,  more,  again;  ta  tchen,  how 
much?  Zeisb.] 

tohwutch,  tohwaj,  adv.  interrog.  why? 
(El.  Gr.  21),  Job  3,  11,  12:  tohvnitch 
koueyog,  why  sleep  ye?  Luke  22,  46. 
tolnraj  is  the  indefinite  and  suppos. 
form.  From  toll  and  vutche,  what 
from?  wherefore? 

[Cree  tdn'virhe,  what  from?  why? 
Narr.  tawhitch .] 

tohwuttintupanoh,  ‘he  cared  for 
(them)’:  mat .  .  .  tohvruttintupandoh,  he 
‘not  .  .  .  cared  for  (the  poor)’,  John 
12,  6,  =  “matta  wutche  tohen  tupponum- 
op" ,  Mass.  Ps.  (Eliot  has  rnatta  toh- 
hentup&num&ua)  sliepsoh,  ‘he  careth  not 
for  the  sheep’,  John  10, 13,=w«ffa  tup- 
panumoco  sheepsoh,  Mass.  Ps. ). 
tomeii,  v.  i.  he  escapes,  saves  himself, 
goes  clear  (infin.  tomun-al,  to  escape, 
Ezra  9, 8).  Caus.  an.  tomheau,  he  causes 
to  go  clear,  saves,  delivers,  1  Sam.  23, 5; 
imperat.  2d  sing.  +  3d.  pi.  tomireh,  save 
thou  them,  1  Sam.  23,  2;  suppos.  noli 
mos  nut-lomhik,  he  can  deliver  me,  1 
Sam.  17,  37.  Caus.  inan.  lomwehteau , 
he  saves  (it),  2  K.  13,  25. 
tomogkon,  v.  i.  it  is  flooded,  there  is 
a  flood.  As  n.  a  flood,  Gen.  6,  17; 
Job  22,  16;  Matt.  7,  25;  the  rising  of 
water,  flood  tide  ( nippe  tdmogkon,  water 
flows,  C. ;  tommogkon,  tommog,  Mass. 
Ps. ).  PI .  wadchuash  sogkodtunk  tomog- 
konash,  the  mountains  flow  with  milk, 
Joel  3,  18.  Suppos.  tomogkog,  when  it 
flows  with,  when  there  is  a  flopd,  Ex. 
3,  8. 

[Narr.  tamoccon,  flood  tide;  tauma- 
coks,  upon  the  flood  (i.  e.  when  water 


trumbuli.] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


165 


tomogkon — continued. 

is  rising),  R.  W.  100.  Abn.  tam&gan, 
la maree  monte;  tamagaghe,  mareemon- 
tante.  ] 

*ton  (Mull.),  a connective,  and,  moreover 
(between  clauses);  don,  Ps.  19,  1,  2,  11, 
also  Watts’  Cat.  25,  ans.  3,  and  Lord’s 
Prayer  in  [Quinnev’s?]  Assembly  Cate¬ 
chism  5,  6. 

tonkqs.  See  acUonkqs,  kinsman  or  kins¬ 
woman. 

toshkeonk  (?),  vbl.  n.  a  ‘crashing’  noise, 
a  crash,  Zeph.  1,  10. 

touappu  [toueu-appu,  he  remains  soli¬ 
tary  or  deserted],  v.  i.  he  is  deserted, 
abandoned:  nun-neechanog  touappuog, 
my  children  are  desolate,  Lam.  1,  16. 
toueu,  touweu,  v.  i.  it  is  solitary,  de¬ 
serted,  unoccupied:  ut  touweu,  ‘in  the 
desert’,  Ps.  78,  40.  Hence  suppos.  tou- 
wag,  ‘a  gap’  (place  left  open),  Ezek. 
13,  5. 

[Del.  tauwiechen,  it  is  open  (e.  g.  the 
way),  Zeisb.  Gr.  168.] 
touiesu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  solitary,  de¬ 
serted;  as  n.  ( tommies ,  touiis),  an  or¬ 
phan,  a  fatherless  child,  Ex.  22,  22; 
Deut.  14,  29;  27,  19. 

[Xarr.  towiuwoek,  fatherless  chil¬ 
dren,  R.  W.  45.] 

touishin,  touwushin,  v.  i.  inan.  subj.  it 
is  desolate,  it  lies  waste:  ohke pish  toui¬ 
shin,  the  land  shall  be  desolate,  Mic. 
7, 13;  suppos.  ne  tauuhshik,  that  which  is 
desolate  or  waste,  Hag.  1,  9.  Adj.  and 
adv.  touishinne,  touwushinne,  Job  15,34; 
Is.  35,  1. 

[Del.  tau  trie  chen,  it  is  open,  Zeisb.] 
tountomuk.  See  oontumuk,  the  womb, 
touohkomuk  [suppos.  inan.  or  pass, 
part,  of  touohkeu,  from  toueu-ohke,  de¬ 
serted  place,  ‘wild  land’  (?)],  n.  the 
desert,  the  wilderness,  a  solitary  place, 
Ex.  5,  3;  Ps.  107,  4;  Is.  14,  7;  44,  23 
( touohkomuk ,  C. ) ;  pi.  -ukquash,  Is.  48, 21. 
Adj.  and  adv.  -ukque,  of  the  wilderness, 
etc.,  not  cultivated,  Deut.  32,  10;  2  K. 
4,  39;  Is.  10,  18. 

[Del.  tachanigeii,  woody,  full  of  wood, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  165;  te-ke-ne,  the  woods, 
Zeisb.  Yoc.  30.] 

touohpeu,  v.  i.  he  goes  in  (or  into)  water, 
John  5,  7  ( tauohpe ,  Mass.  Ps. );  suppos. 
tauohpit,  when  he  goes  into  water, 
ibid.  v.  4. 


toudhpuhteau,  v.  t.  (caus.)  he  casts  it 
into  (the  water);  pi.  -teaog  en  kehtah- 
hdnit,  they  cast  (it)  into  the  sea,  Jonah 
1,  5. 

touopham,  tauwohpahham,  v.  t.  he 

puts  (it)  in  water,  ‘seethes’  it,  Ex.  29, 
31;  Num.  6,  19  ( nuttauohpunukcoh ,  he 
puts  me  Into  (the  water),  Mass.  Ps., 
John  5,  7).  Cf.  neepattau. 

[Abn.  tsaSapS,  il  se  plonge  dans  l’eau. 
Xarr.  touwopskhommke  (imperat.  2d  pi. ) , 
cast  anchor,  i.  e.  throw  the  stone  into 
the  water.] 

touppuhhosu,  v.  adj.  an.  he  is  put  into 
water;  suppos.  noli  touppuhhosit,  he  (or 
an.  obj.,  as  weyaus,  flesh)  when  put  in 
water,  ‘sodden’,  Xum.  6,  19. 
touweu.  See  toueu. 
touwushin.  See  touishin. 
touwutchathamooonk,  ‘a  breach’  (in  a 
house),  Amos  6,  11.  See  tauwutchash- 
unk-ish. 

*touwuttin  i  Xarr.),  the  south  wind  (?), 
R.  W. 

*toyusk  (Xarr.),  n.  a  bridge,  R.  AY.  Cf. 
tooskeonk. 

[Del.  ta  yacli  quoan,  Zeisb.] 
tcoanneu.  See  ptcowu. 
tcohpu.  See  toopu. 

trokeu,  tcohkeu,  v.  i.  he  wakes  from 
sleep,  Ps.  78,  65;  pret.  nul-tookep,  I  did 
wake,  Ps.  3,  5;  Jer.  31,  26;  imperat.  2d 
sing,  tmkish;  suppos.  tookeii,  when  he 
wakes,  is  awakened,  Zech.  4, 1 ;  tookion, 
when  I  wake,  Ps.  17,  15.  With  the 
characteristic  (sh)  of  suddenness  or 
involuntary  action,  tooksheu.  Y.  t.  an. 
obj .tcokinau,  he  wakes,  awakens  (him): 
nut-tmldn-uk,  he  wakes  me,  Is.  50,  4; 
Zech.  4,  1. 

[Xarr.  tokisli,  wake  thou,  pi.  tokcke; 
kitumydi  [ kittuinma ,  EL]  tokccm,  as  soon 
as  I  wake;  v.  t.  tdkinish,  wake  him. 
Abn.  ne-tSkira,  je  m’eveille;  ne-tSkki- 
mah,  ‘je  l’eveille,  moiparlant’,  etc.] 
-t<xm.  See  muttoon,  the  mouth, 
tconeque,  it  slips,  is  slippery;  as  adj.  and 
adv.  Jer.  23, 12;  imperat.  3d  sing,  tame- 
quaj,  let  it  slip  or  be  slippery,  Ps.  35,  6. 
toonequshin,  v.  i.  inan.  subj.  (it)  slips 
or  slides,  Ps.  94,  18;  suppos.  nusseet 
tamukqushik,  when  my  foot  slips,  Ps. 
38,  16.  With  an.  subj.  tconequssu,  he 
slips,  is  slipping.  ( Tconukquesfte  kup- 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


166 


tcDnequshin — continued. 
pat,  slippery  ice,  C. ;  but  the  adj.  should 
lie  tmneque  or  tconeikqmhinne.) 
tamuppasog,  n.  the  tortoise,  Lev.  11,  29. 

[Alin.  tSrebe;  pi.  -bak,  tortue.  Del. 
loolj>e  [ tulpe ,  Hkw.];  tdlpa,  turpa,  Cam- 
panius  (unde  deriv.  terrapin);  tulpe,  a 
water  or  sea  turtle,  Zeisb.] 
tcopu,  tcohpu,  (there  is)  a  (white)  frost, 
Gen.  31,  40;  Ps.  78,  47;  147,  16  (‘hoar 
frost’);  tcop,  ‘dew’,  Cant.  5,2;  suppos. 
toohpuwudt,  when  there  is  frost,  Ex.  16, 
14.  Cf.  muhpooi,  it  snows  (C.). 

[Narr.  tupu,  a  frost;  missittdpu,  a  great 
frost.  Del.  to  pan,  frost,  Zeisb.  S.  B. 
12;  ‘it  freezes  a  white  frost’,  Zeisb. 
Gr.  161.] 

tcoskeonk,  vbl.  n.  a  fording  place  (?);  ut 
tooskeonganit,  at  the  ford,  Is.  16,  2.  Cf. 
Hoyiisk,  a  bridge;  see  pohquag. 

[Narr.  wui-toclkemin,  to  wade;  toce- 
ketuck,  let  us  wade.] 
tcowu.  See  ptoovm,  he  flies. 

-tugk.  See  muttugk,  m’tugk,  the  shoul¬ 
ders,  i.  e.  the  upper  part  of  the  back, 
tuhkekqun.  See  tohkequn,  heavy, 
tuhkekun.  See  tohkequn. 

*tuhkes,  adv.  by  this  time,  Mass.  Ps., 
John  11,  39;  =yeu  aquompak,  El. 

-tuk,  n.  generic  for  ‘river’;  found  only 
in  compound  words,  as  kishketuk,  near 
to  or  by  the  river,  Ex.  2,  5;  Ezek.  47, 

6,  7;  ndahtuk  ( noeu-tuk ),  the  middle  of 
the  river,  Josh.  12,  2;  13,  9,  6;  kehteih- 
tukqut,  at  the  great  river,  Gen.  15,  18. 
So,  qunni-tuh-ut  (hodie,  ‘Connecticut’), 
at  the  long  river;  missi-tuk  (‘Mystic’), 
the  great  river,  etc.  It  is  a  contraction, 
or  perhaps  the  suppos.  form,  of  a  verb 
tukkoo,  signifying  it  waves,  flows  in  ■ 
waves,  fluctuatus  est.  The  pi.  tukkcoog 
is  used  by  Eliot  for  ‘waves’,  Ps.  65,  7; 
89,  9;  Mark  4,  37,  etc.  ( keitoh  wuttuk- 
oomoli,  the  sea  whose  waves,  etc.,  Is.  51, 
15) .  Heckewelder  confounds  this  word, 
which,  for  the  Delaware,  he  writes 
hittuck  and  translates  ‘a  rapid  stream’, 
with  m’htuk  ( m’htug ,  El.),  a  tree,  I 
Hist,  and  Lit.  Trans.  Am.  Philos,  j 
Soc.  i,  61.  tukkoo  itself  is  either  a 
derivative  form  or  nearly  related  to  the 
primary  verb  togku,  he  strikes.  It  has 
apparently  dropped  an  initial  syllable, 
ont,  the  characteristic  of  involuntary 


-tuk — continued. 

motion  or  change  of  place  (see  ontapin- 
nedt),  which  syllable  is  restored  to  its 
derivatives:  keht-ontukquog,  ‘the  mighty 
waves’,  Ps.  93,  4;  mish-ontukaoe  kehtoh- 
han-it,  to  ‘the  troubled  [great-waved] 
sea’,  Is.  57,  20;  kehtahhan-ontuk,  a  wave 
of  the  sea,  James  1,  6;  ketahhannuppog 
tukaoaxDgk,  the  waters  of  the  sea  (when 
they)  are  troubled,  Ps.  46,  3.  See  sepu. 

[Abn.  tegS,  flot,  pi.  tegS’ak;  kesaiitegS, 
grand  flot.  Chip,  tigou-ug,  waves,  Luke 
21,  25.] 

tummehtam,  v.  t.  inan.  he  severs  (it), 
cuts  it  off,  Prov.  26,  6;  Jer.  10,  3;  im- 
perat.  2d  sing,  tummehlash,  tummethash, 
Matt.  5,30;  Luke  13,  7;  tummehtamuvg 
up-puhkuk,  1  Sam.  31,  9,  =  tummussum- 
wog  up-puhkuk,  2  Sam.  20,  22,  they  cut 
off  his  head;  suppos.  tdmettdhhog,  tamah- 
tahhog,  when  hesevers,  cuts  off,  Is.  66,  3; 
suppos.  inan.  and  pass,  tummehthamuk, 
when  it  is  cut  off,  being  cut  off,  Deut. 
23,  1;  Job  14,  7.  With  an.  obj.  tummeh- 
tahwhau  ( tummetah -,  tammuttah-,  etc.), 
he  cuts  (him)  off:  nut-tummetah,  I  cut 
him  off,  Lev.  17,  10;  suppos.  part,  noli 
tametahu'hont,  he  who  cuts  off,  Is.  51,  9. 
tummigquohwhau,  -wou,  v.  t.  an.  he 
cuts  off  (his)  head,  beheads  (him), 
Matt.  14,  10. 

[Narr.  ttmequassin,  ‘to  cut  off  or  be¬ 
head’,  R.  W.  Abn.  ne-temi gSeteh ah,  ne- 
temikSssan,  ne-temig§e  haraii,  je  lui  coupe 
la  tete.  Powh.  tomahacke,  axes,  J. 
Smith  (see  togkodteg).  Del.  temahiean, 
hatchet;  temitehemen,  cut  off,  Zeisb.] 
*tummdckquashunck  (Narr.),  n.  a 
beaver  coat,  R.  W.  See  tummfink. 
tummuhliouau,  v.  caus.  he  deserves, 

earns,  is  worthy  of,  Jer.  26,  11:  - 

onkquatunk,  he  earns  wages,  Hag.  1,  6; 
suppos.  noh  tamhouadt,  he  who  earns 
(it),  ibid.  Vbl.  n.  tummuhhouaonk, 
desert:  kut-tamhouaonganaoash,  your 
deserts,  Ezek.  7,  27.  Cf.  attumunnum,  he 
receives  it. 

tummunk,  n.  a  beaver;  pi.  -unkquaog, 
El.  Gr.  9(tumunk,C. ;  tommunque,  Stiles). 
This  name  is  evidently  a  verbal  from 
the  base  tumm-u  (he  severs,  cuts  off), 
from  which  are  formed  tummussum, 
tummehtam,  tummigquohicliau,  etc.,  and 
signifies  ‘the  cutter’.  “His  teeth  .  .  . 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


167 


tummunk — continued. 

be  sharpe  and  broad,  with  which  he 
cuts  downe  trees  as  thicke  as  a  man’s 
thigh,  afterwards  dividing  them  into 
lengths,”  etc.,  Wood.  See  *amisque. 

[Xarr.  tummock,  pi.  -f -quatiog;  (also) 
nSosup-patiog;  sum.hup-pati.og,  R.  W. 
Abn.  temakSe;  leinale,  atsimeskS,  fem. 
nmserneskS.  Del.  tamdque,  Hkw.] 
tummussum,  v.  t.  he  cuts  off;  as  used 
by  Eliot  it  has  the  same  signification  as 
tummehtam, q. v.*  Withan. ob).tummus- 
sahwhau,  with  nearly  the  same  signifi¬ 
cation  as  tummehtahwhau.  Freq.  iad- 
tamswau  vmhkassoh,  he  cuts  his  nails, 
Deut.  21,  12. 

[♦Marginal  Note.— “The  difference  is  that 
one  is  severed  by  repeated  blows  (- ehtahum ), 
the  other  by  simple  cutting  (-us sum).  See 
Howse  87  et  seq.” 

[Abn.  ne-temesemen,  ne-temesSn,  je  le 
coupe.] 

*tunnock  (Xarr. ),  whither?  S ee  tohnoh. 
*tuppaco  (Xarr.),  ‘toward  night’:  ote- 
mat'ippocat  (suppos. ),  ‘toward  night’; 
nanashowa-tlppocat,  midnight,  R.W.  67. 
Eliot  does  not  employ  this  word  in  the 
present  or  indicative,  but  has  its  sup¬ 
positive  ( tipukook ,  -ok)  in  the  compounds 
pohkenittipukmk,  ‘  in  the  darkness  of  the 
night’  (when  it  is  dark  night),  Prov. 
7,  9;  pajeh  noe-tipukkok,  till  midnight 
( nouttippdhkod ,  ‘late  at  night’,  C. ); 
ndetipukoddeu,  at  midnight,  tuppaco 
signifies  it  is  dark,  or  the  time  of  dark¬ 
ness,  and  has  the  same  base  with  poh- 
keni  (q.  v. ),  if  not  formed  from  it 
directly  by  the  prefix  adt  or  ut  ( adt ’- 
polik-eni). 

[Abn.  tahni  ed8tsi  tebVkat,  quel  temps 
denuit?;  titebSkSikeban,  lanuit  (passtle), 
de  tot4  noete  dicitur;  i8  tebkSiSik,  cette 
nuit.  Micm.  tepk8n8get,  lune,  mois. 
Del.  tpocu,  Zeisb.  and  Hkw.  Cree  tib- 
biskcnu,  it  is  night.  Chip.  (St  Marys) 
teb  ik  ud,  (Gr.  Trav. )  tebik  ( tibikad , 
might,  Bar.).  Alg.  tibikat,  il  est  nuit.] 


*tuppanum,  v.  t.  he  cares  for  [takes 
care  of  (?)]  it,  Mass.  Fs.  See  tohwut- 
tintup&noh. 

tuppinohteau,  tuttup-  (freq.),  v.  i.  he 
twists,  he  spins  (caus.  he  makes  to 
turn  around),  Ex.  35,  25;  neg.  pi. 
Luke  12,  27;  Matt.  6,  28.  From  tuppin, 
tuttuppin,  it  turns  or  winds  (about  its 
axis).  Adj.  and  adv.  tuppenohtde,  spun 
or  twisted,  Ex.  35,  25.  See  tatuppagin; 
tatuppe;  tuttuppun. 

[Abn.  ne-datebaberemen,  je  devide, 
je  fais  peloton.] 

tuppuliquam-asli,  n.  pi.  beans,  2  Sam. 
17,  28;  but  “ beans-asli ” ,  Ezek.  4,  9; 
lit.  creepers,  or  twiners;  tuppuhquamco, 
‘it  winds  about’,  twines.  Probably 
the  Phaseolus  vulgaris  L.  (common 
pole  bean),  as  manusqussedash  (bush 
bean)  is  the  var.  nanus.  See  *manu- 
squssed-ash. 

[Abn.  atebakSar,  feves,  faseoles; 
dd tebakSenemen,  il  l’entortille.  Mod. 
Abn.  ad-ba-kwa,  bean,  Osunk.] 
tuppuksin,  v.  i.  he  encamps,  pitches 
tents  (makes  a  ring);  pi.  -sinwog,  they 
encamp,  ‘pitch  their  tents’,  ‘abide  in 
tents’,  Ex.  13,  20;  Num.  9,  18,  22; 
suppos.  taubukkussik,  when  he  was  en¬ 
camped,  Ex.  18,  5.  V.  t.  an.  iuppuk- 
sinehtauonat,  to  encamp  against;  wuitup- 
sinehtauouh,  they  encamped  (against) 
them,  Judg.  6,  4.  Ybl.  n.  -sinnaoonk,  a 
camp,  Xum.  2,  3;  Ps.  78,  28. 

*tupsaas  (Peq.),  a  rabbit,  Stiles, 
tussonkquonk,  n.  a  saw;  pi.  -ongasli,  1 
Chr.  20,  3.  See  poksunkquonk. 
tuttup pinohteau.  See  tuppinohteau. 
tuttuppun,  tatuppin,  v.  i.  it  turns  or 
winds  itself  about,  it  twines;  as  n.  a 
(spun  or  twisted)  string,  thread,  cord, 
Judg.  16,  9,  Josh.  2,  21,  =tuttuppunoah- 
tog,  v.  18,  suppos.  of  tuttuppinohleau, 
q.  v. 

[Abn.  atep8rd8ar,  entortilM.  Cree 
tit-tippe-puthu,  it  turns  (on  its  axis); 
idppee,  a  line,  or  cord.  ] 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


168 


TJ 


ubbuhkumun:  wutch  ubbukumunit,  from 
the  kernel  (of  the  grape),  Num.  6,  4. 
Cf.  appuhqudsu;  uppdhquds. 
uhhussauwaonog-e  (?),  checkered,  1  K. 
7,17:  — —  quomphongane  anakausuonk, 
‘nets  of  checker  work ’ ;  lit.  ‘checkered 
net  work ’ . 

-uhkon.  See  -dlikon. 
uhkos.  See  muhkos,  a  hoof,  a  nail, 
uhpegk,  uhpequan,  n.  (his)  shoulder. 
See  mohpegk. 

*uhpuckachip  (Peq. ),  n.  gull,  Stiles, 
uhpuconkash,  ubpcoonk,  pipes  and  to¬ 
bacco,  C.  162;  hopudnck,  a  (tobacco) 
pipe,  R.  W.  vi  (56).  Cf.  kogkehodponat, 
to  be  drunk,  C.  189.  See  wuttamduog; 
umttoohpocomweonish. 

[Del.  ho  poa  can,  pipe;  liobboeiX,  he 
smokes,  Zeisb.] 

uhquae,  adj.  (1)  at  the  point  or  extrem¬ 
ity  of;  (2)  at  the  end,  border,  or  ex¬ 
treme  part  ( ahquae ,  on  the  other  end, 
C.  235):  ukquae  wutanwohhou,  the  end 
or  tip  of  his  staff,  Judg.  6,  21 ;  ut  ahquae, 
at  the  ends,  Ex.  39,  15,  =  wohkukqudag , 
Ex.  39,  1 6  (see  wdhkdeu) ;  uhqude  Moab, 
upon  the  border  of  Moab,  Num.  21,  15; 
uhqude  wutogkcounit,  (to)  the  skirts  of 
his  garment,  Ps.  133,  2;  the  borders  of 
his  garment,  Mark  6,  56;  ut  ohqude,  on 
the  edge  of,  Ex.  26,  4;  qut  asquam  coh- 
quaeu,  but  the  end  (shall)  not  (be)  yet, 
Mark  13,  7.  Cf.  ahque. 

The  radical  uhq  or  uhk  (a  point  or 
sharp  extremity)  enters  into  a  great 
number  of  compound  words,  as  uhkos 
(muhkos),  the  nail  of  a  man  or  hoof  of 
an  animal;  uliquan,  a  fishhook  (rnukqs, 
uhks,  uhkas,  an  awl),  etc.;  wuttuhquab, 
his  skin;  onkqunnesog,  claws,  etc.  See 
also  wehqshik;  wdhkuhqudshik;  uppuh- 
kuk,  the  head;  wussukqun,  the  tail;  kuh- 
kuhqueu,  uppermost;  unkque,  ‘sore’,  ex¬ 
treme. 

[Quir.  matt  a  eakquino,  he  is  without 
end,  Pier.  15;  ceaseth  not,  ibid.  40.] 
uhquae,  uhquaeu,  n.  the  foreskin  (pree- 
putium),  Gen.  17,  11,  23,  24,.  25,  =un- 
quaeu  waduhquab,  2  Sam.  3,  14:  quosh- 
qussuk  coweyaus  ut  uhqude,  he  was  cir¬ 
cumcised  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin, 


uhquae,  uhquaeu — continued. 

Gen.  17,  24;  pi.  uhquaiyeuash,  1  Sam. 
18,  25,  =a>quaiyeu  woduhquabeyeuash, 
1  Sam.  18,  27. 

uhquan,  ukquon,  uhquoan,  n.  a  hook, 
a  fishhook,  Job  41,  1;  Amos  4,  2;  Hab. 
1, 15  ( uhquon ,  pi.  -qudnash,  C.  159) :  wey- 
ause  uhquonash,  flesh  hooks,  Num.  4, 14. 
See  onkqunnesog. 

[Narr.  hoquaim,  pi.  -a  f inash,  R.  W. 
104.  Del.  aman,  fishhook;  hocquoan, 
pothook,  Zeisb.  Voc.] 
*uhquantamwe,  adv.  cruelly,  C.  227. 
uhquanumauonat,  v.  t.  an.  subj.  to  be 
an  object  of  aversion  or  abhorrence  to: 
ohquanum.au,  he  is  loathsome  (intran¬ 
sitively),  Prov.  13,  5. 
uhquanumonat,  ahquan-,  ohquan-, 
unkquan-,  v.  t.  an.  to  abhor,  to  hold 
in  abhorrence:  matta  nutCihquanumoog, 
I  will  not  abhor  them,  Lev.  26,  44;  nag 
nutunkquanumukquog,  they  abhor  me, 
Job  30,  10;  pish  kutuhquanumukou,  it 
shall  abhor  you,  Lev.  26,  30;  wutunk- 
quanumbuh,  they  abhor  him,  Prov. 
24,  24;  yeug  pish  uhquanumogig,  these 
you  shall  have  in  abomination  (shall 
be  abhorred),  Lev.  11,  13.  Cf.  ahquan- 
urnau,  he  forsakes,  abandons,  and  jish- 
ontam,  he  despises,  rejects,  hates.  See 
unkque. 

uhquanumukquok,  n.  an  abominable 
thing,  an  abomination,  Lev.  20,  13;  pi. 
unkquenumukqunkish,  ‘  abominations  ’, 
abominable  things,  Dent.  32,  16.  See 
unkquanumooonk,  sorrow, 
uhqueu.  See  unkque. 
*uhquompanumoadtuonk, as  adv. 
‘harshly’,  C.  228. 

uhquontamauonat,  v.  t.  inan.  subj.  to 
be  abhorrent  to,  to  be  an  abomination 
to:  pish  kutuhquontamundoash ,  they 
(inan. )  shall  be  an  abomination  to  you, 
Lev.  11,  11. 

uhquontamunat,  okquanit-,  oh- 
quont-,  v.  t.  inan.  to  abhor,  to  hold  in 
abhorrence,  to  have  extreme  aversion 
to  (see  ahquanamau,  he  forsakes):  tih- 
quontamun,  he  abhorred  it,  Deut.  32,  19; 
pish  kutdhquontamun,  you  shall  abhor 
it,  Deut.  7,  26  (pish  kulbhquonlamund- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


uhquontamunat,  etc. — continued. 
oash,  they  (inan. )  shall  be  an  abomina¬ 
tion  to  you,  Lev.  11,  11);  dhquonittam- 
woh,  they  abhor  (it),  Ps.  107,  18;  Ah- 
quontamdg,  if  you  abhor  (it),  Lev.  26, 15. 
uhquosket,  unkquasket,  -quoshket, 
-kekt,  n.  poison  of  serpents,  Ps.  140,  3; 
Deut.32,  33;  poison  of  arrows,  Job  6,  4: 
wutonkquosketueuonk,  their  poison,  Ps. 
58,  4;  unkque  unkquoshkel,  ‘the  cruel 
venom’  (of  asps),  Deut.  32,  33. 
uhshuaonk,  uhsua-,  ushuwa-,  n.  a  cus¬ 
tom,  Judg.  11,  39;  Jer.  32,  11;  pi.  -on- 
gash,  Acts  6,  14;  21,  21  ( us-huwaonk ,  an 
example,  C.  1 16;  uhshuwaonk,  Danforth, 
Oggus.  Kutt.  52).  See  usseonk. 
uh.tappattauu.nat,  to  go  out  (as  lire), 
to  be  quenched  (see  tahlippadtau) : 
ncotau  matta  uhtappatt6un,  fire  is  not 
quenched,  Mark  9,  44;  matta  woh  tihtap- 
pattauoinuk,  it  shall  not  be  quenched, 
Mark  9,  43,  45,  46,  48;  matta  noh  uhtap- 
padta&munao,  (it)  can  not  quench  (it), 
Cant.  8,  7. 

uhtea:  ncotau  uhtea,  the  fire  goes  out, 
Prov.  26,  20.  See  onlhamundt. 

-uhtug1,  in  compound  words,  for  met  dug, 
tree,  wood. 

ukkosue  [uhq-ussu  ?],  adj.  pertaining  to 
the  organs  of  generation:  ukkosue  pom- 
puhchaeiyeum,  the  virile  organ,  Deut. 
23,  1. 

ukkosuonk,  n.  the  pudenda,  Lev.  18,  7, 
8,  9:  ukkdsuonganit,  ‘by  the  secrets’, 
Deut.  25,  11.  Perhaps  from  kezheadnat 
(to  give  life  to):  kezheau,  he  created 
(Gen.  1,  21),  gave  life  to. 
ukkutshaumun,  n.  lightning,  Ex.  19, 
16;  Ezek.  1,  14;  Matt.  24,  27. 

[Xarr.  cutshdusha,  R.  W.  82.] 
ukkuttuk,  (his)  knee.  See  mukkuttuk. 
ukoh:  nen  ukoh,  1  am,  Ex.  3, 14.  See  ko. 
ukquanogquon,  n.  a  rainbow,  Rev.  4, 
4;  10,  1. 

ukqunonukquoonk,  n.  (his)  lock  of  hair; 
long  lock,  Yum.  6,  5.  See  qun&nuh- 
quoau. 

ukquttunk,  (his)  throat.  See  mukqut- 
tunk. 

ummanunnehtaunnat,  v.  caus.  to  ap¬ 
pease,  to  make  calm:  ummAnnunneh- 
taun,  he  appeaseth  (strife),  Prov.  15, 18. 
ummequnne,  adj.  feathered,  Ezek.  39, 
17.  See  mequn. 


169 

|  ummissies,  ummisses,  n.  (his  or  her) 
sister:  ummissiesin,  our  sister,  Gen.  24, 
60;  (constr. )  ummissesoh,  his  sister,  her 
sister,  Ex.  2,  4;  hum  missis,  thy  sister 
(father’s  daughter),  Lev.  18,  11;  weesu- 
rnussoh,  (his)  younger  sister,  Judg.  15,  2. 
Cf.  weetompas,  (his)  sister,  by  father  or 
mother;  weetahtu,  weetuksquoh,  sister. 

[Narr.  weesuminis  (and  in'ticks),  a  sis¬ 
ter,  R.  W.  45.  Muh.  nmase,  an  (my) 
elder  sister,  Edw.  91 ,  =  nmees,  ibid.  87. 
Del.  mis,  eldest  sister,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  5.] 
ummittamwussenat,  v.  i.  to  take  a  wife, 
ummittamwussoh,  n.  constr.  the  wife 
of;  his  wife,  Gen.  11,  29.  See  mittam- 
w us;  wusso. 

ummittamwussu,  he  took  a  wife, Gen. 25, 
1:  ummittamwusseheunt  (part.),  taking 
a  wife,  Ex.  21,  10;  wuske  u  mmitlam- 
vmssit,  if  or  when  he  takes  a  new  wife, 
Deut.  24,  5.  See  weetauomonat. 
ummittamwussuhkauau,  he  took  a 
wife  for  (his  son,  Gen.  38,  6). 
*ummugka3naittuonk,  n.  permission, 
C.  203. 

"umukquinumunat,  to  rub,  C.  207. 
*umukquompae,  adv.  valiantly,  C.  234. 

Cf.  kenomp;  mugquomp. 
unantam.  See  andntam. 

*ungowa-ums ( Peq. ),  ‘old wives’, Stiles; 
Fuligula  glacialis  Bonap.,  or  long-tailed 
duck;  old  squaw.  (Called  ’hah-ha-wag 
by  theCrees;  caccctwee by  the  Canadians. 
Nuttall,  p.  45,  represents  the  call  of  this 
duck  by  the  syllables  ’ ogh-ough-egh, 

’ ogh-ogh-ogh-ough-egh.  Cf.  unkque  and 
derivatives. 

unkhamunat,  v.  t.  to  cover,  to  put  a 
covering  over,  or  upon,  Ezek.  38,  9: 
unkhumwog,  they  covered  (the  ark),  1 
K.  8,  7;  ne  unkivhuk,  for  covering,  that 
which  may  cover,  Hos.  2,  9.  See  put- 
toghamunat;  wuttunkhumunat. 
unkquamonat,  -anat,  oncquomonat, 
v.  i.  to  suffer  pain,  to  feel  pain:  wuh- 
hog  pish  onkquamoinco,  his  body  shall 
have  pain,  Job  14,  22;  nutongquomom, 
I  am  in  pain,  I  feel  pain,  Jer.  4,  19; 
nutonquomomumun,  we  are  in  pain,  Is. 
26,  18.  See  kehkeclit'su,  sore. 

[Narr.  nchesammam,  nchesammdttam, 
I  am  in  pain,  R.  W.  156.  Cf.  C'r«e 
Awkoorn,  ‘he  is  sick’;  drckoohayoo,  ‘he 
hurteth  him’,  Howse  79.] 


170 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BI  LLETIN'  25 


unkquanumroonk,  n.  sorrow,  Job  41, 
22;  Eccl.  1,  18  ( onkquanumaoonk ,  Lam. 

I,  12):  mish-unkqiiomomcDonganit,  in 
great  extremity,  Job  35,  15.  See  onk¬ 
quanumaoonk;  onkquommommaoonk. 

unkquanumwimneat,  v.  p.  to  be  grieved 
or  afflicted,  to  be  in  affliction.  Is.  14,  3: 
nag  mishe  unkquanumdog,  they  are  in 
great  affliction,  Neh.  1,  3;  onkquanum- 
wit,  when  he  was  in  affliction,  2  Chr. 
33,  12;  cans.  an.  uhquanumweheonat 
( unkq -,  onkq-),  to  cause  to  be  afflicted, 
to  afflict;  onkquanumwehit,  he  afflicts, 
makes  me  afflicted,  Is.  58,  5;  uhquanum- 
weheunt,  afflicting,  making  afflicted,  Is. 
58,  5;  vmtdhque  onkquanumweheuh ,  he 
did  grievously  afflict  her,  Is.  9,  1.  See 
uhquanum&nal. 

unkquasket.  See  uhquosket. 
unkque,  adj.  sore,  severe,  grievous;  adv. 
sorely,  grievously  (extremely,  =  uh-  j 
qu&e) :unkque kechisuongash,  ‘sore boils’, 
Job  2,  7 ;  vmtuhque  ( wutunkque ,  Jer.  4, 8) 
onkquanumweheuh,  he  did  grievously 
afflict  her,  Is.  9, 1;  uhqueu,  ‘cruel’,  rig¬ 
orous,  Ex.  6,  9.  (Apparently  the  same  1 
with  uhqude,  ‘  at  extremity  ’ .  Its  deriv¬ 
atives  are  numerous,  and  exhibit  a 
wide  range  of  meaning,  everywhere 
traceable,  however,  to  this  radical  sig¬ 
nification.  See  corresponding  words 
under  uhqude. ) 

[Cree  dwkoosu,  he  is  sick,  Howse  79 
(see  also  pp.  152-153).  Mod.  Abn. 
a-kivan,  bitter,  acrid.  Del.  achewon,  \ 
strong,  spirituous;  achowat,  hard,  pain-  j 
ful,  troublesome,  Zeisb.  Gr.  167.] 
unkquenehuwaonk,  n.  severity,  Rom. 

II,  22. 

unkqueneunkquok,  ohq-,  that  which 
is  grievous,  Rev.  16,  2:  unqueneunkquot, 
-quodt,  it  is  grievous,  Gen.  41,  31;  Jer. 
30,  12. 

unkqueneunkqussue,  adj.  an.  terrible 
(inaction),  Neh.  9,  32;  ohqueneunkqus, 
Cant.  6,  4;  kutunkquanuhkausuongash, 
thy  terrible  acts,  Ps.  145,  6. 
unkquenneunkque,  adj.  grievous,  Ex. 9, 
18,  Is.  21,  15;  cruel,  severe,  Prov.  17, 
11  ( onkqueneunkque ,  C.  168;  unkquene- 
unkque,  terribly,  ibid.  230).  See  unkque. 
unkquenneunkquodte,  uhqun-,  adj. 
—  unkquenneunkque,  Jer.  14,  17;  Nah. 
3,  6. 


unkquenumukqunkish,  n.  pi.  ‘abomi¬ 
nations’,  abominable  things,  Deut.  32, 
16.  See  uhquanumukquok. 
unkquontamcoonk,  uhquan-,  n.  an 
abomination,  abominable  wickedness; 
pi. -ongash,  1  K.  14,  24;  Deut.  23,  18. 
unkquoshket.  See  uhquosket,  poison, 
unnag,  if  it  be  so:  u-oh  unnag,  (if  it  may 
be  so)  ‘if  it  be  possible’,  Matt.  26,  39; 
Rom.  12,18.  S ee&unag;  unneheonat. 
unnaiinneat:  ne  wunnegen  unnaiinneat, 
‘it  is  good  so  to  be’,  i.  e.  in  such  a  state 
or  condition,  1  Cor.  7,  26  ( unniinat ,  to 
become,  C.  181).  Cf.  nuttiniin;  u-uttin- 
niin.  See  unne. 

unnaiyeuonk.  See  unnujiuonk. 
*unnammiyeue  (?),  adv.  inwardly,  C. 
228. 

unnantamcoonk,  n.  thought,  purpose, 
intention,  opinion,  Deut.  15,  9;  Job 
42,  2;  1  K.  18,  21;  unnanumaonk,  Job 

12,  5  (unantamooonk,  C.  213):  nuttenan- 
tamoonk,  my  will;  vmttenantamoonk  (q. 
v.),  his  will. 

[Narr.  nleatammou'onck,  ‘that  is  my 
thought  or  opinion’,  R.  W.  65.] 
unnantamunat,  anantamunat,  v.  t.  to 
think,  2  Cor.  3,  5;  to  suppose,  2  Sam. 

13,  33;  to  purpose,  to  will,  to  have  in 
mind  (to  suppose  or  imagine;-  C.  211): 
nuttenantam,  I  think,  Acts  7,  40;  I  sup¬ 
pose,  Luke  7, 43;  sun  kuttenantam,  think- 
est  thou?  Job  35,  2;  unnantam,  he 
thought,  Luke  12, 17 ;  he  purposed,  Acts 
19,  21;  nuttenantamun,  I  will  (it),  Matt. 
8,  3;  ne  anantamup,  that  which  I  have 
thought,  Is.  14,  24  (ne  pakodtantamup, 
that  which  I  have  purposed,  .intended, 
ibid.);  unnantamohp,  I  thought,  Num. 
33,  56;  ahque  uhnantamcok,  do  not  (ye) 
think,  Matt.  5, 17;  matta  ne  anantam  new, 
qut  ken  ne  ananiaman,  ‘  not  as  I  will,  but 
as  thou  wilt’,  Matt.  26,  39;  yen  anana- 
tamon,  ‘having  this  confidence’,  when 
I  thought  thus,  2  Cor.  1,  17;  neanontog, 
‘according  to  his  will’  (what  he  may 
will),  Dan.  4,  35;  howaneh  anantogeh, 
■whom  he  (may)  will,  John  5,  21;  Dan. 
4,  17.  See  anantam. 

In  form  this  verb  is  a  frequentative 
or  intensive  from  antamundt,  or  anaia- 
munat  (Narr.  ntunndntum  or  nedntum, 
I  think;  tocketedntam  and  -tanndntum, 
what  do  you  think?  R.  W.  64) .  The 
latter  is  not  found  in  Eliot’s  transla/- 


TEl'MBl'LL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


171 


unnantamunat,  etc.— continued. 

tion  and  perhaps  was  not  in  use,  but 
it  serves  in  forming  a  great  number 
of  verbs  expressing  states  of  the  mind, 
mental  operations,  passions  and  emo¬ 
tions,  etc.  Among  the  more  important 
of  these  are  the  following:  ahquoantam- 
undt  ( ahque ,  not  to  think  of),  to  for¬ 
give;  kodtantamundt  (see  hod),  to  de¬ 
sire;  matchenantamunat  ( matchet ,  bad), 
to  think  evil  of;  mehquantamunat  ( meh - 
qunum,  he  finds),  to  remember;  mis- 
scmtamun&t  ( missi,  much,  greatly),  to 
think  much,  to  meditate;  monchanaiam- 
un&t ,  to  be  astonished;  musquantamu- 
ndt  ( musqui ,  red  or  bloody),  to  be  an¬ 
gry;  muskouantamundt  ( muskoau ,  he 
boasts),  to  be  boastful,  to  be  very  glad; 
natwontamun&t,  to  devise,  to  meditate 
upon;  neuantamundt,  to  grieve,  to  be 
sorry;  onquotantamundt,  to  recompense, 
to  avenge;  pabahtantamundt  ( pabahta - 
num,  he  trusts),  to  trust;  pakodtantamu- 
ndt  ( paguodche ,  perhaps),  to  intend  or 
have  a  mind  to;  peantarnunat  (pd,  let 
me),  to  pray;  poanatamundt,  to  be  mirth¬ 
ful,  to  make  sport;  tabutlantamunat 
(tempi,  tdpi,  sufficient,  enough),  to  be 
thankful,  to  give  thanks  (to  be  satisfied 
or  to  have  enough) ;  waantamundt,  to  be 
wise;  wannantamundt(wanne,  negat. ),  to 
forget;  weekontamundt  ( weekone ,  sweet, 
pleasant),  to  be  pleased,  to  be  glad; 

- wuttamantamundt ,  to  be  troubled;  wun- 
nantamuncit  ( vmnne ,  good),  to  bless. 

From  the  same  root  appear  to  be  de¬ 
rived  the  names  given  by  the  Indians 
to  their  gods.  “They  do  worship  two 
gods,  a  good  god  and  an  evil  god.  The 
good  god  they  call  Tantum  and  their  evil 
god,  whom  they  fear  will  do  them  hurt, 
they  call  Squantum.” — Higginson’s  N. 
E.  Plantation.  The  latter  name,  applied 
to  the  same  evil  deity  who  was  called 
Habbamouk  or  ITobbamoco  (Lechford’s 
PI.  Dealing  52),  appears  to  be  the  con¬ 
tracted  3d  pers.  sing,  indicat.  present 
of  musquantamuriat:  m’squantam,  ‘he  is 
angry’,  or  literally,  ‘bloody-minded’. 
The  composition  of  Tantum  is  less  obvi¬ 
ous. 

[Note. — The  last  paragraph  of  this  defini¬ 
tion  is  marked  “No”  in  the  margin.  It  was 
probably  the  compiler's  intention  either  to 
rewrite  or  to  omit  it.] 


unnantamwe,  adj.  willingly,  Judg.  5,  2; 

1  Chr.  29,  6. 

unnanumonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  permit  (un- 
nanukkonat,  to  permit;  unanumeh,  per¬ 
mit  me,  C.  203):  unnanumit,  if  (he) 
permit,  1  Cor.  16,  7;  unnantog,  if  (he) 
permit  (it),  Heb.  6,  3;  i.  e.  if  he  will. 
See  unnantamunat. 

unnaunchemcokaonk,  aunch-,  n.  news, 
tidings,  2  Sam.  13,  30;  18,  25,  26;  pi. 
-ongash,  1  Sam.  11,  6. 

unnaunchemookauonat,  aunch-,  v.  t. 
an.  to  tell  news  to,  to  communicate 
new  information :  aunchemcokauonat,  ‘  to 
carry  tidings  to’,  1  Chr.  10,  9;  nutti- 
naunchemcokauondoh  vmnna  u  nche  m  co- 
kauonk,  ‘I  communicated  to  them  the 
gospel’  (i.  e.  good  news),  Gal.  2,  2; 
aunchemcokauonti,  let  me  bear  tidings 
to  (him),  2  Sam.  18,  19.  Y.  i.  aunche- 
mcokaonat  (?),  aunchemcokaog,  they  told 
the  tidings,  1  Sam.  11,  4;  pish  kut-aun- 
chemookom,  thou  shalt  bear  tidings. 

2  Sam.  18,  20;  padauneliemxDonit  Saul, 
when  tidings  came  of  Saul,  2  Sam.  4,  4 
( unnonchimwinneat ,  to  tell;  nuttindn- 
chim,  I  tell;  unnoowomco,  we  are  told, 
C.  213).  See  annoo;  auncliemmkau;  hen- 
nail;  unnonat;  vmnnaunchemookaonk. 

[Narr.  aaunchemdkaw,  tell  me  your 
news;  auncliemokauhettittea,  let  us  dis¬ 
course  or  tell  news;  tocketeaunchim, 
what  news?  (what  tell  you?);  euttaun- 
chemokous,  I  will  tell  you  news;  cum- 
mautaunchemokous ,  I  have  done  (tell¬ 
ing)  my  news,  R.  W.  62.] 

unne,  aune,  ane,  may  have  been,  origi¬ 
nally,  an  indeclinable  adjective  and 
adverb,  expressing  likeness  or  resem¬ 
blance,  the  relation  of  the  individual 
to  its  kind,  or  of  species  to  genus,  etc. 
(ne  Uniit,  that  is  proper  or  right,  C.  174; 
nenih  or  sample i,  right,  ibid.  174;  v.ttoh 
unni,  what  manner,  ibid.  176 ;  nahnaunne, 
adv.  especially,  ibid.  228;  yeuunni,  thus, 
ibid.  234;  en  unni,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  3,  9, 
=en  nnih,  El. ) ;  it  is  not  found,  however, 
in  this  form  in  Eliot  or  the  vocabularies, 
but  is  used  largely  in  composition  and 
as  a  verb  substantive:  ne-ane,  so,  such, 
of  this  or  that  kind,  whence  nan  and 
ne-nan  (q.  v.),  the  same;  dunag,  if  it  be 
so,  when  it  is  so;  hence,  as  a  noun,  an 
event,  an  occurrence  (possible  or 


172 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  '2b 


unne,  etc. — continued. 

actual),  that  which  is  or  may  be  so 
(see  dunag) ;  and  with  ne,  ne  aimak,  the 
color,  appearance,  or  other  specific 
quality  of  an  object;  unne,  ‘that  is’, 
id  est,  Rom.  9,  8;  unnaiinneat  (q.  v. ), 
for  unne-ayinneat,  to  be  so,  i.  e.  of  such 
kind  or  condition,  -in  or  -en,  as  a 
suffix  of  animate  nouns,  has  the  same 
meaning,  referring  an  individual  to  the 
species  or  kind,  and  constituting  nouns 
general  [?]  or  appellative  [?],  as  wut- 
taun-oh,  his  or  her  daughter,  the  daugh¬ 
ter  of;  und-taun-in,  a  daughter,  any 
daughter;  ivut-taun-eunk  (collective), 
the  daughterhood,  or  the  whole  of  the 
daughters;  adchaen,  a  hunter,  i.  e.  some 
particular  hunter;  adchaen-in,  a  hunter, 
i.  e.  any  hunter,  one  of  the  hunter 
kind. 

unneapeyau.  See  enneahpeyau,  he  so¬ 
journs,  stays. 

unnehenat,  umhenat,  v.  i.  to  act,  to 
conduct  one’s  self. 

unneheonat,  unheonat  (neheonat?), 

v.  t.  an.*to  conduct  one’s  self  toward  or 
with  respect  to  another,  to  act  toward, 
to  do  to  or  deal  with :  ne  anaowadt  nmttin- 
heonat  ummimnninnumoh,  that  ‘which 
he  thought  to  do  unto  his  people’,  Ex. 
32,  14;  noh  nutlinhednat,  (what  do  you 
wish)  me  to  do  to  him?  Mark  15,  12; 
unnehhuau,  he  dealeth  (treacherously), 
Is.  21,  2;  womaumonk  ne  dnhen,  ne  pi»h 
kuttinhen,  the  kindness  that  I  have  done 
unto  thee,  that  thou  shalt  do  unto  me, 
Gen.  21,  23;  toll  kittinhesh,  what  have  I 
done  (do  I)  unto  thee?  1  K.  19,  20; 
matta  ne  pish kuttinheon,  ‘thou  shalt  not 
do  so  unto’  (God),  treat  him  so,  so  deal 
with  him,  Deut.  12,  31 ;  ne  urinehe,  so 
deal  (thou)  with  me,  2  Chr.  2,  3;  ne 
nuitjinheun  ne  dnhit,  I  will  do  so  to  him 
as  he  hath  done  to  me  ( I  will  do  it  that 
he  may  have  done  or  may  do),  Prov. 
24,  29;  mdtinheonanonut  ne  anhikqueog, 
we  to  do  to  him  as  he  hath  done  to  us, 
Judg.  15,  11;  ne  unnehe,  so  deal  thou 
with  me,  2  Chr.  2,  3  (ne  anheop,  as  I 
dealt  with  (him),  ibid.);  unnehuk,  un- 
nehhuk,  unneheuk,  nag,  deal  ye  with 
them,  do  to  them,  Gen.  19,  8;  Judg.  19, 
24;  unnehuk  nanuk  nag,  ‘so  do  ye  to 
them’,  Matt.  7,  12;  u'ussitturnoonk  un- 


unneheonat,  etc. — continued. 

nehenarh,  let  judgment  be  executed  on 
him,  Ezra  7,  26;  matcheneheunat,  to  act 
evilly  toward,  to  treat  badly:  kum  .  .  . 
matchenehennumun,  we  will  deal  badly 
with  thee,  Gen.  19, 9;  kconenehikqun,  ( he 
may)  do  thee  good,  Deut.  8,  16.  Inan. 
uttoh  anteunkup,  what  he  did  to  (it), 
Deut.  11,  4. 

[Note. — “  Is  this  a  verb  causative  from  neane 
(nan),  with  verb  subst.?  See  dunag.’’’] 

[Del.  liho,  do  it  to  him;  lihineen,  do 
unto  us,  Zeisb.  Voc.  9,  20.] 
*unnehtongquat,  n.  a  story,  pi.  -f  ash, 
C.  163. 

unnequanumunat  (?),  v.  t.  to  roll,  or 

move  by  rolling  (?) :  unnequanumcok, 
roll  ye  (great  stones,  Josh.  10,  18); 
vmttinnequanumun,  he  rolled  (a  great 
stone,  Mark  15,  46). 

unneu,  adj.  an.  anyone,  =howan  (?):  toh 
pishunneu  nampoohamauau,  what  shall 
one  (i.  e.  anyone)  answer?  Is.  14,  32 
(nen  unnuh,  I  am  he,  Mass.  Ps.,  John 
9,  9,  —noh  neen,  El. ;  tonoh  unnuh,  where 
is  he  (this  man),  ibid.  v.  12). 
*unniinat.  See  unnaiinneat. 
*unnissuonk,  n.  a  color,  C.  163;  but 
umkeiompae  unnissuonk,  mankind,  C. 
167. 

unnitchuan,  v.  i.  3d  pers.  sing,  (it)  flows 
to  or  toward,  Eccl.  1,  7:  unnitchuanash 
kehtahhannit,  they  (rivers)  flow  to  the 
sea,  Eccl.  1,  7.  See  anitchewan;  nrultit- 
chuwan. 

unniyeuonk,  unnai-,  n.  a  matter,  affair, 

case,  business,  Deut.  17,  8:  kuttinniyeu- 
onk,  ‘thy  matters’,  business,  2  Sam. 
15,  3;  -ongash,  2  Sam.  19,  29;  vmttinni- 
yeuongash,  his  business  or  matters  con¬ 
cerning  him,  his  affairs,  2  Chr.  19.  11; 
wunnohteae  unnaiyeuongash,  ‘conditions 
of  peace’,  terms,  Luke  14, 32;  matcheni- 
yeuonk,  ‘evil  case’,  bad  state  of  affairs, 
Ex.  5,  19  ( ponniyeue  dnniyeuonk,  rude 
behavior,  manner,  way,  state,  condi¬ 
tion,  C.  174;  wunnegen  unniyeuonk,  a 
good  cause,  ibid.  216).  From  unnche- 
nat  (?). 

unnohkon,  -uhkon  (?),  (it)  is  cast,  is 
thrown  down,  Job  18,  8;  Prov.  16,  33. 
unnohkonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  cast  down,  am 
obj.:  wutlinnohkonuh  ohkeit,  he  cast  him 
down  to  the  ground,  Dan.  8,  7  (kup- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


173 


unnohkonat — continued. 
penuhkoneh,  thou  castest  me  down,  Ps. 
102, 10).  Cf.  nookondnat;  penohkdnau. 
unn6hteamunat(?),unnuht-,  v.  t.  inan. 
to  cast  (it)  down:  unndhteash,  cast  (it) 
down,  Ex.  7,  9;  kuttinnuhteam,  thou 
castest  it  down  (to  the  ground),  Ps.  89, 
44;  unnohte.au  uppogkomunk,  he  cast 
down  his  rod,  Ex.  7,  10.  Cf.  ncokond- 
nat;  penohkdnau. 

unnohteauonat,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan.  to 
cast  or  throw  (an.  obj.)  to  or  into:  un- 
nohte&og  umlaut,  they  cast  (them)  into 
the  fire,  2  K.  19,  18. 

unnomai,  a  reason,  the  reason,  1  K.  9, 
15  ( ennomai ,  Samp.  Quinnup. ;  unnom- 
mai,  ennomaiyeuonk,  C.  158). 
unnonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  tell,  to  say  to,  2  Sam. 
17, 16;  Matt.  28,  9.  See  annco;  hennau; 
unnaunchemcokaudnat ;  uttindnat. 
unnontoowaonk,  n.  language  (in  its  re¬ 
stricted  sense,  peculiar  to  a  people  or 
nation),  Gen.  11,  1:  kuttme  unnontao- 
waonk,  ‘the  voice  of  speech’,  Ezek.  1, 
24;  kutiinnontcoiraonk,  thy  speech  (man¬ 
ner  of  speech ) ,  Matt.  26,  73. 
unnontukquohwhonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  owe 
to  another,  to  owe  ( unhohtukquahwhil - 
tinneat,  to  owe  (to  be  in  debt);  kuttin- 
nolitukquahe,  I  am  in  your  debt,  C.  203) : 
ahque  toh  unnonlukqudwhutteg ,  ‘owe  no 
man  anything’,  do  not  owe,  Rom.  13,  8; 
toh  kittinnontukquohhuk,  how  much  dost 
thou  owe  to,  Luke  16,  5;  anunlukquoh- 
wonche,  one  who  owes,  Matt.  18,  24; 
nmnamontukquohhcowaen,  -in,  a  creditor, 
Luke  7, 41.  See  namamontukquohwhdnat. 
unncohamauonat,  v.  t.  to  sing  (songs) 
to:  unncohammk  .  .  .  wuske  unncohom- 
aonk,  sing  ye  to  (him)  a  new  song,  Is. 
42, 10;  anoohomont  ketrnh amaongash ,  he 
who  sings  songs  (singing  songs)  to, 
Prov.  25,  20.  Cf.  ketoohomom. 
unnoohamunat  (?),  v.  t.  to  sing  (songs). 
See  anoohomunat. 

unncohomaonk,  n.  a  song,  Is.  42,  10; 

Num.  21,  17.  Cf.  ketoohomdonk. 
unnrohqueu,  so  far  distant,  at  such  a 
distance,  Acts  28,  15  ( uttoh  unnuhkuh- 
quat,  how  far?  C.  228,  =  Narr.  tounuck- 
quaque,  R.  W.  74).  See  nmhqueu. 
unnrowaonk,  n.  a  commandment.  See 
VDuttinncowaonk. 


!  unncowonat,  to  speak  to,  to  tell,  to  com¬ 
mand.  See  annm;  na>6nat. 

unnugkeni,  (it  is)  sharp  [speaking  (?)] 
(of  the  tongue,  Prov.  5,  4).  Cf.  kenai. 

I  unnuh.quain.at,  v.  i.  to  look  (toward  or 
at),  =nuhquainat,  q.  v. :  unnuhquash 
ketahhaniyeu,  look  toward  the  sea,  1  K. 
18,  43. 

unnukquominneat,  v.  i.  to  dream,  Gen. 
41,  17;  unnukquom,  he  dreamed,  Gen. 
41,  1,  5. 

unnukquomroonk,  -muonk,  n.  a  dream, 
Deut.  13,  1;  Dan.  4,  5,  6  ( -quarnmonk, 
C.  163) ;  nuttinnukquomcoonk,  my  dream, 
Dan.  4,  7,  8;  unnugquomooonk,  Gen.  41, 
15. 

unnukquomunat,  v.  t.  to  dream:  nuttin- 
nugquomun,  I  dreamed  (a  dream),  Gen. 
41,  15.  Cf.  kodtukquom-unat,  to  be 
sleepy,  C.  209. 

unnukquomuwaen,  n.  one  who  dreams, 
a  dreamer,  Deut.  13,  1. 

[unjnussu,  (he  is)  shaped  or  formed, 
made  like,  made  such  as  [unnussu]: 
toh  unnussu,  what  form  is  he  of?  1  Sam. 
28,  14;  matta  nani'ahteaou  neanussit,  ‘I 
could  not  discern  the  form  thereof’ 
(an.),  Job  4,  16;  ne  anussit  God,  in  the 
form  (likeness)  of  God,  Phil.  2,  6;  muh- 
hogkatmmu,  ‘in  bodily  shape’,  Luke 3, 
22.  See  neane;  neaunak;  nussu. 

[un]nussuonk,  n.  form  or  shape  (of  an. 
obj.?):  wuttinnussuonk,  his  form,  Is.  52, 
14;  ut  neheuvnche  wuttinnussuonganit,  in 
his  own  image,  Gen.  1, 27.  Cf.  neaunak. 

unuhquainat.  See  nuhquainat. 

*ununanum6e,  adv.  mildly,  C.  229. 

*ununumauwonate,  to  give  (to),  C.  192. 
See  aninnum. 

*uppaquontup  (Narr.),  the  head,  R.  W. 
58;  nuppaqu&ntup,  my  head,  ibid.  See 
uppuhkuk. 

uppasq  (?),  n.  ‘the  horse  leech’,  Prov. 
30,  15. 

uppeanashkinonog,  n.  pi.  flags,  rushes, 
Is.  19,  6. 

uppeshau,  n.  a  flower,  Ex.  25, 33;  Job  15, 
33;  Is.  40,  7  ( uppeshou ,  C.  168) ;  pi.  uppe- 
sliauanash,  uppishd&nash,  Ex.  25,  31,  34; 
37,  17:  sonkin  uppishaanish,  it  bloomed 
blossoms,  Num.  17,  8.  From peshauonat, 
to  blossom;  3d  pers.  sing,  indie,  pres. 
‘  it  blossoms  ’ ;  so  peshau,  a  flower,  J arnes 


174 


BUREAU  OF1  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


uppeshau — continued. 

1,  10;  peshadnash,  flowers  (without  the 
prefix),  2  Chr.  4,  5.  See  *peshai,  blue, 
uppisk,  his  hack:  uppisquanit,  at  his 
back,  behind  him.  See  muppusk. 
uppohchanitch,  n.  (his)  finger,  Ex.  8, 
19.  See  pohchanutch. 
uppohquos,  obbohquos,  n.  a  tent  (awn¬ 
ing  or  covering),  Ex.  40,  19:  ne  dbuh- 
quosik,  its  covering,  Cant.  3,  10;  aboh- 
qiios  sokanon,  a  covert  from  rain,  Is.  4,  6. 
See  appuhquosu,  he  covers, 
upponat,  uppunat,  v.  t.  =apwonat,  app- 
wdun&t,  to  bake  or  roast.  See  appcosu; 
apwou;  nadtuppco. 

-uppco.  See  nadtuppco. 
uppaosu.  See  appcosu. 
uppooteau.  See  ahpcoteau. 
uppoounneat,  uppwunneat,  a  radical 
verb  meaning  to  feed  one’s  self,  to  eat; 
it  is  not  found  in  Eliot  or  Cotton,  but 
from  it  many  derivatives  are  made.  See 
under  nadtuppco. 

uppuhkuk,  n.  (his)  head,  Lev.  1,  4;  3,  2; 
Job  41,  7;  ‘scalp’,  Ps.  68,  21.  See  mup- 
puhkuk;  *uppaquontup. 
uppuhkukcoash,  n.  pi.  ‘head  tires’, 
Ezek.  24,  23. 

uppuhkukquanitch,  (his)  finger  tip 
(finger  head),  John  16,  24  ( nuppooh - 
kuhqudnitcliegat  (obj.),  my  fingers,  C. 
239). 

uppuhkukqut,  n.  (on  his  head,)  ‘a  hel¬ 
met’,  Is.  59, 17;  Ezek.  27,10: - ahtoh- 

tagish,  ‘bonnets’,  Ex.  28,  40. 
uppuminneonash,  n.  pi.  =appuminneon- 
asli,  parched  corn. 

uppunonneonash,  n.  pi.  parched  pulse, 
2  Sam.  17,  28. 

us,  imperat.  2d  pers.  sing,  from  ussin&t, 
saythou:  nag  us,  say  to  them,  Lev.  18,2; 
Zech.  1,  3. 

ush,  imperat.  2d  pers.  sing. :  ush  Pharohut, 
‘get  thee  to  Pharaoh’,  Ex.  7,  15. 
ushpohteau.  See  dshpohtag. 
ushpuhqutiinat,  aspuhq-,  ishpuhq-, 
spuhq-,  etc.,  v.  i.  to  look  upward,  Ps. 
40,  12:  spuhqudeu,  he  looked  up,  Mark 
6,  41 ;  nutushpoqudim,  I  look  up,  Ps.  5,  3; 
aspuhquait,  when  he  looked  (up) ,  Mark 
8, 24.  See  nuhquainat;  spadtauwompdeu. 
ushpunnamunat,  ashp-,v.  t.  to  lift  up, 
to  hoist  up:  ushpunnumwog  sepcighunk, 
they  hoisted  up  the  sail,  Acts  27,  40; 


ushpunnamunat,  etc.— continued. 
ashpunahettit  wunnuppawhunouh,  when 
they  lifted  up  their  wings,  Ezek.  10, 16. 

[Del.  a  spe  num  men,  to  lift  up,  Zeisb. 
Yoc.  38.] 

*ushpunnaonk,  n.  event,  C.  166;  spun- 
naongash,  ‘diseases’,  Matt.  4,  23. 
ushpushenat,  ushpenat,  v.  i.  to  mount 
upward,  to  lift  one’s  self  up  (?) :  ushpeu, 
he  went  up,  Gen.  35,  13;  ushpeog,  ush- 
pushaog,  they  mount  upward  ( on  wings ) , 
Ezek.  10, 19;  Is.  40,  31;  (in  air)  John  1, 
51;  with  inan.  subj.  usspemo,  it  was 
drawn  up,  Acts  11,  10;  onatuh  chik- 
kinasog  ashpshdhettit,  ‘as  sparks  (when 
they)  fly  upward’,  Job  5,  7. 

[Del.  aspoch  we,  ‘ascend,  to  go  up’  (?), 
Zeisb.  Voc.  14.] 

ushquehtahwah.  See  sequttahwhau. 
ushquontosinneat  (?),  to  sew:  uttcoche- 
yeuco  .  .  .  cidt.  ushquontdsimuk,  ‘a  time 
to  sew’,  Eccl.  3,  7  ( asequam ,  he  sews 
(it),  Mark 2,  21;  kutushquam,  thou sew- 
est  up  (my  iniquities),  Job  14, 17;  ush- 
quamdnat monag ,  ‘to  sew  one’s  clothes’, 
C.);  matta  usquosincoh,  (it)  was  without 
seam,  John  19,  23,  Cf.  asequam. 
*us-huwaonk.  See  uhshudonk. 
uskon.  See  tvuskon. 
usphcowaonk,  ushphouaonk,  spuh- 
hcowaonk,  n.  [a  high  place  (?)]  a  ref¬ 
uge,  2  Sam.  22,  3;  Jer.  16,  19:  spuhhoo- 
wdongdnuco,  he  is  a  refuge,  Ps.  9,  9;  us- 
pulihowaonganucoash,  they  (inan.)  shall 
be  a  refuge,  Num.  35,  15. 
uspuhhoo,  ushp-,  sp-,  v.  i.  to  flee  for 
refuge:  ushpuhhcoash  ohket,  flee  thou 
away  to  the  land  of  ... ,  Amos  7,  12; 
spuhhcowaog,  they  fled,  Josh.  8,  15. 
uspuhhcowae,  spuhhoowae,  adj.  of 

refuge,  Num.  35,  11,  12:  - ayeuonk, 

place  of  refuge,  Is.  4,  6. 
uspunauonat,  ushpun-,  aspun-,  ash- 
pun-,  spun-,  ushpunat,  etc.  (1)  to 
happen  unexpectedly,  to  chance;  (2)  to 
ail  or  to  be  ailing;  an.  subj.  toh  kulush- 
punam,  what  aileth  thee?  Judg.  18,  23; 
toh  kutuspinam,  2  Sam.  14,  5;  toh  ush- 
punaog  missinnuog,  what  aileth  the  peo¬ 
ple?  1  Sam.  11,  4;  tohspinau,  what  aileth 
thee  (her?),  Gen.  21, 17.  The  forms  of 
this  verb  are  irregular.  It  is  generally 
used  intransitively  after  an  animate 
subject,  which  in  the  English  transla- 


TRUMBtTLI.] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


175 


uspunauonat,  etc. — continued. 

tion  becomes  the  object.  Occasionally 
the  animate  form  ( ushpunonat )  is  intro¬ 
duced,  as  in  Eccl.  3,  19:  ne  ashpuna- 
hettit .  .  .  wosketompaog,  ne  wutushpund- 
neau  puppinashimwog,  pasuk  ushpundog 
wame,  ‘that  which  befalleth  .  .  .  men 
[which  men  may  encounter  by  chance], 
befalleth  beasts,  even  one  thing  befall¬ 
eth  them  [all]  ’ ;  tatuppe  uspundog  wame, 

‘  one  event  happeneth  to  them  all  ’ ,  Eccl. 
2, 14;  nag  wame  .  .  .  ushpunaog,  ‘chance 
happeneth  to  them  all’,  Eccl.  9,  11;  ne 
ashpunadt  mattamog,  ne  nutushpinon,  ‘as 
it  happeneth  to  the  fool  so  it  happeneth 
to  me’,  Eccl.  2,  15;  tohwutch  wame  yeu 
spunnaog,  why  is  all  this  befallen  us? 
Judg.  6,  13;  matt  a  wahtecoun  uttoh  ash- 
pinai,  not  knowing  what  things  shall 
befall  me  (may  happen  to  me),  Acts  20, 
22;  shpunnadti  tali  Jcod  shpunnai,  ‘let 
come  on  me  what  will’,  Job  13,  13. 
Of.  miskauau. 

[Narr.  tahaspundyi  ( =  toh  asp-),  what 
ails  him?;  tockeiuspanem,  what  ails  you? 
tocketuspunnaumaqun,  what  hurt  hath 
he  done  to  you?  R.  W.  157.] 

usquesu  wanne  teag,  he  leaves  nothing 
undone,  Josh.  11, 15:  woh  mo  kussequeus- 
sumwa),  you  should  not  leave  (it)  un¬ 
done,  Luke  11,  42.  Cf.  aske,  it  is  raw 
(unfinished),  and  sequnau,  he  remains. 

*usquont,  n.  a  door;  pi .-\-dmash,  C.  161. 
See  squontam. 

usquontdsu.  See  ushquontosinneat. 

usseaen-in,  n.  a  doer,  one  who  does, 
James  1,  25. 

ussenat,  asenat,  v.  t.  to  do,  to  per¬ 
form,  to  accomplish,  to  execute,  Ps. 
149,  7;  Matt.  6,  1;  5,  17:  usseu,  ussu,  he 
does,  or  did,  Esth.  4,  17;  Prov.  14,  17; 
ne  nutussen,  ‘that  do  I’,  Rom.  7,  15; 
uttoh  kodusse  matta  nutussein,  what  I 
would  (wish to  do)  that  do  I  not,  ibid.; 
usseit,  usit,  aseit,  when  he  does,  if  he 
does,  Matt.  7,  24,  26;  loll  asee,  what  I 
did  (might  be  doing),  Neh.  2,  16;  noh 
asit,  he  who  performeth,  or  executeth 
(suppos.),  Is.  44,  26;  Ps.  146,  7;  ussish, 
do  thou,  Ex.  20,  9;  ne  ussek,  that  do 
ye,  James  2,  12;  (negat. )  ussekon,  thou 
shalt  not  do,  Ex.  20,  10;  (pass.)  uttoh 
aseinit,  whatever  was  done,  Gen.  39,  22; 
ne  asemuk,  what  is  done,  Eccl.  8, 17;  pi. 


ussenat,  asenat — continued. 

asemukish,  (things)  done,  Eccl.  8,  16- 
( nuttissem  machuk,  I  commit  evil,  C. 
186). 

[Del.  lussu,  he  doth;  lussi,  do  it, 
Zeisb.  Yoc.  9.  Cree  a'clieeoo,  he  moves, 
has  the  faculty  of  moving,  Howse  32; 
is-putliu,  it  so  moveth,  ibid.  80.] 

usseonk,  n.  doing,  dealing,  Ps.  7,  16; 
an  example,  C.  166.  See  dhsliudonk. 

usseu.  See  ussenat. 

ussinat,  wussinat,  v.  i.  to  say,  to  tell: 
wussinat  nashpe  wussissetconut,  ‘to  pro¬ 
nounce  with  his  lips’,  Lev.  5,  4;  nussin, 
I  say,  Gal.  1,  9;  kussin,  thou  sayest, 
Matt.  27,  11;  Mark  15,  2;  wussin,  he 
saith,  Zech.  1,  3;  nussirn,  if  I  say,  when 

1  say,  Prov.  30,  9;  Ps.  78,  2;  kussim, 
when  thou  sayest,  Job  22,  13;  Is.  47,  8; 
woh  nussirn,  shall  I  say?  Heb.  11,  32; 
loll  kussimuw,  what  say  ye?  Matt.  16, 
15;  uttoh  asean  (?),  whatever  thou 
mayest  say,  Num.  22,  17;  us,  say  thou, 

2  Sam.  13, 5;  nag  us,*  say  thou  to  them, 
tell  them,  Lev.  18,  2;  Zech.  1,  3;  nussip, 
I  said,  Eccl.  3, 17, 18;  7, 23;  (an. )  kutds- 
seh*  thou  sayest  to  me,  Ex.  33,  12  (?) 

( nissim ,  I  say;  nuttinncowap,  I  said; 
teagua  kissim,  what  you  say?;  nissimun, 
we  say;  nissimunndnup,  we  said,  C.  207; 
toll  kuttinncowam  or  kussin,  what  do  you 
say?  ibid.  217) .  [The  examples  marked 
with  an  asterisk  are  rarely,  perhaps  not 
at  all,  used  except  in  the  indicative, 
suppos.  present,  and  imperative;  noowo- 
ndt  and  anncowonat  ( unnonat )  supply 
the  other  tenses  and  persons.]  Cf.  nooo- 
nat;  uttinonat. 

ussinonat  (?),  v.  t.  an.  ^uttinonat,  to  say 
to,  to  tell:  ussegk,  tell  (you)  me,  Gen. 
24,  49;  usseli,  tell  thou  me,  1  Sam.  14, 
43.  (See  examples  (*)  under  ussinat.) 

ussish. [au]onat,  v.  t.  to  run  to,  toward, 
into:  ussishonat,  to  flee  to,  Jonah  1,  3; 
woh  nutussishon,  ‘  that  I  may  run  (hasten, 
go  quickly)  to  (him)’,  2  K.  4,  22;  ussi- 
shau,  he  ran  to  (them),  Gen.  18,  7,  (him) 
1  Sam.  3,  5;  ussishau  wunnogskauoh, 
he  ran  to  meet  him,  Gen.  29, 13;  aliao- 
sukque  ( ahauhsukqueu )  ussishaog,  they 
run  to  and  fro,  Joel  2,  9;  nd  ussishash, 
‘escape  (thou)  thither’,  run  to  it,  Gen. 
19,  22;  ushshash,  flee  thou  to,  Num.  24, 
11;  aliauhsukque  ussishunk,  run  ye  to- 


176 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


ussish  [  au] onat — continued . 
and  fro,  Jer.  5,  1 ;  49,  3;  na  ussishash, 
run  thou  to,  ‘escape  thither’,  Gen.  19, 
22;  na  ussishau,  (he)  runneth  into  it, 
Prov.  18,  10;  kutushishaumwao,  ye  run 
to  (it),  Hag.  1,  9;  nussishau  ( nusseu - 
ussishau),  he  runs  alone,  2  Sam.  18,  24, 
26;  moushauog,  they  run  together  to, 
Acts  3,  11;  negonshont  ( negonne-ussish - 
ont),  running  before  (another),  2  Sam. 
18,  27.  See  pomushau. 

[Cree  it-iss'emoo,  v.  i.  he  flees,  speeds 
thither;  it-'lss'awayoo,  v.  t.  he  dispatches 
him  thither,  Howse  172.] 
ussowenonat,  ussro-,  v.  t.  an.  to  name, 
or  give  a  name  to  (an.  obj.) ;  pass,  usso- 
wenittinneat,  to  be  named :  vmttissowenuh 
Israel ,  ‘  he  called  his  name  Israel’,  Gen. 
35,  10,  18;  pish  kuttissowen  Jesus,  ‘thou 
shalt  call  his  name  Jesus’,  Luke  1,  31, 
—woh  kuttusscoiven  Jesus,  Matt.  1,  21; 
nag  kuttussoowenukquog,  they  named 
thee,  Jer.  30,  17;  pass,  nutusscowenittea- 
mun  kooivesuonk,  we  are  called  by  thy 
name,  Jer.  14,  9. 

[Cree  weethayoo,  he  names  him, 
Howse  46.] 

ussowenonat,  v.  t.  to  call  by  the  name 
of,  to  give  the  name  of  to  (an.  and 
inan. ) :  ussoweneg,  call  you  me  by  the 
nameof,  Ruth  1, 20;  ussoioenau,  he  called 
her  name  .  .  .  ,  Gen.  3,  20.  Cf.  hettain. 

[Narr.  tahhia  ( toh  hennau),  what  is 
his  name?;  tahossowetam  ( toh  ussoweta- 
mun),  what  is  the  name  of  it?;  tahetla- 
men,  what  call  you  this?  R.  W.  30.] 
ussowessu,  adj.  (is)  named,  Gen.  27,  36: 
toh  ussowessu,  what  is  his  name?  Prov. 
30, 4.  The  3d  pers.  sing,  of  an  irregular 
verb  ( ussowesitteindt  ? ) ,  to  be  named  or 
called:  kuttisowis,  kuttisowes,  thou  art 
named,  Gen.  17,  5;  35,  10;  toh  kuttisowis, 
what  is  thy  name?  Judg.  13,17;  asoowesit, 
when  he  is  named,  being  named,  2  Sam. 
13,  1,  3;  ussowes,  call  his  name,  name 
him  (?),  Hos.  1,  6,  9  (from  ussowesed- 
nat,  v.  t.  an.  (?):  ussowese66g,  if  you 
should  call  me,  Ruth  1,  21). 

[Narr.  ntussawese,  I  am  called;  tocke- 
tussaw/Htch  ( toh  kutussowis),  what  is  your 
name?  “Obscure  and  meane  persons 
amongst  them  have  no  names”,  R.  W. 
29.  He  gives  ‘  ‘niatnoivesuonckane,  I  have 
no  name;  nowdnnehick  nowesuonck,  I 


ussowessu — continued, 
have  forgot  my  name,  which  is  common 
amongst  some  of  them.”] 
usscowessenat,  v.  t.  an.  to  name,  or  give 
a  name  to  (inan.  obj.) .  Pass,  ussowenit- 
tinneat,  to  be  named. 

usscowessenat,  v.  i.  to  be  called,  or  to 
have  the  name  of:  ussowem  Jakob,  he 
is  named  Jacob,  Gen.  27,  36;  pish 
kuttissowes  A.,  thy  name  shall  be  A., 
Gen.  17,  5;  pish  kuttissowesu  J.,  thou 
shalt  be  called  J.,  Gen.  35,  10;  pish  us- 
sowesu,  his  name  shall  be  called,  Is.  9,  6; 
kuttussaowesimwa),  ye  are  called,  or 
named,  2  K.  17,  34  ( asscowesit ,  called, 
C.  184).  Cf.  hettam. 

usscowetamunat,  usso-,  v.  t.  to  name,  or 
give  a  name  to  (inan.  obj.),  nominare: 
wvtussowetamun  ne  alike,  he  called  the 
name  of  that  place  ( Peniel) ,  Gen.  32, 30; 
33,  20;  ussowetamuk  Babel,  ‘the  name 
of  it  is  called  Babel’,  Gen.  11,  9  ( toh 
katusscowetam  table,  what  you  call  table? 
C.  184). 

[Cree  weetum,  he  names  or  tells  it, 
Howse  46.] 
ussu.  See  ussenat. 

ut,  (1)  (-ut)  a  suffix  or  inseparable  parti¬ 
cle,  marking  the  locative  case;  (2)  prep, 
in,  at,  by:  ummayut,  in  his  way,  Is. 
42,  24;  kishke  mayut,  by  the  wayside, 
Gen.  38,  14,  21;  neane  mukkies-ut,  as 
(like  to)  a  little  child,  Luke  18,  17; 
ut  Damaskus,  at  Damascus;  ut  sijna- 
gogs,  in  the  synagogues,  Acts  9,  19,  20. 
The  vowel  of  the  locative  suffix  is  vari¬ 
able,  as  ut  otanit,  Acts  8,  8;  ut  kehtah- 
hannit,  Is.  43,  16;  en  wekit;  en  ohkeit 
(or  ohket);  ut  manootat,  Acts  9,  25;  ut 
wuhhogkal,  Mark  5,  29.  See  adt. 

[Cree  ittd,  adv.  there,  thither,  Howse 
33.] 

utcbuan.  See  anitchewan;  wuttitchuwan, 
etc. 

*utchukkuppemis,  n.  cedar  (tree),  C. 

164.  See  cldkkup;  *mishqudwtuck. 
utchuwompan  [  =  cotche - wompan  (?)]. 

See  adchuwompag. 

*uttae,  adv.  woefully,  C.  230. 
uttinnonaudnat,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan.  to 
say  a  thing  to,  to  tell  something  to: 
wuttinnonneau,  they  told  it  to  (him), 
John  12,  22. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


177 


nttinonat  [  =  unnonat  (?)],  v.  t.  an.  to 
tell,  to  say  to:  nuttin,  I  say  to  (this 
man),  Matt.  8,  9;  kuttimh,  I  say  to  thee, 
John  13,  38  ( nissim ,  Isay;  nuttinncowap, 
I  said,  C.  207 ) ;  wuttinuh,  he  said  to  him, 
John  8,  25;  9,  35  ( vmttunuh ,  Mass.  Ps., 
John  3,  4) ;  he  said  to  them,  John  8,  39; 
wuttinouh,  they  said  to  him,  John  8,  25, 
39  ( wuttonapah ,  he  said  unto  him,  Mass. 
Ps.,  John  3,  2,  3;  kuttunush,  ‘I  say  to 
thee’,  ibid.  3,  5);  nuttinonash  muttaok, 
I  say  to  the  world  (these  things) ,  John 
8,  28;  kuttinnonnumwco,  I  say  unto  you, 
John  13,  20,  21;  utash,  say  thou  to 
(them),  Is.  40,  9;  yeu  kuttinnunnunan, 
this  we  say  unto  you,  Acts  4,  15. 

[Narr.  teaqua  ntunnawen,  or  nteawem, 
what  shall  I  speak?  E.  W.  64.  Cree 
itwayoo,  he  so  says,  Howse  42.] 
uttiyeu,  adv.  where  (El.  Gr.  21):  uttiyeu 
cine,  wherever,  Deut.  28,  37. 

[Narr.  tuckiu,  tiyu,  where,  R.  W.  49; 
tuckiu  sdchim,  where  is  the  sachini? 
ibid.  48.] 

uttiyeu,  ‘pron.  interrog.  of  things’, 
which;  pi.  uttiyeuash  (El.  Gr.  7) :  uttiyeu, 
which  (who)  of  these,  Luke  22,  24,  27; 
an.  pi.  uttiyeug,  whom,  Luke  6,  13. 


uttoh  [ut-toK],  adv.  to  what,  whereunto, 
Matt.  11,  16;  whither,  Cant.  6,  1;  to 
what,  how:  uttoh  en  wunnegen,  how 
beautiful!  ibid.  7,  1;  wherein,  Gen.  21, 
23;  how?  Job  22,  13  ( uttoh  missi,  how 
great,  C.  171;  uttoh  unni,  wrhat  manner; 
uttokau  asuh  matt  a,  whether  or  no,  ibid.; 
uttoh  unuhkuhquat,  how  far?  ibid.  228). 
[A  curious  analogy  might  be  traced  be¬ 
tween  ut-toh  and  Engl,  whi-ther  (Old 
Germ,  hue-dar,  Goth,  hva-thar;  Slav. 
kotoru;  Sansk.  katard  (Bopp.  69,  1-2), 
from  ka,  interrog.,  and  tarn;  Greek 
-repos,  Lat.  terminus,  trans,  transgredi. 
Cf.  tat,  Bopp.  161.] 

[Del.  enda,  Zeisb.] 

uttcoche,  adv.  in  due  season,  seasonably, 
Ps.  104,  27:  mutch  uttcocMeu  kah  ah- 
quompi,  ‘for  a  season  and  a  time’,  Dan. 
7,  12;  papaume  ahhuttcoche  wayont,  at 
the  time  of  the  going  down  of  the  sun, 
Josh.  10,  27;  no  uttcoche,  as  often  as, 
1  Cor.  11,  25,  26;  toliuttcoclie,  how  long, 
Rum.  14,  11.  Y.  subst.  ultcocheyeuco, 
there  is  a  season,  tit  time,  opportunity, 
Eccl.  3,  2,  3,  4.  Cf.  ahquompi;  see  coch. 


w 


w’.  The  inseparable  pronoun  of  the  3d 
pers.  sing,  and  pi.  Before  w  it  coalesces 
with  that  letter,  and  the  sound  of  co  is 
substituted.  Before  a  vowel 't  or  ut  is 
.  inserted  for  euphony,  as  ohtomp,  a  bow, 
wutolitomp,  his  bow. 

waabe,  adv.  above,  Is.  6,  2;  Ex.  40,  19: 
vmtch  waabe,  from  above,  Ps.  78,  23. 
Prep,  waabe  wussissittoonit,  above  his  lip, 
or  to  his  lip  above  (?),  Lev.  13,  45. 
waabeiyeu,  adv.  upward,  Ezek.  41,  7. 
waabenat,  waapenat,  v.  i.  to  rise,  to  go 
upw'ard:  waabeit,  if  or  when  he  rises 
up,  Job  31,  14;  ivaapin,  there  arises  or 
arose  (a  new  king,  Ex.  1,  8);  oowaobe- 
naout,  infln.  3d  pi.  (they)  to  mount 
upward,  Ezek.  10,  16;  with  inan.  subj. 
waabpemcouk,  ivaabemcouk,  when  it  rises 
or  mounts  upward  (as  smoke),  Is.  9, 
18;  Num.  24,  17;  na  pish  waapemco, 
there  (it)  shall  be  raised  up,  it  shall 
vise  up,  Is.  15,  5;  nipqieash  waapemcoash, 
B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 12 


weabenat,  waapenat — continued, 
the  waters  rise  up,  Jer.  47,  2  (wussdppi 
woppinnok,  thin  air,  C.  176). 
waabese,  adj.  an.  above,  Lev.  14,  5,  6. 
waabeu,  waapu,  it  ‘raised  itself  up’, 
‘wrent  up’,  Dan.  7,  5;  Gen.  2,  6:  (with 
an.  or  inan.  subj.)  noli  waabeit,  which 
goeth  (may  go)  upward,  Eccl.  3,  21 
( ncowabeem ,  I  arise,  C.  180). 
waadjishadt,  v.  t.  to  couple,  to  fasten, 
join,  unite  one  thing  to  another,  Ex. 
26,  6. 

waadjishunk,  n.  a  coupling,  joint,  Ex. 
26,  4  et  seq. 

waaneg-ugish,  pi.  precious  things.  See 
waonegugish;  umnnegik. 
waantamroonk,  n.  (El.  Gr.  10)  wisdom, 
2  Chr.  1,  11,  12;  1  K.  4,  29;  discretion, 
Ps.  112,  5:  ncowaantamcbonk,  my  wis¬ 
dom,  Prov.  5,  1;  oowaantamcoonk,  his 
wisdom,  1  K.  4,  30. 


178 


RUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BI  LLETIN'  25 


waantamunat,  v.  i.  to  be  wise  (conju¬ 
gated  in  EL  Gr.  pp.  25-27,  as  example 
of  verb  subst.) :  noowaantam,  I  am  wise; 
kaowadntam,  thou  art  wise;  waantam 
noli,  he  is  wise;  waantam,  ‘in  his  right 
mind’,  compos  mentis,  Luke  8,  35; 
waantamwog,  they  are  wise;  waantash, 
be  thou  wise;  waantaj,  let  him  be  wise; 
waantamon,  when  I  am  wise  (or  if  I  am 
wise);  waantaman,  if  thou  art  wise; 
waantog,  if  he  be  wise;  negat.  ivaan- 
tamooundt,  not  to  be  wise, 
waantamwe,  adv.  (El.  Gr.  22)  wisely,  2 
Chr.  2,  12;  Prov.  17,  2. 
waantamweyeuonk,  pi.  -onganash,  a 
proverb,  proverbs,  Prov.  1,1.  See  nup- 
wodonk;  siogkooviaonk;  wunnupwoaonk. 
waapenat.  See  wa&benat. 
waapenumunat,  v.  t.  to  raise  up,  to  lift 
up:  wadpunum  pogkomunk,  he  lifted  up 
the  rod,  Ex.  7,  20;  waapinuk  vmttinnoh- 
kou,  when  he  held  up  his  right  hand, 
Dan.  12,  7. 

waapinonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  raise  up,  to  lift 
up,  an.  obj.:  waapimvusken,  raise  thou 
up  the  lad,  Gen.  21,  18. 

[Cree  o'opahoo,  he  raises  himself  (as  a 
bird),  Howse  84.] 
waapu.  See  i vciAbeu. 
waashanau,  v.  t.  an.  he  hangs  (him): 
ne  ivctashancok,  hang  ye  him  thereon, 
Esth.  7,  9;  cowaashanduh,  they  hanged 
him,  Esth.  7,  10;  nah  cowaashanduh, 
they  hanged  them,  2  Sam.  21, 9.  With 
inan.  obj.  waShshadtoog,  they  hanged 
(it)  upon,  Ezek.  27, 10;  waahshadto  ohke, 
he  hangeth  the  earth  upon  (it),  Job 
26,  7.  See  kechequabinau. 
waashau,  woushau,  v.  i.  he  hangs,  he 
is  hanging:  noh  wSoshau,  he  who  hangs 
(on  it),  Gal.  3,  13;  nag  woushaog  meh- 
tugqut,  they  hang  on  the  tree,  Josh.  10, 
26;  wodshunk,  if  it  hung  (on  his  neck), 
Matt.  18,  6,  =  waashunk,  Luke  17,  2; 
wohwoohshunk  onkwhonk,  ‘hangings’, 
Ex.  26,  36. 

waashpu,  waushpu,  wowushpu,  adj. 

an.  delicate,  effeminate:  noh  waashpit, 
he  who  is  (may  be)  delicate,  effeminate, 
Deut.  28,  54,  56.  See  wowushpcoonk. 
waban,  n.  wind,  Num.  11,  31;  1  K.  18, 
45;  Ps.  78,  39  ( wdpan ,  C.  158);  auwepin, 
the  wind  ceased;  net  mo  mishaowepin, 
there  was  a  great  calm,  Mark  4,  39. 


waban — continued. 

[Narr.  waupi,  pi.  irdupanash;  mishdu- 
pan,  a  great  wind.  “Some  of  them  ac¬ 
count  of  seven,  some  of  eight,  or  nine 
[winds];  and  in  truth,  they  do  .  .  . 
reckon  and  observe  not  only  the  four, 
but  the  eight  cardinal  winds”,  etc., 
E.  W.  83,  84.  Peq.  wuttun,  wind,  Stiles.] 
wabesenat,  wabesinneat,  v.  i.  to  fear, 
to  be  afraid:  wabesu,  (he)  feareth,  is 
afraid,  Prov.  14,  16  ( neowabes ,  I  am 
afraid,  or  I  fear;  noowaMsumun  or  nm- 
wapcintamtimun,  we  fear,  C.  179,  191); 
wabesuog,  (they)  were  afraid,  Is.  41,  5; 
wabsek,  fear  ye,  Ex.  20,  20;  ahque  wabsek, 
fear  not,  Matt.  14,  27,  =  unbesehteok,  Is. 
44,  8.  See  quehlam;  qushaii. 
wabesuonk,  n.  fear,  2  Cor.  7,  11  (unp- 
suontamooonk,  ‘afraid’,  C.  217).  See 
nunnukqussudnook. 

wabesuontamroonk,  n.  fear,  fright  ( wap - 
suontamooonk,  ‘afraid’,  C.  217). 
wabesuontamunat,  v.  t.  to  fear  or  be 
afraid  of  (inan.  obj.),  Deut.  28,  58;  3d 
pers.  oowabesuontamunat,  Is.  31,  4.  Cf. 
quehtam. 

wadchabuk,  wadchaubuk,  wutchau- 
buk,  n.  a  root,  Deut.  19, 18;  Matt.  13, 6; 
Rom.  11, 16, 18  ( wutchappehk  or  wottapp, 
C.  164);  in  compound  words,  -adchau- 
buk,  -adchdbuk.  V.  subst.  unadchdbuka- 
og,  they  shall  take  root,  Is.  37,  31;  nag 
oowadchabukooog,  they  have  taken  root, 
.Ter.  12,  3;  pish  enadchdbukod,  it  shall 
take  root,  2  K.  19,  30.  See  umtehon- 
quom. 

[Narr.  watt&p,  a  root  of  tree,  R.  W. 
89.  Abn.  8adabi,-dbak,  ‘racine  ii  canot’ 
(petites,  Sadabisar).  Mod.  Abn.  wa- 
dap,  root  to  sew  with.  Del.  tschuppic, 
root,  Zeisb.Voc.  12.] 

wadchanauonat  (?),  v.  t.  to  have  in  keep¬ 
ing,  to  have  possession  of  (an.  obj.): 
wadchanau  flocksog,  ‘  he  had  possession 
of  flocks’,  Gen.  26,  14.  See  ohtauundt. 
wadchanittuonk,  n.  (the  state  of  being 
kept),  salvation,  safety,  Is.  59,  16. 
wadchanonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  keep  (a  per¬ 
son  or  an.  obj.),  to  keep  securely,  to 
protect  (conjugated  in  El.  Gr.  28-58): 
kaowadchamh,  I  keep  thee;  nmwadcha- 
noog,  I  keep  them;  ncoivadchcmukquog, 
they  keep  me  (I  am  kept  by  them); 
negat.  wadchanounat,  not  to  keep,  El. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


179 


wadchanonat — continued. 

Gr.  58;  pass,  wadchanitteinat,  to  be  kept:  , 
wadchandunat,  not  to  be  kept,  El.  Gr. 
62, 63;  noowadchanit,  I  am  kept;  tmdcha- 
nau,  he  is  kept;  wadchanoog ,  they  are 
kept;  suppos.  wadchanitteaon,  when  I 
am  kept;  wadchanit  noh,  when  he  is  i 
kept. 

wadchanumunat,  v.  t.  inan.  to  keep  (it), 
to  own  or  possess  (conjugated  in  El. 
Gr.  25,  27);  to  save,  Matt.  18,  11:  nco- 
wadchariumun,  I  keep  (it);  ltcowadcha- 
numun,  thou  keepest  it;  oowadchanum- 
un ,  he  keeps  it;  kaowadchanumumwco, 
ye  keep  it;  wadchanumwog,  they  keep 
it;  imperat.  wadchanish,  keep  thou  (it); 
wadchanitch,  let  him  keep  (it);  wad- 
chanumuttuh,  let  us  keep;  wadchctnu- 
matk,  keep  ye.  Suppos.  wadchanumon, 
if  I  keep;  wadchanuman,  if  thou  keepest; 
wadchanuk,  if  he  keep  ( noh  wadchanuk, 
he  who  keeps  or  possesses;  God  ivad¬ 
chanuk  kesuk  kali  olike,  God  the  posses¬ 
sor  of  heaven  and  earth,  Gen.  14,  19, 
22);  wadchanumog,  if  we  keep;  wad- 
chanumog,  if  ye  keep;  wadchanumahet- 
tit,  if  they  keep.  Xegat.  wadchanumcou- 
ndt,  not  to  keep. 

[Narr.  wadchdunama,  keep  this  for 
me,  R.  W.  52.] 

wadchanuwaen,  -in,  n.  one  who  keeps 
or  saves,  a  savior,  Is.  45,  21. 

[Narr.  w&uchaunat,  a  guardian  (of 
a  child);  pi.  wauchauamachick,  R.  W. 
126.] 

wadchaubuk.  See  wadchabuk. 

[wadcbinat]  v.  i.  to  come  or  proceed 
out  or  from:  mushconash  wutjishaash, 
boats  came  from  (Tiberias),  John  6,  23; 
cotshoh  toll  kod  wutjishont,  it  ‘bloweth 
where  it  listeth’,  John  3,  8;  toll  wad- 
chiit,  whence  he  was  (might  come  from ) , 
Judg.  13, 6  ( ivosketomp  wachiit  Pharisesut, 
‘a  man  of  the  Pharisees’,  Mass.  Ps., 

J ohn  3,1);  ne  icadchieh,  ‘  whence  I  am  ’ , 
John?,  28;  noh  wajehayeuut  Godut,  ‘he 
which  is  of  God’,  John  6,  46;  neg  wad- 
chiitcheg  Christ,  ‘they that  are  Christ’s’, 
Gal.  5,  24;  nisli  wutchiyeuash  Jehovah, 
these  things  ‘are  the  Lord’s’,  Deut.  10, 
14;  ne  .  .  .  cotcheun  mittamwossiss-oh, 
(of)  ‘that  made  he  a  woman’,  i.  e.  that 
he  from-ed  a  woman,  Gen.  2,  22;  ivajhet 
mittam wossissit,  ‘  born  of  a  woman  ’,  Gal.  I 


[wadchinat] — continued. 

4,4;  howanwadchegit  Godut,  ‘whosoever 
is  born  of  God’,  1  John  3,  9;  5,  4;  noh 
ivutchu  .  .  .  nish  ivame,  ‘of  him  [as 
cause  or  source]  are  all  things’,  Rom. 
11,  36;  wutchaiyeumco,  it  belongs  to 
(him),  in  the  sense  of  it  proceeds  from 
or  is  caused  by,  Ps.  3,  8;  menuhkemonk 
wutchaiyeumoo  Godut,  power  belongeth 
to  God,  Ps.  62,  11;  nuhhogkat  wutchai- 
yeumwash  (nish),  to  me  belong  (these 
things),  Deut.  32,  32;  yeush  wajehayeu- 
ugish,  ‘these  things  which  concern’ 
him,  Acts  28,  31;  kenaau  ka>chaiimwa> 
wutch  agwu,neen  uoochai  wohkumaieu,ye 
are  from  beneath,  I  am  from  above, 
John  8,  23.  From  ivutdhe,  a>ch .  Cf. 
oomundt. 

[Narr.  tunna  wutshatxock,  whence 
come  they?  R.  IV.  29,  and  see  other  ex¬ 
amples  under  *oteshem.  Del.  wunds- 
chnm,  -chen,  the  wind  comes  from  (a 
particular  quarter),  Zeisb.  Gr.  161,182; 
untschihilleu,  it  comes  from  (some¬ 
where),  ibid.  182.] 

wadchu,  n.  a  mountain,  Ps.  78,  68;  pi. 
-{-ash,  Job  9,  5  (wadchu,  -j -ash,  C.  158): 
mishadchu,  a  great  mountain,  Rev.  8,  8; 
misadchu  kali  wadchu,  mountain  and 
hill,  Luke  3,  5;  wadchuekontu,  ‘in  the 
hill  country’,  Josh.  13,  6. 
wadchue,  adj.  mountainous:  en  wadchue 
ohkeit,  ‘  to  the  hill  country  ’ ,  Luke  1,  39. 
wadchuemes,  n.  dim.  a  hill  (small 
mountain),  Is.  40,  4;  pi.  -f  ash,  Is.  42, 
15:  icadchuwemesash,  little  hills,  Ps. 
114,  4. 

wadhuppa[enat].  See  ienttuhppa\enaf\. 
wadohkinneat,  v.  i.  to  dwell  (in  a 
place),  to  be  an  inhabitant  of,  Neh.  11, 
2:  neg  wadohkitclieg,  the  inhabitants  of, 
they  who  dwell  in  (a  land,  or  country), 
Gen.  26,  7;  Is.  9,  2.  See  ivutolikinneat. 
wadsh,  wadtch,  n.  a  (bird’s)  nest,  Ps. 
84,  3;  Num.  24,  21:  wutch  oowadshat, 
from  her  nest,  Prov.  27,  8. 

[Del.  icach  schie  chey,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  31.] 
wadtan,  wodtan,  n.  the  rump,  Lev.  3, 
9;  7,  3;  8,  25.  Cf.  wuttunkin(onat) ,  to 
bend  a  bow. 

wadtauatonkqussuonk,  n.  (the making 
a  sound,)  the  voice,  Is.  40,  6:  cowadt-, 
his  voice,  Is.  42,  2;  -uog,  they  make 
a  noise  (of  the  sea),  Is.  17,  12;  (of 


180 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


wadtauatonkqussuonk — continued. 

wheels),  Ezek.  3,  13;  wuttauatonkqussue 
wimeetash,  the  sound  of  her  feet,  1  K. 
14,  6;  2  K.  6,  32;  unkquerieunkquodte 
wadtauatonkqusmonk,  a  dreadful  sound, 
Job  15,  21. 

wadtaumaogish,  things  which  belong 
to,  have  influence  on,  or  concern,  Luke 
19,  42:  ne  vmUaurnauncog  wuhhogkat, 
that  which  does  not  concern  himself, 
Prov.  26,  17.  Cf.  pissaumatoonk. 
wadtch.  See  viadsh. 
wadtonkqs.  See  adtonkqs. 
wadtutchuan.  See  wuttitchuwan. 
waeenodtumunat,  waeenot-,  v.  t.  inan. 
obj.  to  praise  or  commend:  waeenod- 
tumu'og,  they  praise  (it),  Ps.  89,  5;  wae- 
enodtumwehetticli,  let  them  praise  (it), 
Ps.  148,  5;  149,  3;  waeenotum  magagish, 
‘it  boasteth  great  things’,  James  3,  5. 
With  an.  obj.  waeenotumaunnog  nag,  ‘I 
boast  of  you  to  them’,  2  Cor.  9,  2 
(double  transitive  form);  kcowoweend- 
tumauonumwao,  we  commend  (her)  to 
you,  Rom.  16,  1.  See  ivaienomonat. 
waeenomonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  praise,  to 
commend,  1  Pet.  2, 14;  freq.  woweenomo- 
nat;  waeenomwk,  praise  ye  (him),  Ps. 
150, 1,  2,  3;  waeenomonch,  let  him  praise 
(him),  Ps.  150,6;  woweenom6uh, (they) 
commended  her,  Gen.  12,  14;  aowowee- 
nomuh,  he  approved  him,  Acts  2,  22; 
waeenornau  wuhhogkuh,  he  praises  him¬ 
self,  Ps.  36,  2;  waeenomont  wuhhogkuh, 
‘boasting  himself’,  Prov.  25,  14.  See 
wdundnuhkauonat. 

waeenu,  adj.  and  adv.  round  about,  Ex. 

30,  3;  37,  26;  2  K.  25,  1;  Rev.  4,  3,  4: 
ne  wekqshik  waeenu,  on  the  edge  of  it 
round  about,  Ezek.  43,  13;  wemu,  Gen. 

31,  8  ( waene ,  ivewene,  prep,  about,  C. 
225,  234) .  See  wayeoag;  weenuhkauonat; 
weenusheau. 

waheonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  know  (a  person,  or 
an.  obj. ) ,  to  recognize:  waheau,  he  knew 
(them) ,  Gen.  42, 8 ;  waheuli,  he knoweth, 
or  knew,  them,  Ps.  138,  6;  Gen.  42,  7; 
n een  ncoiv&eh,  I  know  him,  John  7,  29; 
Gen.  18,  19;  matta  pastik  ncowaheoh,  I 
do  not  know  one,  Is.  44,  8;  konwdhush, 
I  know  thee,  Gen.  12,  11;  Ex.  33,  12; 
kcowahhimwoo,  ye  know  me,  John  7,  28; 
noh  matta  wahhedog,  ye  (may)  not  know 
him,  ibid.  ( kaowahhish ,  I  know  thee; 


waheonat — continued. 
ncowaeh  noh,  I  know  him;  noowahedog, 
I  know  them,  C.  196,  197.  Cotton 
gives  two  pages  to  the  conjugation  of 
the  several  forms  of  waheonat,  wahteou- 
unal,  wahteauwahconat,  etc.). 

[Narr.  matta  now&uwone,  matta  no- 
wdhea,  I  knew  nothing,  R.  W.  51  (cf. 
matta  nmwahheoh,  ‘I  know  not’,  Gen. 
4,  9).  Del.  no  woa  huk,  he  knows  me, 
Zeisb.] 

wahheonk,  n.  knowledge  (of  persons), 
Phil.  3,  8. 

wahheuunat,  v.  i.  to  be  known  (by 
others),  John  7,  4:  waheoneau,  he  is 
known,  Prov.  31,  23. 
wahsukeh.  See  irasukeh. 
wahteauonk.  See  wahteonk. 
wahteauunat,  v.  t.  inan.  to  know  or 
have  knowledge  of,  to  understand, 
Eccl.  1, 17;  7,  25  (- ouunat ,  C. );  ‘to  per¬ 
ceive’,  Deut.  29,  4:  wahteouun[at]  wane- 
gik  kah  machuk,  knowing  (to  know) 
good  and  evil,  Gen.  3,  5;  wahteou,  he 
knoweth,  understandeth  (it),  1  Chr. 
28,  9  (-aw,  Ps.  104,  19);  suppos.  noh 
ivautog,  he  that  understandeth  (v.  i. ), 
Prov.  8,  9;  matta  wahteauou,  he  does 
not  know  (it),  John  15,  15;  kcowah- 
teouunneau,  ye  know  it,  John  7,  28  (nag 
wahteoog,  they  know,  C.  196) ;  koowahteoh 
vmttahhoowoash,  thou  knowest  their 
hearts,  1  K.  8,  39;  ncoivahteouun,  I  know 
it,  Gen.  48, 19;  koowahteoun,  thou  know¬ 
est  it,  Rev.  7,  14;  ne  wahteouun,  this 
thing  is  known,  Ex.  2,  14;  wahteunk, 
knowing,  when  he  knew,  Mark  5,  30, 
33;  wahteaush,  know  thou,  Dan.  3,  18 
( nmwdteo ,  I  know,  I  understand;  ncowd- 
teomun,  we  know;  wahteouunat,  to  know; 
vjahtmmh,  know  thou;  noh  wahteoitch, 
let  him  know,  C.  196). 

[Narr.  nowatitam,  I  understand;  co- 
iv&utam,  you  understand  [thou  under- 
standest];  cowdwtam  tawhitche  nippee- 
yadmen,  do  you  know  why  I  come?  R. 
W.  31.] 

wahteauwaheonat,  v.  t.  an.  (caus. )  to 
make  one’s  self  known  to  (another): 
wahteauwaheont,  making  himself  known 
to  (them),  Gen.  45,  1;  nen pish  noow&h- 
teauwah,  I  will  make  myself  known  to 
him,  Num.  12,  6  ( wahteamvah ,  make 
him  to  know,  C.  196). 


TRUMBULI.] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


181 


wahteauwahuonat,  v.  t.  inan.  (caus.  )to 
make  a  thing  known  to,  Is.  64,  2;  Rom. 
9,  22  ( pish  wahteauwahuau,  he  shall 
make  it  known,  Is.  38,  19):  noowcihteau- 
wahilcqun,  he  made  (it)  known  to  me, 
Eph.  3,  3;  wame  nish  koowahteauwahun- 
undoash,  I  make  all  these  things  known 
to  you,  John  15, 15. 

wahteonk,  wahteauonk,  n.  knowledge, 

2  Chr.  1, 11, 12;  Is.  40, 14;  44, 19;  1  Cor. 

8,  1. 

waiyont,  sun-setting.  See  ivayont. 

waj,  wajeh  [=wutch,  wutche],  for,  be¬ 
cause  of,  Prov.  17,  14:  yen  wajeh ,  for 
this  cause,  John  12, 18;  newajeh,  there¬ 
fore  (for  that  cause),  John  12, 17, 19,  21, 
=  newaj,  John  13,  31;  newutche  yeu  waj, 
‘for,  for  this  cause’,  etc.,  Rom.  13,  6 
(ne  waj,  for  which  cause,  C.  234;  waj, 
conj.  for,  ibid.).  See  wutche. 

wame,  wamu,  adv.  all,  wholly  (El.  Gr. 
21),  full  ( wameyeue ,  usually,  C.  230); 
with  v.  subst.  tea  mat,  there  is  enough, 
sufficient,  Gen.  45,  28;  Ex.  9,  28;  Matt.  ; 
6,  34:  naowameit,  I  have  enough,  there 
is  enough  for  me,  Gen.  33, 11;  inan.  pi. 
wamutash,  sufficient,  ‘Ex.  36,  7;  ohke 
wamut,  there  is  land  enough,  Gen.  34, 
21;  wamok,  womohk,  when  or  if  it  is 
enough,  if  it  suffice,  1  K.  20,  10;  anue 
ne  woh  adt  womohk,  more  than  (when 
it  was)  enough,  Ex.  36,  5;  wamach,  let 
it  suffice,  Deut.  3,  26;  wamalitch,  let 
them  suffice,  be  sufficient,  Deut.  33,  7 ; 
wamenau,  he  has  enough;  matin  pish 
wamenau,  he  has  not  enough,  is  not 
satisfied,  Eccl.  1, 8;  ncowamanittamumun , 
it  sufficeth  us,  we  have  enough,  John 

14,  8.  Cf.  tdpi  (tdbach,  let  it  suffice, 
Ezek.  44,  6).  See  pohshe. 

[Narr.  waumet  taiipi,  it  is  enough, 
R.  W.  35.  Abn.  egSami,  tout  entiere- 
ment,  Rasies  552.  Del.  wemi,  all,  Zeisb. 
Gr.  178.] 

wamepwunneat,  v.  i.  to  be  full,  to  have 
enough  of  food,  to  fill  one’s  self,  Luke 

15,  16:  wamepooh,  he  is  satisfied,  Is.  44, 
16;  wamepcoog,  they  are  satisfied,  are 
filled,  Deut.  14,  29;  Mark  8,  8;  wame- 
peop,  (she)  was  sufficed,  had  enough  to 
eat,  Ruth  2, 14;  mattapish  kcowamepoom- 
woo,  ye  shall  not  be  satisfied,  Lev.  26, 26; 
neg  woh  mo  wamepcogig,  they  which  can 
never  have  enough,  Is.  56,  11;  wamep- 


wamepwunneat — continued. 
wean,  wamepcoan,  when  thou  art  full, 
Deut,  8,  10,  12.  See  nadtuppoo. 

[Narr.  now&ump,  I  have  enough; 
cowcLump,  have  you  enough?  R.  IV.  36.] 
wamesashquish.  (?),  n.  the  ‘swallow’, 
Prov.  26,  2.  See  niameesa.shques. 
wamunat,  womunat.  See  comunat,  to 
go- 

wanahchikomuk  [vxinashque-komuk] ,  n. 
a  chimney,  Hos.  13,  3  (wunnachkemmuk, 
C.  161). 

[Narr.  wunnauchicdmock,  R.  IV.  51.] 
wanantamunat,  v.  t.  inan.  to  forget  a 
thing  or  inan.  obj.  ( oowunanatamundt , 
Heb.  6,  10) :  \naoi]wandntam,  I  forget, 
Ps.  102,  4;  wanantam,  he  forgets,  James 
1,  24;  wunanatamwog,  they  forget,  Ps. 
78,  11;  ahque  wunantash,  do  not  (thou) 
forget,  Deut.  9,  7;  Prov.  4,  5;  nukkod- 
wunantam,  I  will  (wish  to)  forget,  Job 
9,27  ( noowdnantam ,  I  forget,  C.  192). 
wanantamwaheonat,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan. 
caus.  to  cause  (him)  to  forget  (it),Jer. 
23,  27  ( wanantamwahhlnnean  kenau, 
make  or  cause  us  to  forget  you,  C.  192). 
wananumonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  forget  a  per¬ 
son  or  an.  obj.:  naowandnum,  I  forget; 
kaowan&num,  thou  forgettest,  Hos.  4,  6; 
woh  oowandnumduh,  she  may  forget 
them,  Is.  49, 15;  wananumunon,  if  I  for¬ 
get  thee,  Ps.  137,  5;  neg.  ahque  wanan- 
um,  do  not  (thou)  forget,  Ps.  10, 12;  Prov. 
3,  1;  wananumoncheg,  they  who  forget 
(him),  Ps.  9,  17;  ncowanunumukquog,  I 
am  forgotten  (they  forget  me),  Ps. 
31,  12. 

wanashque,  wunnash-,  wannasq-, 

prep,  on  the  top  of,  Gen.  28,  18:  wan¬ 
ashque  wutanwolihou,  on  the  top  of  his 
staff,  Heb.  11, 21;  (of  the  scepter, )  Esth. 
5,  2;  wannasque  appuonganit,  the  top  of 
the  throne,  1  K.  10, 19;  wanashquompsk- 
qut  (objective),  ‘the  top  of  a  rock’, 
Ezek.  26,  14.  (Rasies  gives  to  the  cor¬ 
responding  Abnaki  word  a  more  ex¬ 
tended  meaning:  8atiask8i8i,  8anask8i- 
remaskSk,  le bout,  au  bout;  8anask8ittan, 
le  bout  du  n6z,  etc. )  See  wunnash. 
wanashquodtinncogish.,  n.  pi.  mountain 
tops,  Ezek.  6,  13;  Gen.  8,  5:  suppos. 
wanashquodtinnu  wadchuut,  (when)  on 
the  top  of  the  mountain,  Ezek.  43,  12. 


182 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


wanashquonk,  n.  the  top  (le  bout); the 
top  of  the  bough  (tree),  Is.  17,  6. 
waneemsquag  [wunne-mtisqui  ?],  crim¬ 
son  (cloth),  Jer.  4,  30. 
wanegik.  See  wunne;  wunnegik. 
wannantamoe,  -coe,  forgetful,  James  1, 
25.  See  wan&ntamtinat. 
wannasque.  See  wanashque. 
wanne,  without,  destitute  of  (strictly,  it 
is  an  indeclinable  adjective  meaning 
none,  not  any;  as  an  adverb  it  ex¬ 
presses  exclusion,  loss,  or  destitution, 
and  is  occasionally  used  by  Eliot  for 
direct  negation):  matta  wanne  wutooshe, 
wanne  wutokase,  without  father,  without 
mother,  Heb.  7,  3;  wanne  wahtede,  with¬ 
out  knowledge,  Job  35,  35;  wanne  oh- 
tanoo,  there  shall  be  none,  Ex.  16,  26; 
wanne  kutahtoou,  thou  hast  not,  Jer.  30, 
13;  wanne  nippeno,  there  was  no  water 
in  it  (it  was  without  water),  Gen.  37, 24; 
wanne  nushehteaen  ahtoou,  no  murderer 
hath,  etc.,  1  John  3,  15;  wanne  kutchoh- 
kesu,  there  is  no  spot  in  thee,  Cant.  4, 
7;  wanne  howane,  there  was  no  one  (left 
alive),  Num.  21,  35.  Cf.  howan;  urine; 
-oo-. 

wannehheonat,  wanheonat,  v.  t.  an. 

to  lose  (a  person  or  an.  obj.):  ncowan- 
lieomp  nunneechanog,  I  have  lost  my 
children,  Is.  49,  29;  part,  wanneheont, 
losing,  he  who  loses,  Luke  15,  4;  Matt. 
16,  26;  mahche  wanneliheont ,  after  thou 
hast  lost,  having  lost,  Is.  49,  20;  matta 
pasuk  ncowanheoh,  I  have  lost  none, 
John  18,  9;  ne  wanheonche,  that  which 
(an. )  was  lost,  Luke  15,  4;  but  noh  wan- 
lieogkup,  who  was  lost  (pass.),  v.  6. 

[Cree  wunne  hayoo,  Howse  41.] 
wannehteauunat,  wanteauunat  (-un- 
neat),  v.  t.  to  lose,  inan.  obj.,  or  in- 
tons.  to  be  deprived  of,  to  lie  without: 
ne  wanteauomp,  that  which  I  lost,  Luke 
15,  9;  matta  pish  wanneteauou,  he  shall 
not  lose  (it),  Acts  27,  22;  pish  cowan- 
teoun,  oowanteauun,  he  shall  lose  it,  Matt. 
10,39;  16,25;  Mark  8,  35;  wannehteunk, 
wanteunk,  if  he  lose,  losing,  Matt.  10, 
39;  Luke  13,  8;  pass,  ne  wanteamuk, 
that  which  is  lost,  Matt.  18,  11;  -6muk, 
Lev.  6,  3. 

[Cree  minnetou,  Ilowse  41.] 
wannonkcotDk.  See  wunnonkaoook. 


wannconau,  n.  (his)  cheek,  Lam.  3,  30: 
pi.  wannooash,  his  cheeks,  Cant.  5,  13; 
konnoonauash ,  thy  cheeks,  Cant.  I,  10. 
See  manoonau  ( m’noonau ). 
wanonkquae,  wannonkou,  adv.  in  the 
evening,  yesterday.  See  wunnonkqude. 
wanontoowagk,  -coagk,  n.  music,  Dan. 
3,  5,  7,  10. 

wanonuhkcowaeu,  wawunonukcoae, 
adv.  by  flattery,  Dan.  11,  32,  34.  See 
papannanvau;  wdunonuhkau&nat. 
wanteauunat.  See  wannehteauunat. 
waompog:  quenau  waompog.  ‘in  the 
(morning)  twilight’,  2  K.  7,  7. 
waonat.  See  waudnat. 
waonegugish,  waonegigish,  waane-, 
n.  pi.  precious  things,  Gen.  24,  53; 
Deut.  33,  13,  14;  Prov.  24,  4.  See 
wunnegik;  cf.  wayedag-ish,  rings, 
waonit,  if  he  go  astiay.  See  waudnat. 
waont,  sun-setting.  See  wayont. 
*wapantamunat,  to  hasten:  ncowdpdn- 
tam,  I  am  in  haste,  C.  193. 
*wapunnukquas,  n.  the  swallow,  Mass. 
Ps.,  Ps.  84,  3,  =  mameesashques  (q.  v. ), 
El. 

wapwekan,  n.  the  fin  of  a  fish:  wapwd- 
kanitcheg,  pi.  having  fins,  Lev.  11,  9; 
Deut.  4,  9. 

*wasaquananetick,  n.  a  light  or  candle, 
C.  161.  See  wequdnanteg. 
wasenumonche,  n.  amother-in-law,  hus¬ 
band’s  or  wife’s  mother,  Ruth  1,  14; 
Matt.  10,  35. 

wasenumukqutche,  n.  a  son-in-law, 
daughter’s  husband,  Judg.  15,  6.  See 
wussenumdnat. 

[Narr.  nosttnemuck,  he  is  my  son-in- 
law,  R.  W.  124.] 

wasit  (condit.  part. ).  See wussue,  ‘seeth¬ 
ing’. 

*waskeke  (Narr. ), whalebone,  R.W.  103. 
Cf.  wusk6n. 

wassabbe.  See  ivossahpe,  thin, 
wasukeh,  wahsukeh,  wessukeh,  n. 
(construct.)  the  husband  of,  (her)  hus¬ 
band,  Num.  30,  7;  Deut.  25,3;  Rom.  7,  3 
( wasdkkien ,  wasekkien,  a  husband,  C.  161 , 
171) :  puli  ken  wesrnke,  thou  shalt  be  her 
husband,  Deut.  21,  13;  nasuk,  my  hus¬ 
band,  Gen.  29,  32;  kasuk,  thy  husband, 
Gen.  3,  16;  kahsukowoog,  your  hus¬ 
bands,  Eph.  5,  24;  wasukkoouh  (obj.), 
to  their  husbands,  ibid.;  noh  ivaohmk- 


TRUMBl'LL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


183 


wasukeh,  etc. — continued. 

Hit,  she  who  hath  a  husband,  Rom. 
7,  2  [ noli  asukkauau,  he  whom  she  fol¬ 
lows  after?];  collect,  owessukkiinneunk, 
all  husbands,  collectively,  Eph.  5,  25. 
See  wussukeh. 

[Narr.  wdsick,  an  husband,  R.  W.  44. 
Peq.  nehyushamug,  my  husband,  Stiles.] 
*watamwe,  adv.  knowingly,  C.  228. 
*watoncks  (Narr.),  a  cousin,  R.  W.  45. 
See  adtonkqs. 

*wattap  (Narr.),  a  root.  See wo.dchabuk. 
waunonuhkauonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  flatter 
( waunonuhkcowonat ,  C.  192):  noh  wdu- 
ndnukumont,  he  who  speaketh  flattery, 
Job  17,  5  (ncowauwunonukoovMm,  I  flat¬ 
ter,  C.  191).  See  papannanvau.  Cf. 
waeen&monat. 

%auompeg.  See  *wompam. 
wauonat,  waonat,  wauwoinat,  v.  i. 

to  go  astray,  to  go  out  of  the  way:  nco- 
auw&in,  I  have  gone  astray,  Ps.  119, 
176;  onatuh  sheepsut  waonit,  as  a  lost 
sheep  (as  a  sheep  when  it  goes  astray), 
ibid. ;  woonu,  he  goes  astray,  Prov.  5,  23; 
woonuog,  they  go  astray,  Ps.  58,  3  [ ne - 
pauz  matta  pish  wayaucn,  the  sun  shall 
not  go  down,  Is.  60,  20  (?)];  no  waonit 
ivulch  mayut,  he  who  wandereth  (if  he 
wander)  out  of  the  way,  Prov.  21,  16; 
wauonit,  going  astray  (if  he  go  astray), 
Deut.  22,  1;  Matt.  18,  12;  neg  wauon- 
itcheg  (obj.),  they  who  go  astray,  Matt. 
18,12  ( wdwdnchik  (as  adj.)*  wandering, 
C.  176;  wawonnuog,  they  wander;  nco- 

woowon,  I  wander,  ibid.  214).  From - - 

and  audnat.  See  nanwiyeu;  vjayont. 

[Cree  wunnissu,  he  errs;  wunnesin, 
he  loses  himself,  goes  astray,  Howse 
81.] 

*wauontam  (Narr.),  n.  a  wise  man  or 
counselor;  pi.  wauontaJdck,  wise  men, 
R.  W.  120.  See  waantamunat. 
wauontamauonat,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan.  to 
bear  witness  of,  or  testify  of  (it)  to 
(persons):  ncowauontamau,  I  testify  of 
.  .  .  to  .  .  .  Rev.  22,  18;  koowauonta- 
munkquneau,  he  testifies  of  (these 
things)  to  you,  Rev.  22,  16. 
wauontamunat,  v.  t.  to  testify  of  (inan. 
obj.):  noowauwaontamun,  I  testify  of  it, 
John  7,  7. 

waushpu.  See  waashpu. 


waussummuonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  worship, 

1  Sam.  1,  3.  See  wowussumonat. 
waussumoncheg.  See wowussumoneheg. 
*Wautacone  (Narr.),  Englishman;  pi. 
WautaconHaog,  ‘that  is,  coat-men,  or 
clothed  ( Watdhkcbnog,  Englishmen, 

‘  such  as  wear  coats’ ,  C.  169 ) :  Wautacon- 
isk,  an  English  woman;  Wautaconemesc, 
an  English  youth,  R.  IV.  65.  From  wut- 
tunkuni,  he  covers  with  (it).  C)ther 
names  given  to  the  English  were: 
Avjaunagress  (for  -gust),  pi.  -suck,  “as 
much  as  to  say,  these  strangers  ’  ’ ;  Chdu- 
quaquock,  knife-men,  sword-men,  R.  W. 
51,  65.  See  *awdun.  Morton  (N.  E. 
Canaan,  3,  5)  says:  “The  Salvages  of 
the  Massachusets  .  .  .  did  call  the 
English  planters  Wotawquenange 
[-auge],  which  in  their  language  signi- 
fiethstabbersorcut-throates”.  ...  “A 
southerly  Indian  that  understood  Eng¬ 
lish  well  .  .  .  calling  us  by  the  name 
of  Wotoquansawge,  what  that  doth  sig- 
nifie,  hee  said  hee  was  not  able  by  any 
demonstration  to  expres.se.” 

[Del.  wtak  ho  hen  sin,  to  cover, 
Zeisb.] 

wautjishaut  (?):  wutche  wauljishaut,  ‘for 
the  joinings’,  1  Chr.  22,  3. 
*wautuiiques  (Narr.),  ‘the  coney’  (mis¬ 
printed  ‘ conck ’  in  the  reprint) .  “They 
have  a  reverend  esteeme  of  this  crea¬ 
ture,  and  conceive  there  is  some  Deitie 
in  it.” — R.  W.  95,  96.  Josselyn  (Voy¬ 
ages,  pp.  82,  85)  calls  it  the  squnck,  q.  v. 
wauwaen,  n.  one  who  witnesses  or  tes¬ 
tifies,  a  witness,  1  Pet.  5,  1;  wauwaenin, 
Prov.  14,  5  ( ivdvjaenin ,  a  witness,  0. 
157). 

wauwaonk,  n.  testimony,  witness,  1  John 
5,  11;  Is.  19,  20. 
wauwoinat.  See  ivauonat. 
wauwonat,  wauwaonat,  v.  i.  to  bear 
witness,  to  testify  (of),  John  1,  7, 9:  (v.  t. 
an. )  ne  mv.'dmvon,  that  which  he  testi¬ 
fies  of  or  to,  John  3,  32;  wauwau,  he 
testifies,  Heb.  7,  17;  nancauvxm,  I  tes¬ 
tify,  Gal.  5,  3;  Eph.  4,  7;  noowauwonan, 
we  do  testify,  1  John  4,  14;  nag  v:au- 
wacheg,  they  who  bear  witness,  1  John 
5,  7,  8;  wauwon,  if  I  testify,  Acts  20,  24; 
vjauwonaj,  let  it  be  a  witness,  let  it  tes¬ 
tify,  Gen.  31,  44;  wauwomooudj,  let  it  be 
a  witness,  v.  52;  nish  wauwaondgish,  the 


184 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


wauwonat,  wauwaonat — continued, 
things  which  I  testify  to  you,  Deut.  32,  [ 
46. 

*wauwonnuonk,  n.  wandering,  or  going 
astray,  C.  214.  See  waudnat. 
*wawamek,  n.  a  dress,  C.  160. 
waweenwhatuonk,  n.  ‘strife’,  Prov.  15, 
18. 

wawunonuktnae.  See  wandnuhkaowaeu. 
*wawwhunnekesuog  ( Narr.) ,  pi.  mack¬ 
erel,  E.  W,  103  [ wunnogkesu ,  he  is  fat, 
well-bodied]. 

wayeoag-ish,  wayeoagish,  wohway-, 

n.  pi.  rings,  Ex.  39,  16,  17,  20,  21.  Cf. 
wcieenu,  round  about ;  woweaushin,  a  wind¬ 
ing  about ;  waonegugish,  precious  things, 
wayont,  waont(part.  of  wau&nat) ,  sun- 
setting,  Gen.  15,  12;  Mark  1,  32;  Lev. 
22,  7:  papaume  ahhuttcoche  wayont,  ‘at 
the  time  of  the  going  down  of  the 
sun’,  Josh.  10,  27  (oowayaonk  nepaz,  sun 
setting,  C.  164);  wayau,  it  was_  sunset, 
Gen.  28, 11;  the  sun  went  down,  2  Sam. 

2,  24;  ash  waaongkup,  before  (it  was) 
sunset,  ‘before  the  sun  went  down’, 
Judg.  14,  18. 

[Narr.  wayadwi,  the  sun  is  set,  R.  W. 
67.  Peq.  weyhan,  ‘moon’,  Stiles.] 
weachimineash.  See  weatchiminneash. 
weanun,  weanin,  n.  a  burden,  Ps.  38,  4; 
Is.  30,  27:  onveanun,  his  burden,  Num. 

4,  19;  pi.  weanunash,  Gen.  49,  14;  ka>- 
weannunncoash,  your  burdens,  Deut.  1, 
12;  Gal.  6,  2.  From  wcieenu,  (wrapped) 
about  (?). 

weassunonat  (?),  v.  i.  to  bear  burdens; 
weassukeg,  pi.  neg  weassukeg,  they  who 
bear  burdens,  Neh.  4,  10  (weasukeg,  v. 
17);  ooweassunaoont,  (they)  to  bear  bur¬ 
dens,  2  Chr.  2,  2. 

[Del.  wi  waschin,  to  carry  a  load, 
Zeisb.  Yoc.  33.  ] 

weatchimin,  n.  corn  (in  the  field),  stand¬ 
ing  grain,  Deut.  23,  25. 
weatchimlnneash,  weachimineash,  n. 
pi.  grain,  corn  (generically),  Gen.  27, 
28;  Lev.  2,  14  ( eachimmineach ,  -cash, 
C.):  apposuash  weatchiminneash,  (con¬ 
tract.)  appuminneonash,  parched  corn, 

1  Sam.  17,  17;  25,  18,  =  uppashcjuctssue 
weatchiminneash,  Lev.  23,  14;  munne- 
quomunneash,  green  ears  of  corn,  Lev. 
2, 14;  munnequomin,  growing  corn,  Hos. 
14, 7;  missunkquaminneash,  missuhk,  (dry 


weatchiminneash,  etc. — continued, 
or  ripe)  ears  of  corn,  Gen.  41,  5;  mis- 
sunkquamunnemesash  (dimin.),  thin  or 
blasted  ears,  Gen.  41,  6;  nukk/mumin- 
neash,  old  corn,  Josh.  5, 11, 12.  [Cf.  Tupi 
ubatim,  viba-tim,  uba-tim,  avaty,  avatyi 
( ui ,  uy,  vi,  flour,  ‘farinha’ ),  which  Yon 
Martius  ( Wbrtersamml.  Brasil.  Spra- 
chen,  427)  derives  from  viba,  ‘gramen’ 
and  tan,  ‘nasutum’  ( tim=  fructus,  Calli- 
nago;  timid,  ‘comida’,  ‘sustento’,  ‘ ali- 
mento’,  Seixas),  or  from  viba-tuiima, 
‘gramen medullosum ’ ;  Omaguas dialect 
and  Oyambi  (of  Cayenne),  auaty,  abaty; 
Cocomas,  awate  (Castelnau);  Caraib 
avachit,  aoachy,  goaxi  (Call inago) ;  Caya- 
pos,  muschiu;  Araieu,  metschy  (cf.  mee- 
chu  ?);  Chicriabas,  nolsche;  Taino  ( Yu¬ 
catan),  mahiz,  mayz;  Maya,  yxim;  Tecu- 
na,  schiauii,  Von  Martius,  1.  c. ;  Corapo 
dialect,  tschumnam .]  See  meechu,  he 
eats;  min,  a  fruit. 

[Narr.  ewachirn[i] neash,  corn  (i.  e. 
Indian  corn,  maize);  scannbneneash, 
seed  corn,  R.  W.  91;  accoquiss,  Indian 
corn,  Stiles.  Peq.  wewautchemins,  In¬ 
dian  corn,  Stiles.] 

weatchiminneohtek  (-teukl,  n.  a  field 
of  corn,  ‘standing  corn’,  Deut.  23,  25. 
*weawhush  (Narr. ),  v.  imperat.  ‘take  it 
on  your  back’,  R.  W.  51,  =  nidutash, 
ibid.  See  weassunonat. 
webe,  adv.  only,  Gen.  18,  27;  Num.  4,  9: 
matla  ne  webe,  not  only  so,  Rom.  5,  3; 
U'ebe  kenaau,  you  yourselves  apart  (you 
only),  Mark  6,  31;  ken  webe  nussu,  thou 
only,  2  K.  19, 19;  matla  howan  .  .  .  webe 
nen,  there  is  no  one  besides  me,  Is. 
43,  11;  webe  noh  adtumunuk,  (no  one 
knoweth)  ‘saving he  that  receiveth  it’, 
Rev.  2,  1 7.  See  wipe. 

[Peq.  wepe,  but  (=qut,  El. ),  Mayhew, 
Lord’s  Prayer.] 

webequshonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  fear,  Deut. 

10,  12.  See  qushau;  wabesenat. 
webesuonk.  See  wabesuonk,  fear, 
*wechekum  (Narr.),  the  sea,  R.  IV.  98. 
See  kehtoh;  pummoh. 

weechauonat,  weehaonat,  v.  t.  an. 

to  accompany,  to  go  with:  weehau,  go 
thou  with  him,  Matt.  5,41;  ooweechauoh, 
he  went  with  them,  Acts  10,  23;  cowee - 
chauduh,  they  went  with  him,  ibid. 
(  — coweechogquoh  (?),  Acts  20,  4);  wee- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


185 


weechauonat,  wechaonat — continued. 
chaiecin,  if  thou  go  with  me,  Judg.  4,  8; 
kaowechaush,  I  go  with  thee,  v.  9;  wee- 
chauau,  he  went  with  (him),  ibid. 

[Narr.  cowechaush ,  I  will  go  with  you; 
coirecliaw  ewd,  he  will  go  with  you; 
wechauatUtea,  let  us  accompany  (go  to¬ 
gether),  R.  W.  73.] 

weecke,  prep,  with,  in  company  with 
(a  person,  or  an.  obj.),  Ex.  23,  1;  Job 
1,  4:  kcoweeche  waomseumsh,  I  go  down 
with  thee,  Gen.  46, 4;  noh  weechiyeum.uk, 
he  was  with  me,  Neh.  4, 18.  Cf.  nashpe, 
with  (inan.  obj.). 

[Del.  witschi,  Zeisb.] 

weechinnineummoncheg,  n.  pi.  one’s 
family  or  company,  Lev.  25,  10.  See 
teashiyeuoonk. 
week.  See  wek. 
weekinashq.  See  wekinasq. 
weekittamun[neat  (?)  ],  v.  i.  to  dwell  in 
tents  or  houses;  ooweekittamunnaoul ,  Ps. 
78,  55.  See  wekinneat. 
weekitteinat,  v.  i.  to  build  a  house  (for 
one’s  self?),  to  pitch  one’s  tent:  wekit- 
teau,  she  builds  her  house,  Prov.  14,  1; 
he  pitched  his  tent,  Gen.  31,  25;  wcoche 
wekitteau,  he  began  to  build,  2  Chr.  3,  2; 
wekitteaog,  they  pitched  their  tents,  Gen. 
31,  25;  mattapish  luekittecuoog ,  they  shall 
not  build  houses,  Is.  65,  22;  wekitteagk, 
build  ye  the  house,  Hag.  1,  8;  weekikash 
[for  wekitteash  (?)],  build  thee  a  house, 
1  K.  2,  36.  See  adtannegen. 
*weekohquat,  fair  weather,  C.  158.  See 
wunnohquadt. 

weekomonat.  See  wehkomonat. 
weekon,  wekon,  adj.  sweet,  Prov.  20, 
17;  27,  7;  Rev.  10,  9;  pi.  -{-ash,  Prov. 
16,  24.  (Strictly,  perhaps,  verb  impers. 
‘it  is  sweet’,  ‘they  are  sweet’.) 

[Del.  win  gan,  sweet;  win  gal,  tasting 
good;  loin  gi,  gladly,  Zeisb.  Voc.  12.] 
weekontamoonk,  n.  pleasure,  gladness, 
Eccl.  2,  1;  2  Sam.  6,  12;  1  Chr.  16,  27; 
joy,  Prov.  14,  10;  delight,  Prov.  15,  8 
( wekontamabonk ,  gladness;  taphetiaonk, 
cheerfulness,  C.  193). 
weekontamunat  [  =  wekon  (unn)  antam- 
unat ],  v.  i.  to  be  glad,  to  rejoice,  to 
be  pleased,  Eccl.  3,  12;  8,  15  (C.  192; 
to  be  willing,  ibid.  215):  nmwekontam, 
I  am  glad,  Ps.  9,  2;  wekontam,  he  is 


weekontamunat — continued. 

glad,  Ps.  16,  9;  pass,  form  with  inan. 
subj.  wekontamwmco,  (it)  rejoices,  is 
made  glad,  ibid.;  wekonlash,  rejoice 
thou,  be  glad,  Joel  2,21;  wekontamcok, 
kah  ahche  muskouantamcok,  rejoice  (ye) 
and  be  exceeding  glad,  Matt.  5,  12. 
See  *wussekitieahhudnat. 

[Narr.  nowecontam,  I  am  glad,  R.  IV. 
65.  Abn.  nSighinamen,  je  le  trouve 
agreable,  a  mon  gre;  nSigandarn,  je  le 
veux.  Del.  winginamen,  to  be  pleased 
with ;  wingelendam,  to  love  or  be  pleased 
with  something,  Zeisb.  Gr.  179.] 
weekontamwae,  -we,  adj.  and  adv. 
glad,  joyful,  merry,  Num.  10,  10;  Esth. 
5,  9;  Prov.  15,  15;  16,  24  ( wekontamde , 
willingly;  matwekontamwe,  unwillingly, 
C.  230). 

weekshik.  See  wehqshik. 
weematoh,  n.  (his)  brother;  constr.  the 
brother  of,  Gen.  25,  26;  Acts  12,  2; 
Mark  3,  17:  nemat,  my  brother,  Acts  9, 
17;  kemat,  thy  brother,  Gen.  27,  35; 
neematog,  my  brethren,  Matt.  12,  48; 
kematog,  thy  brethren,  Luke  18,  20; 
wematog,  his'  brethren,  ibid.  v.  19; 
kemattoowoog ,  your  brethren,  Num.  32, 
6;  kematou  (v.  subst. ),  (I  am)  your 
brother,  Gen.  45,  4.  See  weetompcts; 
weetuksquoh . 

weemattinneunk,  n.  collect,  the  breth¬ 
ren,  the  brotherhood,  Acts  10,  23;  1  Pet. 
2,  17. 

ween,  wein,  n.  the  marrow,  Job  21,  24; 
Prov.  3,  8;  Is.  25,  6;  Heb.  4,  12. 

[Abn.  8in,  Rasies.] 
weenan,  his  tongue.  See  menan. 
weenohke,  n.  a  grave,  Prov.  30, 16;  Hos. 
13, 14:  woskeche  weenohket,  on  her  grave, 
Gen.  35,  20;  weenohkeyeuoo  nek,  the 
grave  is  my  house,  Job  17, 13.  [ waeen - 
alike,  earth  all  around  (?);  waeenu-olike, 
the  winding  up  place  (?).] 
weenominneash  [ineno m i s -  m  i n n e a s h , 
vine-fruit],  n.  pi.  grapes,  Lev.  19,  10; 
Matt.  7,  16:  weenorn,  a  grape,  Is.  18,  5. 

[Narr.  wenomeneash,  grapes,  R.  W. 
91.] 

weenomis,  n.  a  vine,  Ezek.  15,  2,  =wee- 
nomesippog,  Ps.  128,  3.  From  waeenu,, 
roundabout  (?). 


186 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


weenomwussipog,  -mesippag,  n.  a 

vine,  Ps.  80,  8;  pi.  -\-u ash,  Ps.  105,  33 
(lit.  vine  leaves:  wenomis-wunnepog,  the 
vine  in  leaf). 

weenont,  n.  raven,  Lev.  11,  15  (but 
‘kite’,  Deut.  14,  13):  kutchikkonkcmt, 
‘raven’,  Deut.  14,  14;  qusmkquanush, 
‘kite’,  Lev.  11,  14.  Cf.  konkont. 
weenshonat,  weenshauonat,  v.  t.  to 
beg,  to  ask  alms  (from),  Luke  16,  3: 
weenshau,  he  was  begging,  Mark  10,  46;  j 
he  begged  (bread),  Ps.  37,  25;  wenshau- 
nitch,  let  them  beg,  Ps.  109,  10.  See 
wensham  auonat. 
weenu.  See  waeenv . 
weenuhkauonat,  v.  t.  an.:  iveenuhkau- 
waog  neg,  they  encamp  round  about 
them,  Ps.  34,7;  ayeuuhkone  weenuhkdk, 
camp  ye  round  about  against  (it),  Jer. 
50,  29.  See  waeenu. 

weenuhkomumunat,  v.  t.  inan.  to  camp 
round  about  (it),  to  besiege,  to  com¬ 
pass:  ooweenuhkomun,  he  besieged  it, 

2  K.  17,  5;  weenuhkomcok  otan,  ‘compass 
ye  the  city’,  Josh.  6,  7. 
weenusheau,  -shau,  v.  i.  it  goeth 
around,  ‘compasseth’  (of  a  boundary 
line),  Josh.  18,  14;  19,  14:  pemunneat 
weenisheau,  a  line  compasses  it  about, 

2  Chr.  4,  2.  See  waeenu. 
weenuwasog,  n.  pi.  onions,  Num.  11,  5. 

[Mod.  Abn.  wi-noz,  onion,  K.  A. 
Del.  wi  nun  schi,  and  u  lee  pen,  Zeisb. 
Voc.] 

weenwee.  See  wemve. 
weepamoe,  wepamuwaonk.  See  un¬ 
der  wehpamonat. 

weepit,  (his)  tooth.  See  inepit. 

[Narr.  inepit,  pi .-\-teash,  R.  W.  59.] 
weepwoiyeu-ut,  ‘in  the  passage’  (be¬ 
tween  two  places),  1  Sam.  13,  23. 
weequau,  (his)  thigh.  See  mehquau. 
wees,  weis,  n.  fat,  Lev.  9, 10,20:  coweis, 
its  fat,  Gen.  45,  18.  As  adj.  vjehsue,  fat, 
Zech.  11,  16.  From  weyaus  (?).  See 
wunnogque. 

[Del.  wisu,  (he  is)  fat,  fleshy,  Zeisb. 
Voc.  13;  wil  hu,  fat  meat,  ibid.  12.] 
weesadtippogquosh,  n.  pi.  bitter 
herbs,  Ex.  12,  8;  Num.  9,  11.  See 

wunnepog. 

weesaushaonk,  wesoshaonk,  n.  a  pes¬ 
tilential  or  infectious  disease,  the  pesti¬ 
lence,  Ps.  78,  50;  a  fever,  Mark  1,  31; 


weesaushaonk,  etc. — continued. 

John  4,  52:  weesoshau,  she  was  sick  of 
a  fever,  Matt.  8,  14;  Mark  1,  30.  Cf. 

enninnedonk. 

[Narr.  v:esauashauonck,  the  plague; 
wesausashau milch,  the  great  plague, 
R.  W.  157.] 

weeshittcon,  n.  (mouth-hair, )  the  beard, 
Ps.  133,  2;  Is.  15,  2:  kcoweeshittcounU,  on 
thy  beard,  Ezek.  5,  1;  pi.  (often  used 
for  the  sing.)  -j-as/i,  Lev.  19,  27;  Is.  7, 
20. 

weeshquabashin  (?),  n.  a  pool  of  water, 
Ex.  7,  19  (only). 

weesoe,  adj.  yellow,  Lev.  13,30,  32.  Cf. 
weeswe,  the  gall. 

[Narr.  wesaui,  R.  W.  Del.  wisaweii, 
v.  adj.  it  is  yellow,  Zeisb.  Gr.  164.] 

weesogkina>onk,  n.  bitterness,  Prov.  17, 
25.  See  ivesogkon. 

weesoshaonk.  See  weesaushdonk,  pes¬ 
tilence. 

weesquapinneat,  coweesquabinneat, 

v.  i.  to  wrap  one’s  self  up:  ooweesquapin, 
she  wrapped  herself,  Gen.  38, 14;  cowees- 
quabinun  (v.  t. ),  he  wraps  it  up,  Mic. 
7,  3;  an.  obj.  covmhquanuh,  she  wrapped 
him  (in  it),  Luke  2,  7;  weesquabesu,  it  is 
wrapped  up  (in  a  cloth),  1  Sam.  21,  9; 
suppos.  inan.  weesqnabesik,  (when)  ‘it 
was  bound  up  with’,  Gen.  44,  30;  wees- 
quabenau,  he  bindeth  up  (the  waters 
in  the  clouds),  Job  26,  8.  Cf.  Cree 
waska,  around;  newdskanen,  I  surround, 
inclose  (it),  Howse  34. 

[Narr.  wesquaubenan,  to  wrap  up  body 
for  the  grave,  R.  W.  161.] 

weesumussoh,  n.  (constr. )  the  younger 
of  sons  or  daughters,  (his  or  her) 
younger  brother  or  sister,  Gen.  19, 
31,  38:  mohtommegit,  .  .  .  ire.mmussoh, 
‘the  first  born’,  .  .  .  ‘his  younger 
brother’,  Gen.  48,  18,  19;  younger  sis¬ 
ter,  Judg.  15,  2.  See  muttdsom;  peixsis- 
m;  weetuksquoh. 

weeswe,  n.  the  gall,  Deut.  29,  18;  Ps.  69, 
21:  nanveeswe,  my  gall,  Job  16, 13.  Cf. 
wesogkon,  bitter;  weesoe,  yellow.  (Cf. 
also  Sax.  ge-alewe,  yellow;  gealla,  gall; 
Greek  x°^-V,  bile;  x^°V,  X^-oa,  green¬ 
ish  yellow;  Arab,  murr  and  so’uda, 
bile;  murr,  bitter;  defer  (fern,  r/ifra), 
yellow. ) 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


187 


weetahtu,  n.  a  sister  or  half-sister,  Lev. 
20,  17;  21,  3;  John  11,  5  (strictly,  one 
of  the  same  household  or  family,  a 
near  relative).  ( netukkusq ,  my  sister, 
Luke  10,  40. )  See  ummissies;  weetom¬ 
pas;  weetuksquoh. 

[Narr.  weticks,  weesummis ,  a  sister, 
R.  W.  45.] 

weetateamung-anin,  n.  a  neighbor, 
Prov.  27,  10;  Jer.  6,  21:  ketatteamung, 
thy  neighbor,  Ex.  20,  16,  17;  weetattea- 
mung,  his  neighbor,  Ex.  12,  4;  pl.+ojr, 
Luke  14,  12  ( nehtoliteamonk ,  my  neigh¬ 
bor,  C.  Math.,  Notit.  Ind.  54) .  See  vm- 
tohtimoin;  wutohtu. 

weetauadteaen,  -in,  n.  a  bride,  Jer.  16, 
9;  Joel  2,  16;  Rev.  22,  17.  Of.  wessen- 
tamwaen. 

weetauomog  ( suppos.  pres.  1st  and  3d 
pers.  sing,  ‘if  I  marry  her’,)  n.  a  be¬ 
trothed  one,  ‘spouse’,  Cant.  4,  9, 10, 11. 

weetauomonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  take  a  wife 
or  husband,  to  marry,  Matt.  19,  10 
( wetouadtinnate ,  to  be  married,  C.  201): 
weetoomau,  he  took  (her)  to  wife,  Ex. 
2,  1 ;  voh  wetauadteadt,  he  who  is  (when 
he  is)  married,  1  Cor.  7,  33;  ivetauad- 
teaan,  if  thou  marry,  1  Cor.  7,  28; 
ojweetauomouh ,  ‘they  had  her  to  wife’, 
married  her,  Mark  12,  23;  pass,  sekousq 
noh  wetauomomp  sephausuaenin,  a  widow 
who  had  a  priest  (for  husband), 
Ezek.  44,  22;  wetauomont,  he  or  she 
marrying,  Rom.  7,  3  ( ncoivetauattam ,  I 
(a  woman)  am  married;  nummittum- 
wussissu,  I  ( a  man )  am  married,  C.  201 ) . 
Cf.  ummittarmwvLSsenat. 

weetauomwaheonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  cause 
to  marry,  to  give  in  marriage:  weetauam- 
waheau,  he  gave  (her)  to  (him)  as  a 
wife,  Ex.  2,  21. 

*weetauoog,  they  live  together,  Ind. 
Laws,  xm,  10.  See  paswauwatuog. 

[Del.  witeu,  he  goes  with  (somebody), 
Zeisb.  Gr.  83;  witawema,  he  stays  with 
him,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  60;  witauwemuk,  he  is 
with  me,  ibid.] 

weetemungquot,  -quok  (suppos.),  n. 
perfume,  Prov.  27,  9  ( wechimcoquat , 
wetimunkqut,  a  sweet  smell,  C.  163). 

weetomonat,  weto-,  v.  t.  an.  to  dwell 
with  (to  live  in  the  house  with),  Judg. 
17,  11;  to  be  ‘present  with’,  2  Cor.  5,  8: 
weetomeh,  dwell  thou  with  me,  Judg.  17, 


weetomonat,  etc. — continued. 

10;  nmweetom,  I  dwell  with,  Prov.  8, 12; 
Num.  35,  34;  weetom  kitassaot,  abide 
with  the  king,  2  Sam.  15,  19;  weetomau, 
she  dwelt  with  (her),  Ruth  2,  23; 
mweetomouh,  they  dwelt  with  him,  1 
Sam.  22,  4;  matta  woh  ncoweet&mukaouh, 
he  shall  not  dwell  in  my  house,  Ps. 
101,  7.  Cf.  iveeehaudnat. 

[Cr eeieeegee-mayoo,  lielives  with  him, 
Howse  43.] 

weetomp-ain  [weetu-omp  (’!)],  n.  a  friend, 
Ex.  33,  11;  Prov.  17,  17;  27,  6;  a  kins¬ 
man:  neetomp,  my  friend,  Is.  41,  8; 
Luke  11,  6;  ketomp,  thy  friend,  2  Chr. 
20,  7 ;  neetompaog,  my  friends,  Cant.  5, 1 ; 
my  kinsmen,  Ps.  38,  11;  Luke  14,  12. 
Cf.  wuttinnunkumoin,  a  kinsman, 
weetompas,  weetompassu  (constr.), 
n.  (his  or  her)  brother  or  sister,  the 
brother  or  sister  of :  weetompas ,  my 
sister,  Gen.  20,  12;  2  Sam.  13,  6;  Mark 
3,  35;  my  brother,  2  Sam.  13,  12;  kee- 
tompas  ( ket thy  sister  (father’s  or 
mother’s  daughter),  Lev.  18,  9;  thy 
brother,  2  Sam.  13,  20;  weetompasu,  his 
or  her  sister,  2  Sam.  13,  2;  Ezek.  16,  45; 
his  or  her  brother,  2  Sam.  13,  8,  10,  20; 
netukkusq,  my  sister,  Luke  10, 40  ( ivetom - 
pasin,  asister  (ornetat),C.  162).  Cf. urn- 
missies;  weematoh;  weetahtu. 

[Narr.  wHicks,  weesummis,  R.  W.  45.] 
weetomukqutch,  n.  a  companion,  Judg. 
14,20.  From  weetomonat.  CLnoht&nuk- 
qus. 

weetuksquoh,  n.  (constr.)  the  sister  of, 
his  or  her  sister,  John  11,  1  ( wetuk - 
kushquoh,  Luke  10,  39):  netukkusq,  my 
sister,  Luke  10,  40.  Like  weetahtu,  it  is 
not  restricted  in  its  application  to  a 
sister  of  the  whole  blood,  or  uterine, 
but  signifies  any  near  kinswoman  or 
female  inmate  of  the  house.  From  wet- 
aht-squa.  See  weetahtu. 

It  is  not  certain  that  Eliot  correctly 
employed  or  himself  understood  the 
various  terms  employed  to  express  the 
relationship  between  male  and  female 
offspring  of  the  same  parents  or  parent. 
In  the  Gospel  of  St  John,  published 
with  the  Psalter  (1709),  the  terms 
brother  and  sister  are  rendered  as  fol¬ 
lows:  wematoh,  his  brother,  John  11,  41 
(so  Eliot) ;  wetahtuoh,  her  brother,  John 


188 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BO.I.ETIN'  25 


weetuksquoh — c<  >nt  inue<  1 . 

11,  2  ( ipunnohtonukqussoh ,  Eliot);  m  - 
tahlwoh,  his  sisters,  John  11,  3  ( weesu - 
misoh,  Eliot) ;  wetahtu,  the  sister  of 
(him),  John  11,39  (so  Eliot);  wetukish- 
quoh,  her  sister,  John  11,  1;  28,  5  (wee¬ 
tuksquoh,  weet&hlu,  Eliot).  So,  when  the 
speaker  is  a  female,  netaht,  my  brother 
(■ nohtonukqm ;  netukkusq,  my  sister, 
Eliot),  John  11,  21;  Luke  10,  40. 
weewees,  n.  the  screech-owl,  Is.  34,  14. 
See  koohkookhaue. 

*weewo  (Narr. ),a  wife;  nowehvo, my  wife 
( =nummittamus) ,  R.  IV.  44.  See  mittam- 
ivus;  mittamu’ussu. 

[Del.  wi  wu,  he  is  married ;  wi  wall , 
his  wife,  Zeisb.] 

*wehkomaonk,  vbl.  n.  (a)  calling,  C.  182, 


184. 


wehkomonat,  week-,  wek-,  v.  t.  an.  to 

call  to,  to  call,  Matt.  9,  13:  wehkomau 
weekomau,  he  called  (him  or  them),  Ex. 
24, 16;  1  Sam.  13,  17;  monchish  wehkom 
kahsuk,  go  call  thy  husband,  John  4,  16; 
koowehkomunumwop,  I  have  called  you, 
Prov.  1,  24;  kaowehkomunup,  I  called 
thee,  Sum.  24, 10;  anvehkomuh,  he  called 
her,  2  K.  4,  36;  kaowehkomeh,  thou  didst 
call  me,  1  Sam.  3,  5,  8;  cowekomuh  nah- 
hog,  he  called  them  to  him,  Acts  20,  1; 
wehkomont  (part.) ,  calling,  Is.  41, 2.  See 
wehquetumcmat ,  to  call  upon,  to  ask. 

[Narr.  wecum,  call  (thou),  R.  W.  49.] 
wehpamonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  lie  with,  as 
man  with  woman,  to  have  sexual  con¬ 
nection  with;  with  prefix  of  1st  pers. 
narwehpam&nat,  2  Sam.  11,  11:  aoweh- 
pomuh,  -pamuh,  he  lay  with  her,  ibid. 
11,  4;  13,  14;  ka>wehpamsh,  lie  with  me, 
ibid.  13,  11;  ivehpamont,  lying  with, 
Deut.  22,  23,  25.  From  waapendt,  to 
mount  up,  or  (with  inan.  subj.)  v:aa- 
pemco.  See  neesin-icog. 

[Del.  wipentin,  v.  recipr.  (and  wipen- 
gen,  wipenditam),  to  lie  or  sleep  with 
each  other,  Zeisb.  Gr.  133,  184.] 
wehpepetu,  he  is  lame  (from  birth,  Acts 
3,  2) :  wehwheepetu,  he  is  a  cripple,  Acts 
14,  8.  See  ncochumwi. 
wehpumonat.  See  wepumauonat. 
wehqsheau,  v.  t.  inan.  it  reaches  to,  ends 

at:  - sepuut,  it  reaches  to  the  river, 

Josh.  19,  11;  weekshin ,  it  reaches  to, 
ends  at,  Zech.  14,  5. 


wehqshik,  week-,  wek-,  n.  the  end,  the 
utmost  limit,  1  K.  6,24;  Ps.  19,  6;  ‘the 
uttermost  part’,  2  K.  7,  5:  ne  wekqshik 
waeenu,  its  edge  round  about,  Ezek. 
43,  13;  ivehqshik  ohke,  weekqshinne  alike, 
‘the  ends  of  the  earth’,  Deut.  33, 17;  Is. 
40,  28;  41, 9.  See  pomuslian,  he  walks; 
wohkoeu,  at  the  side  or  sides;  uhquae,  at 
the  point  or  extremity  of. 
webquanunkq,  n.  the  stump  (of  a  tree), 
Dan.  4, 15,  23;  icehquanunkquame,  of  the 
stump,  v.  26. 

wehquau.  See  mehquau,  the  thigh, 
wehque,  prep,  as  far  as,  1  Sam.  3,  20;  Ex. 
23,  31;  ‘even  unto’,  1  K.  12,  30:  wuteh 
.  .  .  wehque,  from  .  .  .  to;  beginning 
from  .  .  .  ending  at.  Cf.  naihqueu;  uh- 
qude;  wohkoeu. 

[Narr.  go  weque,  thus  far,  R.  IV.  55.] 
wehquetumonat,  v.  t.  to  call  upon,  to 
ask  for  (an.  and  inan.):  kcowehquetu- 
munk  (- uk )  keteaonk,  he  asked  life  of 
thee,  Ps.  21,  4;  karwehquetu moush,  I 
pray  thee,  Gen.  38,  25;  naowehquetu- 
munk,  he  shall  call  upon  me  (i.  e.  for 
help),  Ps.  91,  15;  wehquetumau,  call 
thou  upon  (him),  Jonah  1,  6;  u-ehque- 
tumah,  call  thou  upon  me,  ask  (it)  of 
me,  2  Chr.  1,  7;  Ps.  2,  8;  50,  15;  ne 
wehquetumauadt,  that  which  thou  (may 
have)  asked  him  for,  1  Sam.  1, 17;  warm 
ne  waj  wehquetumunkquean,  all  which 
they  (may)  call  upon  thee  for,  1  K.  8, 
52;  karwequetummauunup,  I  have  called 
on  thee,  Ps.  17,  6  ( karweqnetummdush, 

I  beseech  you,  C.  182).  Cf.  natartomau, 
he  questions  (him).  See  wehkomdnat; 
uequtteamiindt. 

wehquetumcQonk,  n.  [asking  for,]  a  re¬ 
quest,  supplication,  1  K.  8,  52;  1  Sam. 
1,27. 

wehquetumunat,  v.  t.  to  ask  for,  to  call 
for  or  upon,  inan.  obj.:  wehquetum,  he 
asked  for  (it),  Judg.  5,  25;  noowehque- 
tum,  I  call  upon,  ask  for,  Deut.  4,  26; 
narwehquetumun,  I  called  on  (his  name), 
Ps.  116,4;  karwehquetum  ne  siohkok,  thou 
askest  a  hard  thing,  2  K.  2, 10;  n  ehque- 
lug,  wehquetuk,  if  he  ask  for  (it),  Matt. 
7,  8;  wehquetush,  ask  thou,  1  K.  3,  5; 
wehquetumark,  ask  ye,  Matt.  7,  7  ( wequt - 
teamfmat,  to  call;  wequttinneat,  to  be-- 
called,  C.  182). 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


189 


wehquog,  suppos.  blunt:  misselichuog 
wbhquog,  iron  when  it  is  blunt,  Eccl.  10, 
10. 

[Del.  vriquon,  (it  is)  blunt,  not  sharp, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  167.] 

*wehquohke  [wehque-ohke\,  the  end  of 
the  earth  (‘uttermost  part’),  Mass. 
Ps.,  Ps.  2,  8.  See  wohkveu. 
wehquoshauonat,  v.  t.  to  go  as  far  as: 
wehquoshaog,  they  went  as  far  as,  Acts 
11,  19. 

wehsue  (?),  adj.  fat,  Zech.  11,  16.  See 
wees;  wunnogque. 

wehtauog,  (his)  ear.  See  mehtauog. 
wehwepetu,  he  is  lame  (from  birth, 
Acts  3,  2):  wehwheepelu,  he  is  a  cripple, 
Acts  14,  8.  See  noochumivesu. 
we'in.  See  ween. 
weis.  See  ivee-s. 

wek,  week,  n.  (his)  house,  tent,  or 
dwelling,  Ex.  20,  17;  Prov.  14,  11:  ne 
ponamum  week,  he  pitched  his  tent 
there,  Gen.  12,  8;  ayimun  wetu,  he  built 
a  house,  IK.  6,  9.  See  wetu. 

[Del.  wi  kit,  his  house;  wik  he,  to 
build  a  house;  uri  quoam,  house,  Zeisb.] 
wekinasq,  weekinasliq,  n.  a  reed,  Is. 
42,  3;  (sugar)  cane,  Is.  43,  24:  pi. 
-{-wash,  reeds,  Is.  19,  6.  Cf.  mishashq. 
Perhaps  from  wek  and  cishq  ( meo-skeht ), 
house  grass,  with  which  the  roofs  of 
the  wigwams  were  tilled  in  or  covered. 
“Their  houses  are  very  little  and 
homely,  being  made  with  small  poles 
pricked  into  the  ground  and  so  bended 
and  fastened  at  the  tops,  and  on  the 
sides  they  are  matted  with  boughs  and 
covered  on  the  roof  with  sedge  and  old 
mats.”- — Higginson’s  N.  E.  Plantation, 
ch.  12.  “The  meaner  sort  of  wigwams 
are  covered  with  mats  they  make  of  a 
kind  of  bulrush.” — Gookin,  1  Mass. 
Hist.  Coll,  i,  149. 

[Narr.  wekinash,  reed;  pi.  +  quash, 
R.  W.  90.] 

xwekineauquat  (Narr.),  fair  weather: 
wekinnauquocks,  when  it  is  fair  weather, 
R.  W.  81  ( weekohquat ,  fair  weather; 
wekeneankquat,  warm  weather,  C.  158). 
See  *onndhquat;  wunnohquodt. 
wekinneat,  v.  i.  to  occupy  or  live  in  a 
house,  tent,  or  other  dwelling  place, 
Prov.  21,  9:  na  weekean,  when  ye  dwell 
therein,  Deut.  8,  12.  See  weekittamun 
[neat]. 


wekinneat — continued. 

[Narr.  tuckowekm,  where  dwell  you? 
R.  IV.  29.  Cree  wegeemayou,  he  tenteth 
with  him,  Howse  22.] 

*weki-tippocat  (Narr.),  ‘it  is  a  warm 
night’,  R.  W. 

wekitteaonk,  n.  a  building,  2  Cor.  5,  1. 
*wekohtea  (?),  as  interj.  ‘0  brave’,  C. 
234. 

wekomonat.  See  wehkomonat. 
wekon.  See  weekon. 

*wekbnche,  adv.  commonly,  C.  227. 

[Quir.  wegonje,  ‘often’,  Pier.  5.] 
wekshik.  See  wehqshik. 
wekuhkauonat,  wekuhkonat,  v.  t.  an. 
to  build  a  house  for  (another  person, 
etc.),  2  Chr.  2,  3;  6,  7;  or,  as  in  Gen. 
33,  17,  wekikauau,  ‘he  made  booths  for 
(cattle)’:  wekuhkon,  he  went  on  build¬ 
ing,  Neh.  4,  18;  wekuhkau,  build  the 
house  for  (of  the  Lord),  1  Chr.  22,  11; 
noh  pish  nanvekekunk,  he  who  shall  build 
me  a  house,  ibid.  v.  10;  kooivekekauu- 
nunnanonut,  to  build  thee  a  house,  ibid. 
29,  16. 

wematin,  n.  appel.  a  brother,  1  Cor.  5, 
11;  Mark  13,  12  ( oowem&ttin ,  C.  162). 
See  weetuksquoh. 

[Narr.  wematittuock,  ‘they  are  broth¬ 
ers’,  R.  W.  45.] 

wenauwetu  [wunne-wStu?] ,  adj.  an.  (is 
or  was)  rich,  2  Sam.  12,  1;  pi.  -\-og, 
Ruth  3,  10  ( wunne  wetu,  a  good  house, 
C.  170):  wenauweiuen,  -in  (indef.  and 
general),  any  rich  man,  Prov.  28,  11. 
“A  winnaytue,  that  is  a  rich  man,  or 
a  man  of  estimation,  next  in  degree 
to  a  sachem  or  sagamore.” — Morton’s 
N.  E.  Canaan,  ch.  19.  Cf.  ivunneetu-k. 
wenauwetuonk,  n.  riches,  Prov.  30,  8. 
xwenise  (Narr. ),  an  old  woman;  pi.  went- 
suck,  R.  W.  44.  See  kehchisqua. 
wenom-in  (?),  n.  a  grape:  seane  ivenom, 
the  sour  grape,  Is.  18,  5.  See  min. 

[Del.  (?)  wi  na  min,  it  is  ripe,  Zeisb. 
Yoc.] 

wenshaen,  n.  a  beggar,  one  who  begs, 
Luke  16,  20,  22;  obj.  wenshaenuh,  1  Sam. 
2,  8. 

wenshamauonat,  v.  t.  to  ask  (alms) 
from,  (an.  and  man. )  to  ask  for  (alms): 
aywenshamuh  ne  teaguas,  he  asked  an 
alms  (something)  from  them,  Acts  3,  3. 
See  weensh&nat. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


190 

wenwe,  weenwee,  n.  (his)  navel,  Job 
40,  16:  kenwe,  keenwe,  thy  navel,  Cant. 
7,  2;  Ezek.  16, 4.  See  rnenwee  ( m’nde ?). 
*wenygh  (Narr. ),  woman,  Stiles;  (Peq.) 

nehyewgh,  my  wife,  ibid, 
wepamcoe,  wepamue,  adj.  of  genera¬ 
tion:  -  iruskannem,  semen  virile, 

Lev.  15,  16,  17,  18. 
wepamuwaonk.  See  weepamoe. 

*wepe  (occurs  in  chap,  xxii  of  Roger 
Williams’  Key,  prefixed  to  an  accusa¬ 
tion,  judgment,  or  sentence,  or  ad¬ 
dressed  to  a  delinquent):  wipe  kunnish- 
cvCirnis,  you  killed  him;  wipe  kukkemin- 
eantin,  you  are  the  murderer;  wipe  cuk- 
kdmmoot, you  have  stole,  etc.,  121,  122; 
cuppittakunnamun  wipe  ivdme,  (he  com¬ 
mands  that)  ‘all  men  now  repent’,  p. 
118  ( ‘only’,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  2, 12) .  See 
webe. 

[Peq.  wepe,  but  ( =qut ,  El.),  Exp. 
Mayhew,  Lord’s  Prayer.] 
wepumauonat,  wehpumonat,  wepim- 
6nat,  etc.,  v.  t.  to  eat  with,  to  share  a 
meal  with:  ivehpumop,  he  did  eat  with 
(them),  Gal.  2,  12;  pish  kancepimimwao, 
ye  shall  eat  with  me,  1  Sam.  9, 19;  yeush 
woh  naovieepemukquog,  they  shall  ‘dine’ 
with  me,  Gen.  43,  16;  kcowehpumopan- 
neg,  thou  didst  eat  with  them,  Acts 

11,  3  ( wehpittittuk ,  let  us  eat  together, 
Exp.  Mayhew). 

[Del.  uipantin  (recipr.),  to  eat  with 
each  other,  Zeisb.  Gr.  133.] 
wepumawaonk,  n.  carnal  connection 
(natural  or  unnatural),  Lev.  18,  23. 
wequai,  n.  light,  Gen.  1,  4;  Zech.  14,  6, 
7;  John  1,  5,  8:  wequaiaj,  let  there  be 
light,  let  light  be;  m.6  wequai,  there  was 
light,  Gen.  1,  3. 

[Narr.  wequdi,  light;  wequdshim 
(dimin.?),  moonlight,  R.  W.  68.] 
wequananteg,  n.  ‘candle’,  Pro v.  31,18; 
lamp,  light,  Gen.  15,  17;  Ex.  27,  20; 

Lev.  24,  2:  -  chagohtag,  a  burning 

lamp,  Gen.  15,  17;  wequdnaiitegash, 
chikohtaash,  lamps  burned,  Rev.  4,  5 
( wasdquondnltick,  a  light  or  candle;  we- 
qudndnetekonnduhtuk,  a  candlestick,  C. 
161).  The  word  ‘torch’  is  transferred 
by  Eliot  without  translation,  as  in  Zech. 

12,  6. 

[Narr.  wequanantig,  a  candle  or  light; 
■p[.-\-anash;  wikinan,  ‘a  light  fire’, 
R.  W.  48.] 


wequash,  n.  the  swan,  Lev.  11,  18. 

[Narr.  wequash,  pi.  — rf nog;  and  wdm- 
patuck,  pi.  -j-qnduog,  R.  W.  86.] 
*wequashim  (Narr.),  moonlight,  R.  W. 
68.  See  wequai. 

wequtteamunat  ( =wehquetumundt) ,  we- 
qutteamauonat  ( =  wehquetumau6nat), 
wequtteamoo  ( =  wehquetumau ),  v.  i. 
she  calleth,  ‘crieth’,  Prov.  8,  3:  wehqut- 
leamweon,  when  I  called,  Is.  65, 12  ( noo - 
weqdtteam,  I  call,  C.  183;  nanvequtteamu- 
vnun,  we  call,  ibid.  184).  See  wehkomd- 
nat. 

*wequttinneat,  to  be  called,  C.  184. 
*wesattimis,  red  oak:  wesokkunk,  oak 
wood,  C.  164.  See  *paugdutemisk. 
*wesattippog,  bitter  water,  C.  168. 
weshaganash,  wishagkinish,  n.  pi. 
hairs  on  the  body  or  limbs  of  man  or 
animals,  Ex.  35,  23;  Is.  7,  20;  Mark 
1,  6;  Matt.  3,  4  (cf.  meesunk).  Adj. 
anveshaginnde,  hairy,  2  K.  1,  8;  pi. 
weshakinndcoash,  Gen.  27,  23.  V.  subst. 
arweshaganu,  he  was  hairy,  Gen.  27,  11 
(ukkeeshde  moskq,  a  hairy  bear,  C.  171; 
from  kushki,  rough?).  [Mr  Pickering 
in  index  to  El.  Gr.  gives  “weshagan, 
hair  of  animals.”  The  meaning  can 
not  be  thus  restricted,  as  will  be  seen 
from  the  above  examples.  It  is  com¬ 
pounded  from  -  and  hog,  body,  or 

hogkco,  it  clothes,  covers  the  body,  as 
weeshittoon  from  ton,  mouth.]  See  wish- 
shuwussuonk. 

*wesheck  (Narr.),  n.  the  hair,  R.  W. 
58.  (Cf.  Eth.  sha-ky,  hair-cloth;  Sax. 
sceacga,  hair,  shag.) 
weske.  See  wuske,  young,  new. 
*weskunck  (Narr.),  a  pounding  mortar, 
R.  W.  50.  See  togguhuhonk. 
*wesogkeyeu,  adv.  bitterly,  C.  227. 
wesogkon,  adj.  bitter,  Prov.  27,  7;  Rev. 
10,  10.  See  iceesogkincoonk,  bitterness. 
Cf.  weestve,  gall. 

[Del.  id  such  can,  Zeisb.  Voc.  33.] 
*wesokkunk,  oak  wood,  C.  164.  See  u-e- 

sattim'ts. 

[Del.  wisachgak,  black  oak,  Zeisb.] 
*wesomkuh,  interj.  ah!  (of  sorrow?),  C. 
234. 

wesoshaonk.  See  weesauslidonk. 
*wesquaubenan  (Narr.),  to  wrap  up  a 
body  for  the  grave,  R.  W.  161.  See 
weesquapinneat. 


trumbull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


191 


wessentamwaen,  -in,  n.  a  bridegroom, 
Jer.  16,  9.  See  wussentamwden. 
wessukeh.  See  wasukeh,  her  husband, 
wesuonk,  owe-,  n.  a  name,  Gen.  11,  4 
(  =  Narr.  we&uonck,  R.  IV.  29):  ncowesii- 
onk,  my  name,  Is.  42,  8;  kcowesuonk,  j 
thy  name,  Gen.  12,  2.  From  wussin(?). 
See  ussowessu. 

*wesuonkanehk5nat,  to  name:  nanvesu- 
onkanehkdntam,  I  name,  C.  202. 
wetahtuoh.  See  weetuksquoh. 
*wetapimmin  (Narr. ),  to  sit  down:  we- 
tapwduwwas,  sit  and  talk  with  us,  R.  W. 
64  ( tadpowaw ,  a  wise  speaker,  ibid.; 
oweetappemo,  he  sat  down  with  them, 
Luke  22,  55). 

[Cree  weetuppee-mayoo,  ‘  he  sits  with 
him,  co-sits  him’,  Howse  43.  Del. 
v.'itep,  ‘to  go  with’,  Zeisb.  Gr.  183; 
witachpin,  ‘to  live,  dwell  with’,  ibid. 
184.] 

wetauadteacheg,  pi.  the  married,  they 
wht>  are  married,  1  Cor.  7,  10. 
wetauadtuonk,  vbl.  n.  marrying,  mar¬ 
riage. 

wetauakon[at]  (?),  v.  t.  to  be  married, 
to  marry,  1  Cor.  7,  9  ( wetouakonate ,  to 
be  married,  C.  201). 

wetauwadteog,  wetauad-,  -teaog, 
v.  i.  (?)  they  marry  (one  another), 
Matt.  22,  30;  Luke  20,  35  ( =  wetatein 
[there  is  marrying  (?)],  Mark  12,  25; 

1  Tim.  5,  11). 

[Narr.  awetawatuock,  ‘they  make  a 
match’  (marry),  R.  W.  124,  =  wussenet- 
Hock  (see*tmsshitam).  Del .  witawentin, 
v.  recipe,  to  live  or  dwell  with  each 
other,  Zeisb.  Gr.  133;  to  work  together, 
ibid.  183.] 

wetu,  n.  a  house  (El.  Gr.  11),  tent,  Ps. 
78,  60:  neek  (nek),  my  house;  keek,  thv 
house;  week,  his  house;  neekun,  our 
house;  keekou,  your  house;  iveekou,  their 
house;  pi.  wetuomash,  houses,  Lev.  25, 
31;  kekooocish,  your  houses,  Neh.  4,  14, 
nekinonash,  our  houses,  Neh.  5,  3;  nekit, 
in  my  house;  “weekuuvut  or  wekuwo- 
mut,  in  his  house.  Hence  we  corrupt 
this  word  wigwam ”  (El.  Gr.  11) ;  weetu 
ne  weetimut,  ‘a  tent  to  dwell  in’,  Is.  40, 
22. 

[Narr.  wetu,  R.  W.  28;  wetuomuck  note- 
shem,  I  came  from  the  house,  ibid.; 
ivetuumuck,  at  home;  nekick,  my  house; 


wetu- — continued. 

kekick,  your  house,  ibid.  47.  Quir.  wejo, 
Pier.  21.  Cree  weegee,  a  tent  or  dwell¬ 
ing,  Howse  22.] 

*weween,  n.  a  horn  (?),  C.  156. 
*wewene,  prep,  about,  C.  234.  See 

waeenu. 

weyaus,  n.  (his)  flesh,  Is.  22, 13:  kcowey- 
aus,  thy  flesh,  Prov.  5,  11;  pi.  -\-og,  Ps. 
78,  39;  venison,  Gen.  27,  3,  7;  askeyaus, 
raw  flesh;  kesittae  weyaus,  sodden  flesh, 
1  Sam.  2,  15  (meyauussue,  ‘of  the  flesh’, 
Mass.  Ps.,  John  1,  15.)  Cf.  udas,  an 
animal. 

[Del.  o  loos,  meat,  flesh,  Zeisb.] 
wishagkinish..  See  weshaganash. 
*wishitta>  (as  wrongly  written  by  Du 
Ponceau  in  index  to  El.  Gr. ),  the  beard. 
See  weeshittam. 

wiskq,  wisq,  wiskq,  n.  a  pot,  dish,  or 
vessel,  Ex.  16,  33;  2  K.  4,  6;  Heb.  9,  4; 
pi.  -j-  uash :  wishquie  pummee,  a  pot  of 
oil,  2  K.  4,  2;  nukkonishquadt,  ‘in  old 
bottles’,  Matt.  9,  17 ;  wuskishquadt, 
in- new  bottles,  ibid.;  mahchishquash, 
empty  ‘pitchers’,  Judg.  7,  16;  empty 
vessels,  2  K.  4,  3  ( weaskq ,  a  vessel,  C. 
161;  quancowask  [qunni-wiskq,  i.  e.  long 
vessel  (?),  or  quonooasq,  a  gourd  (?)],  a 
bottle,  C.  161).  Cf.  weesquapinneat. 

[Cree  waska,  around.] 
wishquin  (?),  n.  a  concubine:  mwishquin, 
his  concubine,  Judg.  19,  2;  oowishquin- 
neunk,  (n.  collect.)  his  concubines.  Gen. 
25,  6.  Cf.  mshkappeum. 
wishshuwussuonk  (?),  n.  hair  on  the 
body  (?),  Lev.  19,  20,  21,  25  (as  meesunk, 
hair  of  the  head  or  beard,  v.  30,  31, 
32 ) .  See  wesh  aganash . 
wiskq,  wisq.  See  wishq. 
wobpee.  See  mobpee,  the  hip. 
wodtan.  See  wadtan,  the  rump, 
wodtat.  See  wuttdt,  behind, 
woduhquab.  See  mattiihquab,  the  skin, 
wogkauunonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  stir  up,  to 
move,  to  set  in  motion,  to  incite  to  ac¬ 
tion:  kidche  oowogkauunuh  mcomansh, 
(it)  began  to  move  him  at  times,  Judg. 
13,  25;  CDwogkouunnouli,  they  stirred 
them  up,  Acts  12,  50;  wogkauunau,  he 
stirreth  up  (the  people),  Luke  23,  5; 
wogkouunnaog,  they  stir  up  (the  peo¬ 
ple),  Acts  17,  13;  kcowogkauununnaout, 
to  stir  you  up,  2  Pet.  1,  13;  pass,  ivog- 


192 


BUREAU  <>F  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


wogkauunonat — continued. 

icouH'cmro  ummusquanum&onl •,  ‘he  was 
moved  with  choler’,  Dan.  8,  7. 
wogkoueonk,  n.  a  stir,  a  tumult,  com¬ 
motion,  Hos.  9, 14;  Rom.  7, 5;  Acts  20, 1. 
■wogkouunumunat,  v.  t.  to  stir  up.  to  set 
in  motion,  to  excite  (inan.  obj.):  na>- 
irogkouunum,  1  stir  up  (your  hearts), 

2  Pet.  3,  1;  wogkommish ,  stir  up  (thy 
strength),  Ps.  80,  2;  pass,  otan  wog- 
kouwemao,  the  city  was  moved.  Acts  21, 
28;  nippe  uogkouemanik,  when  the  water 
is  troubled,  stirred,  John  5,  7. 

-woh,  conj.  ‘of  possibility’,  may  or  can 
(El.  Gr.  22),  a  word  usually  employed 
to  express  the  ‘notion  of  possibility  to 
be’  or  to  form  the  potential  mode  of  a 
verb  ( El.  Gr.  20) :  woh  kenusheh,  ‘  intend- 
est  thou  to  kill  me?’  Ex.  2,  14;  uttoh 
u-oh  yernh  en  nnih,  ‘how  can  these 
things  be?’  John  3,  9;  matta  woh  wun- 
nampaohamauoh,  he  can  not  answer 
him,  Job  9,  3. 

^wohliogke,  (a  body,)  a  shell,  or  anna 
(q.  v.),  C.  156.  See  hogki. 
wohkoeu,  wohkoe,  adv.  and  adj.  at  the 
side  or  sides,  on  the  sides  of,  on  the 
ends  of:  woskeche  kah  wohkoeu  vxieenu, 
on  ‘the  top  thereof  and  the  sides 
thereof,  round  about’,  Ex.  30,  3;  neese 
wohkoe,  ‘on  the  two  sides  thereof’,  Ex. 
37,  27;  ut  wohkoeu,  ‘in  thy  borders’, 
Ps.  147,  14;  v.t  auohquaeu,  on  the  two 
ends  of  (the  breastplate),  Ex.  28,  24; 
id  uhquaeu,  at  the  ends,  v.  22;  rte  ancoh- 
queu  kishkag,  its  breadth  (from  side  to  • 
side),  v.  16;  coquohtogquosh,  the  ends 
(of  the  chains),  v.  25.  See  uhquae. 
•wohkuhquoshik,  n.  the  end,  conclusion, 
Prov.  14,  13:  en  wohkukquoshinit,  to  the 
end,  to  the  utmost,  thoroughly,  Job  35, 
36;  ut  wohkukqushik,  unto  the  end  (of  a 
matter,  or  in  time),  Ps.  119,  33,  =  no 
pajeh  wohkukquoshinit,  Rev.  2,  26;  nao- 
woh  ku  kquo  igeu  m,  my  last  end,  Xu  in.  23, 
10;  asquam  oohquaeu,  ‘the end  shall  not 
be  yet’,  Mark  13,  7.  See  wehqshik. 
■wohkukquoshiiiat,  v.  i.  to  come  to  end, 
to  be  ended:  wohkukquoshin,  (it)  ends, 
is  ended,  Is.  24,  8;  40,  2;  pish  icohkuk- 
quoshinash,  (they)  shall  lie  ended,  Is. 
60,  20;  wohkukquoshik,  when  it  ends, 
ended,  Jer.  8,  20;  en  wohkukquoshinit, 
to  the  end,  to  the  utmost,  Job  35,  36. 


wohkukquoshitteauunat,  v.  t.  inan. 
subj.  to  end.  to  make  an  end  of  (inan. 
obj.),  Dan.  9.  24. 

wohkummiyeu,  adv.  and  adj.  above, 
upward,  Is.  37,  31:  ut  irohkumiyeu,  at 
the  top  (of  a  dress.  Ex.  2S,  32 i;  trulch 
.  .  .  wusseganit  kah  wohkummiyeu, 
‘from  .  .  .  his  loins  even  upward’, 
Ezek.  1,  27. 

wohpanag,  his  or  her  breast,  Prov.  5, 
20:  wohpandgunit,  on  the  bosom,  John 
13,23.  See  mohpcmag;  cf.  pawlienau. 
*wohquatumunat,  v.  t.  to  pronounce  or 
emphasize:  samp-irohqualumunat,  ‘to 
pronounce  right’,  C.  243;  iruttin  noh- 
quatumooonkdnnoo ,  ‘their  manner  of 
pronouncing’,  ibid.  242. 
wohqut:  wuteh  icohqut,  from  above,  Ps. 

18,  16,  =  wuteh  xraahu,  2  Sam.  22,  17. 
wohshinumunat,  v.  t.  to  open,  Ezek.  21, 
22;  Rev.  5,  2,  3,  4  ( woshwunnumundt) ; 
to  ‘uncover’,  Lev.  18,  7-13:  wohshinum, 
he  opens  (it),  Is.  28,  24;  wohshinum 
squont,  he  opened  the  door,  Acts  5,  19; 
1  Sam.  3,  15;  woshwunum,  he  uncov¬ 
ered,  Lev.  20,  11;  woshwunumeok  kenog- 
kaneg,  open  you  the  window,  2  K.  13, 
17  (the  plural  is  used,  perhaps  by  mis¬ 
take,  for  the  singular  number,  ‘open 
thou’);  woshwunnumun,  he  opened  it, 
ibid.;  noh  woshwunuk,  he  who  (may) 
open,  Rev.  3,  8  ( nenwoshwunum ,  I  open, 
C.  202) .  See  pohki  and  its  derivatives, 
also  woshwetash ine;  woshwohtag. 
wobshitanauinauonat,  v.  t.  to  open  to 
(a  person) :  ncowohshitannumau  na>s- 
squoniamash,  I  opened  my  doors  to 
(him),  Job  31,  32. 

wohshitanumunat,  woshwetanumu- 
nat,  v.  t.  to  open  (a  door  or  gate): 
wohshitanmh,  - nish ,  open  the  door,  2  K. 

9,  3; - ka)skquoniash,  open  thy  doors, 

Zech.  11,  1;  irohshitdnwog  squontamash, 
when  we  opened  the  doors,  Acts  5,  23. 
[ = irohsh  i n u  m -  wetu ,  t o  open  a  house  ( ? ) .  ] 
-woksippahtae,  wohsippohtae,  wosu- 
pohtae,  woohsuppae,  adj.  and  adv. 
bright,  shining,  glittering,  Ezek.  27, 19; 
hence,  wohsippahtde,  adj.  of  copper,  Ezra 
8,  27  (but  in  2  Tim.  4,  14,  ‘coppere 
smith  ’  is  transferred ) :  wosippde,  bright, 
Dan.  12,  3;  vosippohtae  wequai,  bright 

light.  Ezek.  32,  S;  - toghxiteg,  bright 

sword,  Xah.  3,  3;  glistering  sword,  Job 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


193 


wohsippahtae,  etc. — continued. 

20,  25;  -  qussukquanash,  ‘glistering 

stones’,  1  Chr.  29,  2;  -  qunuhtug, 

glittering  spear,  Job  39,  23. 

[Del.  sabbeleu,  ‘it  sparkles,  glitters’, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  164.] 

wohsittae,  wosittae,  adj.  bright,  Cant. 
5,  14;  ‘glistering’,  Nah.  3,  3:  ncotau 
u'usittau,  the  fire  was  bright,  Ezek.  1,  13. 
wohsumauonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  shine  upon 
(an.  obj.),  2  Cor.  4,  6. 
wohsumoe,  sohsumwae,  adj.  bright, 
shining,  light-giving,  Luke  11,  36  ( wos - 
sumcoe,  C.  168) :  wohsumoe  wequdi,  a 
shining  light,  Prov.  4,  18,  =  sohsum¬ 
wae  wequai,  John  5,  35. 
wohsumromunneat,  sohsum-,  v.  i.  to 
shine,  to  emit  light:  wequai  sohsumoo- 
mw,  the  light  shineth,  John  1,  5;  nukon 
wohsumeomco,  the  night  shineth,  is  light, 
Ps.  139,  12;  wohsumomou,  (it)  shone, 
Matt.  17,  2;  mattawohsumoomunoout,  (it) 
not  to  shine,  Job  36,  32;  wohsumoom- 
coutch,  let  (your  light)  shire,  Matt.  5, 
16  ( wohsumuinneat ,  to  shine,  C.  208). 

[Del.  waseleu,  woacheyeil,  v.  adj.  clear, 
light,  Zeisb.  Gr.  165.] 
wohsumcoonk,  n.  a  shining  forth,  emit¬ 
ted  light:  oowohsumoonk  wequananleg, 
the  light  of  a  candle,  Rev.  18,  23; 
CDwdhsumcoongancD,  their  shining  (of 
the  stars),  Joel  2,  10.  Cf.  pumohsumco; 
sohsummmoo. 

wohsumunat,  oowohsumunat,  wos- 
um-,  v.  t.  (but  for  the  most  part  used 
intransitively  or  without  object  ex¬ 
pressed)  to  shine  upon,  to  give  forth 
bright  light,  2  Cor.  4,  6;  Rev.  21,  23: 
mwohsicmun,  (it)  did  lighten  it,  Rev.  21, 
23;  pish  kcowdmm,  thou  shalt  shine 
forth,  Job  11,  17;  pish  womimvog,  they 
shall  shine,  Dan.  12,  3;  wohsish,  shine 
thou  (give  light),  Is.  60,  1;  wequai  woh- 
sumcokitch,  let  not  the  light  shine  on  it, 
Job  3,  4  ( nanvossum ,  I  shine,  C.  208; 
nepdz  vjohsum,  the  sun  shineth,  ibid. ) . 
See  *squtta. 

[Abn.  8asak8re,  lumiere;  8assenemah- 
gan,  -nar,  chandelle.] 
wohtamunat,  v.  t.  to  understand,  to 
comprehend,  Eph.  3,  18:  nurn-mmcheke 
wohtam  onk,  I  have  more  under¬ 
standing  than  .  .  .  ,  Ps.  119, 100  (woh- 
wohtam,  v.  99) ;  rnatta  wahteaucoog 
B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 13 


•wohtamunat — continued. 

asuh  wohtamwog,  they  have  not  known 
nor  understood,  Is.  44,  18;  nooivohla- 
munan  (- un ?),  we  understand  it,  2  K. 
18,  26;  wohtamook,  understand  ye,  Prov. 
8,  5;  wautaj,  let  him  understand,  Matt. 
24, 15,  =wahteauutch,  Mark  13, 14.  V.  i. 
freq.  wohwohtamundt,  to  possess  or  ex¬ 
ercise  the  understanding,  to  under¬ 
stand,  Dan.  10,  12;  woh  kaowahteomuw 
.  .  .  kconamptiimwco  .  .  .  koowohtamum- 
woo,  ye  may  know, .  .  .  believe  me  .  .  . 
(and)  understand,  Is.  43, 10. 
wohtoh:  wohtoh  wuttdntauadt,  (when)  he 
climbs  up  some  other  way,  John  10,  1. 
*wohwatcowau  (as  adv.),  ho,  halloo! 
C.  233. 

wohwayeoagish,  pi.  rings.  See  waye6ag. 
wohwohquianumcoog,  ‘they  are  at 
their  wits’  end’,  Ps.  107,  27.  From 
wdhkdeu  (?). 

wohwohtamcoonk,  n.  understanding, 
Is.  40,  28;  44,  19. 

wohwohtamwe,  adj.  of  understanding, 
Is.  40,  14. 

wohwohteauunat,  v.  i.  to  bark,  as  a 

dog,  Is.  56,  10:  matta  wohwoliteaxicoog, 
they  can  not  bark  ( anum  wohwohteau, 
the  dog  barks,  C.  181;  wohwohkonat,  to 
bark  (at  an.  obj.),  ibid.), 
wohwohtog,  (if  he  understand, )  he  who 
is  prudent,  a  prudent  (man),  or  one  of 
understanding,  Prov.  14,  6,  15. 
wohwoshwohkossayeu,  wohwosh- 
wuhkossae,  adj.  cloven  footed,  di¬ 
viding  the  hoof,  Lev.  11,  7;  Deut.  14,  7: 
wdhwdshwuhkussaeu,  (it)  divides  the 
hoof,  Deut.  14,  8.  From  wohshinuviundt 
and  wuhkos;  so,  wohshwuhkossatcheg, 
wohivoshukossaecheg,  they  who  part  the 
hoof,  Lev.  11,  3,  4;  Deut.  14,  7;  wosh- 
weoh  wuhkossa>oh,  they  divide  not  the 
hoof,  Deut.  14,  7.  Cf.  neesukossont; 
passed  ossau. 

woi,  “adv.  of  wishing”,  ‘Oh,  that  it 
were’!,  El.  Gr.  21;  interj.  ‘of  sorrow’, 
El.  Gr.  22  (O,  wo!  C.  234). 
womantamunat,  womon-,  v.  t.  to  love, 
inan.  obj . :  nanvomantam,  I  love  (thy 
law),  Ps.  119,113;  nummcocheke  womon- 
tam,  I  love  (it)  very  much,  Ps.  119,  97; 
womantdmook  wanegik,  love  ye  that 
which  is  good,  Amos  5,  15;  kaewoman- 
tamumwco,  ye  love  (them,  inan.),  Luke 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BI  LLETIN'  ’J5 


194 


womantamunat,  etc. — continued. 

11,  42  i  iKoiromdntum  unasukhonk,  I  love 
a  book,  C.  200). 

wometuaeu,  adv.  kindly,  lovingly:  tro- 
metnahi  unnehheog ,  if  you  deal  kindly 
with  me,  Gen.  24,  49. 
womiyeu,  wcomiyeu,  adv.  downward, 
Ezek.  1,  27:  wcomiyeu  wcomiyeu,  very 
low.  Deut.  28, 43.  See  womsinne&t,  etc. 
*womoausiimeat,  v.  i.  to  love:  womouuk- 
quissinneat,  to  be  loved,  C’.  200.  See 
icomantamundt;  wom&nat. 
womoausu,  adj.  an.  >  he  is)  kind,  loving, 


1  Cor.  13,  4. 

womoausue,  adj.  of  love,  loving:  km- 
uwmoausue  kitteamoniea  n  Utedon  k,  thy 
loving  kindness,  Us.  92,  2. 

womompenat,  v.  i.  to  look  downward: 
womompu,  he  looked  down,  Ps.  102,  19; 
womompish,  look  down,  Ps.  80,  14,= 
ivomdmpsh,  Is.  63,  15;  pajeh  wontompil, 
till  he  looked  down,  Lam.  3,  50.  Cf. 
uimampenat. 

womonaonk,  n.  love  (abstract),  2  Sam. 
13,  15;  1  Sam.  1,  26. 

womonat,  v.  t.  to  love,  to  be  kind  to 
( mishuwomonat ,  to  love  greatly,  ‘to  be 
ravished  with’,  Prow  5,  20):  nanro- 
mon,  I  love  (her),  2  Sam.  13,  4  (ncowd- 
mun  wosketomp,  I  love  a  man,  C.  200); 
(ko-)womomh,  I  love  thee,  Jer.  31,  3 
{kmwomonnmh,  C.  200);  pish  womanau, 
he  will  love  (him) ,  Matt.  6,  24;  aowomo- 
nuh,  he  loves  or  loved  him  or  her,  2 
Sam.  13,  1;  womonomp,  he  loved  (her) 
formerly,  2  Sam.  13,  15;  womoavs,  love 
thou  (him),  Matt.  22,  39;  womonwk  kum- 
matwdmaoog,  love  your  enemies,  Luke 
6, 35;  womondg,  if  ye  love  (them),  Luke 
6, 32;  iromonaog,  they  love  (  them ),  ibid. ; 
womonadt  yeug  rnissinninnuog,  if  thou 
be  kind  to  this  people,  2  Chr.  10,  7; 
neane  iromonadt,  as  thou  lovest  (thy¬ 
self'  ,  Matt.  22,  39;  icamonutche  Jehovah, 
whom  the  Lord  loveth;  hoiran  wdmon- 
onche,  whom  he  loveth,  Prov.  3,  12. 
[Du  Ponceau,  in  Notes  to  El.  Gr.  x, 
derives  this  verb,  as  well  as  wunnanum- 
[onot],  to  bless,  from  wurmegen,  good, 
“Del.  iru-lie-chen ” ;  but  cf. monanumau, 
he  is  merciful  to  (him);  utloh  iroh  mona- 
numog,  ‘to  whom  I  will  show  mercy’, 
Ex.  33, 19.  Cotton  (Yoc.  200,  201)  gives 
the  verbs  wommuseinneat  (v.  i. ),  to 


womonat — continued. 

love;  womonat  [  v.  t.  an.),  and  womonta- 
munat  (v.  t.  inan.)  in  the  several  tenses 
and  persons  of  the  indicative.] 

[Narr.  eowdmmaunsh  (howcmumth  .  I 
love  you;  cowam maun tick,  he  loves  you; 
cowammaus  ( kcowomonaum ),  you  are 
loving,  R.  W.  31;  imumatvm  adj.  an.  i, 
loving,  ibid.  125.  Del.  ahoaleu,  or  w’da- 
hoala,  he  loves,  Zeisb.  Gr.  118.] 
womonausuonk,  n.  love  ( in  exercise,  or 
directed  to  an  object),  kindness  i  mani¬ 
fested),  2  Sam.  1,  26;  Cant.  2,  5;  Prov. 

5,  19;  2  Cor.  13,  14;  Eph.  2,  7;  Gen. 
20,  13! 

womonittinneat,  v.  an.  mutual,  to  love 
one  another:  (2d  pers.  pi.)  kancomonit- 
tinneaout,  you  to  love  one  another,  1 
Thess.  4,  9;  (with  redupl.  freq.) 
koDwoicomonnittinnanonut,  1  John  3,  11; 
womonittitteuh,  let  us  love  one  another, 
1  John  4,  7;  womonittegk,  be  kind  one 
to  another,  Eph.  4,  32. 
womomttuonk,  n.  love,  or  kindness 
[(1)  referred  to  its  object,  or  (2)  mu¬ 
tually  felt];  Cant.  2,  4;  8,  6;  Jer.  31,  3; 
John  17,  26;  (lustful)  Rom.  1,  26,  27; 
(favor  shown  i  Prov.  14,  9:  wemattue  wo- 
monittuonk,  brotherly  kindness,  2  Pet.  1, 
7  (mutual  love,  Eph.  4,  2;  ‘  loving  kind¬ 
ness’,  Jer.  31,  3). 

*womosinneat,  v.  i.  to  be  kind:  nen 
numohche  womans,  I  have  been  kind, 
C.  196;  kitteamontednumeh,  be  kind  to 
me,  ibid.  See  kitleamonteanumau. 
wompag,  n.  ‘brightness’,  bright  light 
(oppos.  to  pohkenahtu,  ‘in  darkness’), 
Is.  59,  9:  adehmcompag,  when  it  is  day, 
‘in  the  morning  watch’,  Judg.  16,  2; 
Ex.  14,  24;  that  which  is  white:  ne 
wompag  w6ou,  the  white  of  an  egg,  Job 

6,  6. 

*wompam  (Narr. ),  pi.  wauumpeg,  wauom- 
pesichiek,  the  white  money,  “made  of 
the  stem  or  stoeke  of  the  periwincle 
[Pyrula],  which  they  call  meteqdhock, 
when  all  the  shell  is  broken  off:  and  of 
this  sort  six  of  their  small  beads  (which 
they  make  with  holes  to  string  the 
bracelets),  are  current  with  the  English 
for  a  penv.”— R.  W.  128,  130.  The 
wompam  was  half  the  value  of  the  mck- 
a&hock (or  black  money),  q.  v.  “A  kind 
of  beads  .  .  .  which  they  call  wamjKim- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


195 


*wompam — continued. 
peak,  and  it  is  of  two  sorts;  the  one  is 
white,  theotheris  of  a  violet coloure.” — 
Morton’s  X.  E.  Canaan,  1,  12. 
wompan,  from  ivuihpu.  See  adchuwom- 
pag;  utchuwompan,  etc. 

*Wompanand  [vompcin-m&nit]  (Xarr. ), 
the  Eastern  God,  R.  W.  110. 
wompanne,  -neu,  adv.  all  night,  Judg. 
19,9;  (warn-)  16, 2;  Luke  6, 12.  Ci.moh- 
tompan. 

[Xarr.  kitompanisha,  break  of  day, 
R.  W.  67.  Del.  wapange,  tomorrow 
(morning),  Zeisb.  Gr.  178  (cf.  wapana- 
cliewi,  p.  182).] 

*wompaniiiyeu,  in  tlic  cast,  ]VI Ps. , 
Ps.  75,6;  103,12,  —wutchepwoiyeu (El. ) . 

[Del.  wapaneii,  v.  adj.  easterly, 
Zeisb.;  woa  pan,  the  morning,  Zeisb. 
Yoc.  13;  woa-pa-ne-u,  morning,  ibid. 
60.] 

wompasquehtu,  ‘in  a  meadow’,  Gen. 
41,  2;  ‘in  the  fens  ’,  Job  40,  21. 

[Narr.  rnicuckaskeete,  a  meadow;  tatag- 
goskltuash,  ‘a  fresh  meadow’,  R.W.  90.] 
*wompatuck  ( Xarr. ),  a  goose;  pi.  -) -qud- 
aog,  R.  W.  86  ( wompdhtuk ,  pi.  -\-quaog,  ' 
a  goose,  geese,  C.  156). 
*wompekisheeae  wosketomp,  a  pale 
man,  C.  173:  wompishkauonk  wosketomp, 
pale  man,  ibid.  232,  but  wompishkauonk 
is  a  noun  substantive  (paleness).  See 
worn pekushonat;  ivosketomp. 
wompekushonat,  v.  i.  to  be  pale,  Jer. 
30,  6. 

wompequae,  adj.  with  child,  Hos.  13, 
16;  2  K.  8, 12  ( wompiquo ,  C.  168):  wom- 
qwquain,  I  am  with  child,  Gen.  38,  25. 
wompequauonat,  wompequainat,  v.  i. 
to  conceive,  to  become  pregnant:  wom- 
pequauog,  they  conceived,  Gen.  30,  39; 
onk  icoli  u'ompequauooog,  that  they  might 
conceive,  v.  38,  41;  wompequoou,  wom- 
poquodu,  Gen.  4,  1,  17;  16,  4;  (- quaeu ) 
Hos.  1,  6;  wompequait,  if  she  conceives, 
Lev.  12,  2;  pass,  wompequdinneat,  to  be 
conceived,  Hos.  9,  11;  asquam  wom- 
pequauoomuk,  before  he  was  conceived, 
Luke  2,  21.  See  neechan;  neech.au;  cf. 
wunneechdnat. 

wompequauonk,  -quaonk,  n.  concep¬ 
tion,  Gen.  3,  16;  16,  4;  Ruth  4,  13. 
wompi,  adj.  white,  Matt.  5,  36;  pi.  irom- 
piyeuash  (El.  Gr.  13),  Esth.  1,  6:  wompi- 


wompi — continued. 
yeuao,  it  is  white;  wompesu,  (he  is)  white; 
ncotvompes,  I  am  white;  koowompes,  thou 
art  white,  etc.  (El.  Gr.  16);  womposke- 
tomp,  a  white  man  (from  wompi,  woske¬ 
tomp,  El.  Gr.  15). 

[Xarr.  wompi,  white,  RAY.  154.  Peq. 
wumbiou,  white;  wumbanute,  a  white 
blanket,  Stiles.  Del.  (v.  adj.)  woapeu, 
it  is  white;  wapsu,  woa-psu,  he  is  white; 
wapelechen,  it  is  white  (?),  Zeisb.  Gr. 
164,  167.] 

*w6mpimish  (Xarr.),  a  chestnut  tree: 
wompimineash,  chestnuts,  R.  \Y.  89.  See 
wompumus. 

[Del.  woa-pim,  chestnut;  woa-pi-min- 
schi,  chestnut  tree,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  61  (i.  e. 
white-nut  tree).] 

*wompishocki,  adj.  gray,  C.  170. 
*wompohkishonat,  to  be  pale,  C.  203: 
nmwomppahkisham,  I  am  pale;  toll  wutcli 
nene  icompohkesean ,  why  art  thou  so 
pale?  ibid. 

wompohshog,  -puhshog,  n.  (white 
metal,)  ‘brass’,  Ex.  38,  2,  4;  Deut.  8,  9; 
but  in  2  Chr.  3,  4,  ‘brasse’  is  trans¬ 
ferred. 

*wompohshogque  [wompi-ooshog (? ) , 
white],  adj.  brazen,  Ex.  38,5;  Is.  45,52. 
Cf.  mwoshog,  (black  metal,)  iron, 
womponak,  n.  (white  cloth,)  linen,  Ex. 
25,  4;  Prov.  31,  24;  ‘cloth’,  Deut.  22, 
17.  See  monak. 

[Peq.  wumbanute,  a  white  blanket, 
Stiles.] 

womponakinne,  adj.  of  linen,  Jer.  13, 1. 
wompontupont,  one  having  a  white 
head,  ‘hoary-headed’,  Lev.  19,  32. 
*wompontuppaonk,  ‘gray-headed’,  C. 

170  (but  a  subst.  gray  ness  of  head), 
wompsikuk,  n.  the  eagle,  Lev.  11,  13; 
(- kcok )  Job  9,  26;  ( wompussikmk )  Deut. 
14,  12;  ( womsikuk )  Ezek.  17,  3  ( womp - 
sukook,  C.  156):  dimin.  wonipsikukqua- 
mesuog,  young  eagles,  Prov.  30,  17. 
[=  wompi-wussuqun,  white-tail.  The 
name  is  perhaps  more  descriptive  of 
the  fishhawk  or  osprey  (Pandion  halia- 
etus)  than  of  the  bald  eagle  (Haliaetus 
leucocephalus),  but  was  very  likely 
applied  to  both  by  the  Indians  of  the 
coast  of  New  England.] 

[Xarr.  wdmpissacuk,  pi.  wompsaeuck- 
quduog,  R.  W.  85.  Del.  uva  pa  lan  ne. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


196 


wompsikuk — continued, 
bald  eagle.  Zeisb.Yoc.  60  (from  v'oapeu, 
white,  and  wo  hmne,  (a  bird’s)  tail).] 
wompu,  orhpu,  he  sees,  he  looks.  This 
primary  verb  is  not  found  separately  in 
Eliot,  but  is  employed  to  form  numerous 
compounds,  in  the  sense  of  to  look  (to 
see  purposely),  as  wdmompu  ( wcomiyeu ), 
he  looksdown;  pwsampu,  he  looks  into, 
etc.  It  is  found  in  other  dialects  of  the 
Algonkin,  as  Cree  wdppu,  ‘he  sees’ 
(Howse  43);  Chip,  oowahbunden,  he 
sees  it  (Jones,  John  11,  9).  Cf.  nau- 
munat  and  nuhquaeu.  The  three  verbs 
signify:  naum,  he  sees  (voluntarily  or 
involuntarily,  without  reference  to  pur¬ 
pose);  nuhquaeu,  he  directs  his  eyes, 
looks  (by  accident  or  designedly); 
ompu,  he  looks  and  sees.  Cf.  wompi, 
bright,  white;  wompag ,  bright  light, 
‘when  he  sees’;  mohtompan  ( R.  W. 
motauban ),  break  of  day,  etc.  See  nad- 
tauwompu. 

[Cree  wdpun ,  it  is  daylight,  Howse 

77.  Abn.  ioppa,  ‘voila’  (Rasies,  subst. 
part.  ah).  Old  Alg.  ni-ouapaman,  I  see 
(him) ;  ni-ouabaten,  I  see  (it) ,  Le  Jeune 
(Arch.  Am.  ii,  25);  ouabemo,  to  see, 
Lah.] 

wompuhquont  [u'ompi-piihb.(l:~] ,  particip. 
having  (white  or)  gray  hair,  having  a 
gray  head,  Deut.  32, 25:  naoicompuhquom, 
I  am  gray  haired,  1  Sam.  12,  2;  wompo- 
quoi,  (when)  I  am  gray  haired,  Ps. 
71,  18;  u'ompuhquaog,  (they  are)  gray 
haired,  Job  15,10  {noh vomppuhqua,he 
is  gray  [headed],  C.  232.)  S ee  *irom- 
pishocki. 

[Del.  woap  hoc  qua  icon,  gray  hair, 
Zeisb.  ] 

wompuhshog.  See  wompohshog. 
wompumus,  n.  a  chestnut  tree,  pi.  + 
seash,  Ezek.  31,  8;  Gen.  30,  37.  See 
*w6mpimish. 

[Xarr.  wompimish,  R.  W.  89;  wompi- 
mineaxh,  chestnuts,  ibid.;  waumpmunch, 
chestnut,  Stiles.] 

womuhkoag-ish,  n.  pi.  declivities,  de¬ 
scents,  ‘steep  places’,  Ezek.  38, 20.  Cf. 
wdmiyeu. 

womunat.  See  comundt,  to  go  from, 
womussinuk.  See  wanminnedt. 
wonk,  adv.  also,  Eccl.  3,  11;  again,  Ps. 

78,  39;  moreover,  Ps.  19,  11  ( wonkanet , 
wonk,  onk,  again,  C.  233).  See  onk. 


wonk — continued. 

[Xarr.  icbnck,  more  (in  the  sense  of 
encore,  again),  R.  IV.  48.  Del.  woak, 
wak,  and,  also(  Zeisb.  Abn.  ahnkki, 
mais;  ahnkaSi,  l’un  apres  l’autre,  per 
successionein.] 

wonkinnumunat,  v.  t.  to  bend,  to  make 
crooked  [from  woonki) :  wonkinnum 
kemkquash,  he  bowed  the  heavens,  2 
Sam.  22,  10  (  =  quanabulikam  kesuk,  Ps. 
18,  9);  wonkinnau  umtohtompe,  he  bent 
his  bow,  Lam.  2, 4;  wonkindgish  ohtomp, 
ye  who  bend  the  bow,  Jer.  50,  14;  won- 
kanogish  ahtomp,  v.  29  (wonkunumunat, 
to  bend;  wonkkenittinneal,  to  be  bent, 
C.  182).  Cf.  woonkitteauonat;  see  pao- 
tonkunau;  wuttunkinonat. 
*wonkkenasu  (adj.  an.?)  bent,  C.  218. 
See  woonki. 

wonkonous,  wonkoncos,  n.  a  wall  (by 
the  roadside),  Num.  22,  24;  (of  a  city), 
Josh.  6,  5;  a  fort  or  stronghold,  2  Sam. 
5,  9;  Jer.  16,  19;  48,  18,  41  (wokamoos, 
a  fence,  C.  160). 

[Xarr.  waukaundsinl,  a  fort,  R.  IV.] 
wonkqunnesog,  n.  pi.  (their)  claws,  of 
animals,  Zech.  11, 17.  See  onkqunnesog. 
wonkqussis,  n.  a  fox,  Xeh.  4,  3;  C.  240; 
wonksis,  Luke  13,  32;  pi.  wonkqxmog, 
Judg.  15,4.  From  woonki,  ‘crooked’; 
w&nkesu,  ‘he  is  (does)  crooked’,  i.  e. 
he  ‘doubles’. 

[Xarr. pequau-us,  a  gray  fox,  R.  W.  95; 
mixhqudshim,  a  red  fox,  ibid.  (cf.  ane- 
qus,  little  squirrel).  Peq.  a'wuvmps, 
fox,  Stiles.  Del.  woa  cus,  a  fox,  Zeisb.] 
wonkum,  v.  t.  an.  greet  thou  (him),  2 
Tim.  4,  19:  kanconkomuk,  he  greets  thee, 
ibid.  v.  21 ;  anconkomuh,  he  greets  him, 
Acts  23,  26  (he  embraced  him,  Acts 
20,  1);  v:onkquttmcongauash,  greetings, 
Acts  15,  23;  wonkomook,  greet  ye  (him), 
ISam.  25,  5;  salute  ye,  Rom.  16,  6-16; 
ivonkqutlehhetlit,  when  we  had  taken 
leave  of  each  other,  Acts  21,  6. 
wonnepog.  See  wunnepog,  a  leaf  or 
herb. 

wonogkenat.  See  dwonogkuog,  they 
burrow,  ‘have  holes’, 
wonogq,  n.  a  hole,  Ex.  28,  32  {-nog, 
Ezek.  8,  7):  pi.  wonogquash,  the  holes 
or  dens  of  wild  beasts,  Xah.  2,  12;  ul 
wonogquehtu,  in  holes  (pitfalls),  Is.  42, 
22;  squontame  wdnogqut,  ‘by  the  hole  of 


TRVMBl'LL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


197 


wonogq — continued. 

the  door’,  Cant.  5,  4;  uvnogque  passah- 
theg,  the  hole  of  the  pit,  Is.  51, 1;  wutch 
hassunonogqut,  from  the  holes  in  the 
rocks,  Jer.  16,  16;  petshonat  ogqunat,  to 
fall  into  a  pit,  Matt.  12,  11. 

[Del.  iroa  lac,  a  hole;  val  heii,  he  is 
digging  a  hole;  woal  heen,  to  dig  a  hole, 
Zeisb.] 

wonteauunat,  v.  i.  to  dig  a  hole:  na>- 
wonteam,  I  have  digged,  2  K.  19,  24; 
wonteau  oh  kit,  he  digged  in  the  earth, 
Matt.  25,  18;  wonteasli,  dig  thou,  Ezek. 
8,  8;  wonteaon,  when  I  digged,  ibid.; 
wdnteauh  kah  ukkuthamun,  ‘he  made  a 
pit  and  digged  it’,  Ps.  7,  15;  wdnteaog, 
they  dig  pits,  Ps.  119,  85.  See  kuttah- 
ham. 

woohsuppae.  See  wohsippcihtde. 
woonki,  adj.  and  adv.  ( 1 )  crooked,  Prov. 
2, 15:  woonki  ayeuongash,  crooked  places, 
Is.  45,  2;  ne  woonkag,  that  which  is 
crooked,  Ecel.  1, 15;  woonkagish,  crooked 
things,  Is.  42,  16.  (2)  perverse,  wrong, 
Hab.  1,  4:  nashpe  woonkagk,  wrongfully, 
Jer.  22,  13.  Cf.  penaeu;  pepemsque. 

[Narr.  icduki,  crooked,  R.  \V.  54. 
Cree  wagow,  it  is  crooked,  Howse  71. 
Del.  waktscheu,  v.  adj.  it  is  crooked, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  164.] 

woonkitteauonat,  v.  t.  (an.  and  inan.?): 
woonkitteaa  nummayash,  he  makes  my 
paths  crooked  (for  me),  Lam.  3,  9. 
woosuppahtumunat,  v.  t.  to  make 
bright,  to  furbish,  Ezek.  21,  11:  woo- 
suppahtauun,  (it  is)  furbished,  Ezek. 
21,  9.  See  wohsumundt. 
woou,  w6u,  n.  an  egg,  Luke  11,  12;  ne 
wampag  wo6u,  the  white  of  an  egg,  Job 
6,  6;  pi.  couanash,  Is.  10,  14;  ancdunash, 
her  eggs,  Job  39,  14  (wou,  pi.  wow&nash , 
an  egg,  eggs,  C.  156).  See  *woweou. 
Cf.  odag,  an  animal;  ooch,  out  of. 

[Del.  wahli  wall  (pi. ),  eggs,  Zeisb.  Yoc. 
12;  wa  cho  wall,  ibid.  31.] 
woshinumunat,  woshwunnumunat. 

See  wohshinumundt,  to  open, 
woshweenit,  (‘if  he  open’,)  parting 
the  hoof,  Deut.  14,  6.  Cf.  neesukossont. 
woshwemco,  (the  water)  ‘parted  asun¬ 
der’,  2  K.  2,  14. 

woshwetanumunat.  See  wohshitanum- 
undt. 


wdshwetashine,  adj.  open  (as  a  door,  or 
gate),  Rev.  3,  8.  See  wohshinumundt; 

;  u'ohsh  it  an  u  m  undt. 

woshwi,  adj.  or  adv.  open,  IV.  5,  9. 
•wdsh.woh.tae,  adj.  open;  pi.  -ohtaash, 

Dan.  6,  10:  -  muttoon,  open  mouth, 

Is.  9,  12. 

woshwohtag,  (that  which  is)  open: 

- wishq,  an  open  vessel,  Xum.  19, 15. 

woshwohteau  (from  woshwohteauundt i, 
it  is  or  was  open,  Rev.  10,  2. 
wdshwuhkossaecheg:  neg  wdshwuhkos¬ 
saecheg,  they  which  divide thehoof.  Lev. 
11,  3,  =  wohwdshwujikossaecheg,  Deut.  14, 
7,=nag  woshweoh  wuhkosscooh,  ibid. ;  neg 
wohuvsh  mmnoneheg  uppahsikossounoh, 
they  which  are  cloven-footed,  Lev.  11, 3. 
woshwunnumunat.  See  woshinumundt. 
wosinneunkcDwae,  adv.  in  the  twilight, 
i  Ezek.  12,  7,  12. 
wossittae.  See  wohsiltde. 
woskeche,  adj.  upper,  on  top,  Deut.  24, 
6;  the  tip  of,  Ex.  29,  20;  Lev.  8,  23;  the 
top  or  highest  part  of,  Ex.  30,  3;  Judg. 
9,  51:  wosketvttauog ,  the  tip  of  the  ear, 
Lev.  14, 14, 17;  icuskodtuk,  the  forehead, 
Ex.  28,  38. 

woskeche,  adv.  (11  on  the  top,  on  the  sur¬ 
face:  woskeche  mcondi,  on  the  face  of  the 
deep,  Gen.  1,  2;  lit  woskeche  ohkeit,  on 
the  face  of  the  earth,  Dan.  8,  5,  =  ivos- 
ket ohkeit,  Lev.  11,  21;  noh  wesket,  in  that 
which  was  uppermost  (placed  on  top 
of  others),  Gen.  40,  17;  woskechepiskq, 
top  of  a  rock,  Ezek.  24,  7 ;  wutch  woske- 
cheqvttu,  ‘from  thetopof  the  rocks’  (?), 
Xum.23,9.  (2)  ‘without’  (El. Gr. 21): 

anomut  kah  woskeche,  within  and  with¬ 
out  (i.  e.  on  the  outer  surface  of),  Ex. 
37, 2.  See  woskechepiskq;  wuskodtuk.  Cf. 
wuske;  u-uskesuk. 

[Narr.  waskeche.  on  the  top,  R.  IV.  52. 
Del.  wochgiischi,  above,  on  the  top  or 
surface  of,  Zeisb.  Gr.  183;  wochgidha- 
mique,  on  the  earth,  ibid.  Quir.  skeje, 
skeeje,  ‘upon’,  Pier.] 
woskechepiskq,  -pisk,  n.  the  top  of  a 
rock,  Ezek.  24,  7;  2  C’hr.  25, 12,  =  woske¬ 
che  qussukquanit,  a  pointed  rock,  cliff,  or 
crag,  Ezek.  24, 8.  See  chippipsk;  ompsk. 
woskeetompsqut,  on  the  (top  of  the) 
rock,  Job  28,  9.  See  woskeche. 

woskehettue  (?),  adj.  hurtful:  - tog- 

!  koclteg,  hurtful  sword,  Ps.  144,  10. 


198 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


*woskeheuonat,tohurt:  woskehhittinneat, 
to  lie  hurt,  C.  195;  noowoskheum,  I  hurt, 
ibid. 

woskehittuonk,  n.  violence  (suffered), 
a  wound,  Ex.  21,  25;  spoiling,  Hab.  1, 3 
(=woskehuwaonk  (?) ,  Gen.  6,  13;  ef.  v. 
11). 

woskehtinneat,  v.  t.  inan.  and  v.  i.  to 
do  harm  to  (inan.  obj.),  Rev.  7,  2, 
=  ivoskehteauunat:  noowoskeleoh,  I  per¬ 
secuted  (it,  the  church),  Phil.  3,  6; 
ahque  woskehteauaok  ohke,  do  not  harm 
(ye)  the  earth,  Rev.  7,  3;  matta  amoske- 
ieauunnaout  moskehtuash,  (they)  not  to 
hurt  the  grass,  Rev.  9,  4. 
woskehuwae,  adj.  hurtful,  harmful,  1 
Tim.  6,  9;  mat  woskehuwde,  ‘innocent’, 
Jonah  1,  14. 

woskehuwaen,  n.  one  who  hurts  or 
harms,  ‘the  spoiler’,  Jer.  51,  56;  pi. 
(obj.)  v.  53:  woskehmvaemiog,  ‘spoilers’, 
2  K.  17,  20;  1  Sam.  13,  17. 
woskehuwaonk,  n.  violence,  hurt,  Gen. 
6,  11. 

woskehuwonat.  See  woskhednat. 
woskesit,  (he  is)  blemished,  deformed, 
Lev.  21,  17,  18,  21.  Cf.  chohkem. 
-wosketohteak :  at  wosketohteakon,  on  the 
open  fields,  Ezek.  29,  5. 
wosketomp,  n.  a  man,  vir;  pi.  xvosketom- 
paog  (cf.  missinnin,  a  man  of  another 
race  or  nation,  a  captive):  noeu  urnske- 
tompauhiu,  among  men,  Ps.  78,  60; 
wosketompooo  (v.  subst. ),  he  is  a  man, 
he  became  a  man  (El.  Gr.  12,  16); 
wosketomp  kah  mittamtvossissoh  xikkez- 
heuh,  ‘male  and  female  created  he 
them’,  Gen.  5,  2  {nukkone  wosk,  an  old 
man,  C.  157 ;  nawhviche  wosk,  some  men, 
ibid.  175;  onkatog  woske,  another  man, 
ibid.  232;  nanwi  woske,  any  man,  ibid.). 
See  omp. 

[Narr.  skeetomp,  pi.  skeitompadog , 
man,  men  (also  nnln,  nnlnnuog),  R.  W. 
44;  nmmiock,  ninnimissinuxvock,  eniskee- 
tompauwog,  “men,  folk,  people”,  ibid, 
pref.  19;  enln  or  eneskeetomp,  a  man, 
ibid.  115.] 

woskheonat,  woskehuwonat,  wosk- 
honat,  v.  t.  an.  to  hurt,  to  injure,  to  do 
harm  to  (an.  obj.),  Prov. 6,  18:  narwosk- 
hukqunat,  to  hurt  me,  Gen.  31,  7;  kco- 
woskhonunat,  to  do  thee  hurt,  v.  29; 
cowoskheonadut  xrosketompuh,  (they)  to 


woskhednat,  etc. — continued. 

hurt  men,  Rev.  9,  10;  matta  ncoicosk- 
heounonog,  we  harm  them  not,  1  Sam. 
25,  7;  woskeheau,  he  wrongeth,  injureth, 
Prov.  8,  36;  woh  woskeheau,  (it)  may 
harm  (him),  Job  35,  8;  woskeheunt,  par- 
ticip.  harming,  one  who  hurts,  Rev.  11, 
5;  uttoh woskeadt,  ‘whom  thou  persecut- 
est’,  injurest,  Acts  9,  5;  woskhuwaan, 
‘thou  that  spoilest’,  Is.  33,  1;  mat  pish 
koowoskhukkao,  he  shall  not  hurt  thee, 
Acts  18,  10;  matta  mwoskheuh,  hurt  thou 
him  not,  Luke  4,  35;  woskeheuhkon,  do 
him  no  harm,  Jer.  39,  12;  ahque  woske- 
heuk,  do  (them)  no  harm,  Ps.  105,  15 
( woskehheaog  wuhhogkauh,  they  hurt 
themselves  (injure  themselves),  C. 
239);  pass,  nocncoskhit,  I  am  hurt,  Jer. 
8,  21;  kaiwoskitteop,  thou  wast  spoiled, 
Is.  33,  1 . 

wososhquit(?):  na  ut  wososhquit,  ‘the 
marshes  thereof’,  Ezek.  47,  11  (uvssds- 
keht,  a  meadow,  C.  160). 

[Del.  assiskuyu,  v.  adj.  marshy, 
muddy,  Zeisb.  Gr.  164.] 
wossabpe,  wassabbe,  adj.  and  adv. 
thin,  1  K.  7,  29;  Lev.  2,  4  (wussdppi, 
C.  176) :  imssabpetdhha mwog  namekag, 
they  beat  (it)  into  thin  plates,  Ex.  39, 
3;  pish  wossappeteauun,  (it)  shall  be 
made  thin,  become  thin,  Is.  17,  4.  Cf. 
saupde;  wussappe. 

[Del.  wschappan,  woasgeyen,  (it  is) 
thin,  Zeisb.  Gr.  167,  172.] 
wosumunat.  See  icohsumun&t,  to  shine 
out. 

wosupobtae.  See  wolmppahlde. 
wdu.  See  v:66u. 

wounkagk,  n.  error  (that  which  is 
crooked),  Eccl.  10,  5.  See  woonki. 
woushau.  See  waashau. 
woweaushin,  n.  a  winding  about,  Ezek. 
41,  7.  Cf.  wayedag;  wayont;  wodu. 

[Cree  wdweussehayoo,  he  circumvents 
him,  Howse  41;  wdweow,  it  is  circular, 
ibid.  79;  wdwetow,  heroundeth  it,  ibid.] 
wowushpoDonk,  n.  effeminacy,  ‘deli¬ 
cacy’,  Deut.  28,  56.  See  iraashpu. 
wowushpu.  See  waashpu. 
wowussumonat,  waus-,  wowos-,  v.  t. 
an.  to  worship,  1  Sam.  1,  3;  Rev.  19, 10; 
1  K.  12,  30  (- mudnat ,  C.  216):  wowussu- 
maog  manitto,  they  pray  to  a  (false) 
god,  Is.  45, 20;  wowussumoh,  he  worships 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


199 


wowussumonat,  etc. — continued. 

(it),  Is.  44,  15;  noowowussumomun,  we 
worship  (intrans.),  Gen.  22,  5;  nag 
waussumoncheg,  they  who  worship,  Ps. 
97,  7  ( ncawowussuwamun ,  we  worship, 
C.  216;  woxvussum  God,  worship  God, 
ibid.;  ivauwussittianeat,  to  be  worship¬ 
ped,  ibid.).  Cf.  nauwanum ,  he  bows 
down;  peantam,  he  prays, 
wowussumoncheg,  waus-,  pi.  worship¬ 
ers,  they  who  worship,  Ps.  97,  7;  2  K. 

10,  19. 

woom.  See  comunAt. 
wromiyeu.  See  womiyeu,  downward, 
woomsinneat,  wcomussinneat,  v.  i.  to 
go  downward,  Judg.  7,  10;  Gen.  46,  3: 
womussu  en,  woomsu  en,  he  went  down 
to  (a  place),  1  Sam.  15,  12;  Jonah  1,3; 
Ex.  2,  5;  ivmmsuog,  they  go  down  (to 
the  gates),  Judg.  5,  11;  noh  woomsit,  he 
who  goeth  down,  Eccl.  3,  21;  onatuh 
puppinashim  oomussit,  he  goeth  down 
as  a  beast,  Is.  63,  14;  kooweeclie  woom- 
seunsh,  I  go  down  with  thee  (into 
Egypt),  Gen.  46,  4;  neg  womussitcheg  en 
passohtheganit,  they  that  descend  into 
the  pit,  Ezek.  26,  20;  31,  16;  ne  ahhut 
womussimuk,  the  descent,  downward 
slope  (of  a  mountain),  Luke  19,  37; 
ncowomussin  wadeh  uut,  I  came  down  from 
the  mount,  Deut.  10,  5.  See  w6 miyeu. 

[Narr.  waumsu  [ ivoomsu ],  down  hill, 
R.  W.  76.] 

wcomsuonk,  n.  a  ravine  (?),  a  steep  de¬ 
scent:  kishke  waomsuonganit,  ‘by  the 
clift  of  (Ziz)’,  2  Chr.  20,  16.  Cf.  wo- 
muhkdag. 

*wuchechepunnock  (Narr.),  “a  great 
bunch  of  hair  bound  up  behind.” — 
R.  W.  58. 

*wuchickapeuck  (Narr.),  “birching 
bark  and  chestnut  bark,  which  they 
dress  finely  and  make  a  summer  cover¬ 
ing  for  their  houses.” — R.  W.  48. 
wudchinat.  See  wadchinat. 

■wuhhog,  (his)  body,  himself,  Lev.  21,  4; 

Prov.  31,  22;  Cant.  3,  9.  See  muhhog. 
wuhhogki,  that  which  covers  the  body; 
hence  a  shell,  and  in  pi.  ivuhhogkiash 
(q.  v.),  scales  (of  fish),  Job 41, 15:  vmh- 
lwgkiitcheg,  (fish)  having  scales,  Lev. 

11,  9. 

[Narr.  suckaAhock,  mckAwhock  [eucki- 
■wuhhogki,  black-shell],  black  money, 


wuhhogki — continued. 

R.  W.  104;  poquaAhock  [ kuppogkl-wuh - 
liogki  (?)],  ‘a  little  thick  shell-fish’, 

ibid.,  the  round  clam;  meteaiihock  [ - 

and  wuhhogki ], 1  the  periwinkle’  (Pyrula 
carica  or  canaliculata),  ibid. 

wuhhogkomminneash,  n.  pi.  husks, 
Luke  15,  16:  vmhhogkomunit,  to  the 
husk,  Num.  6,  4. 

wuhkos,  mkos,  n.  a  hoof  (his  hoof),  his 
nails  or  claw,  Dan.  4,  33;  Deut.  21,  12. 
See  muhkos. 

wuhpeteog,  wuhpit,  wuhpeg.  See 

muhp-. 

wuhtauog,  pi.  +  ash,  (his)  ear,  ears,  Is. 
32,  3;  33,  15.  See  mehtauog. 

wuhtuk,  wuttugk  [wul-uhtug,  of  the 
tree],  n.  a  branch,  John  15,  2;  Is.  9,  14; 
( wuttuhkq )  Is.  19, 15;  Ezek.  15,  2:  wtnh- 
qunnum,  his  branch,  Job  15,  32;  18, 16; 
ncotuhqunnumat,  on  my  branch,  Job  29, 
19;  pi.  wuttuhqunash,  branches,  (wood 
for)  fuel,  Is.  9,  5;  Gen.  22,  6.  See  viut- 
tuliq. 

-wukse  (and  nomsiyeue ),  adj.  alone,  C. 
167.  Cf.  nussu. 

wunanetuonk.  See  wunn&nittuonk. 

wunasscomonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  betray:  vrx>- 
nassoom,  I  betray,  Matt.  27,  4;  noh  conas- 
scomoli,  who  betrayed  him,  Matt.  10,  4, 
—  neh  wanasscomukqutcheh,  Mark  3,  19; 
nonche  wunassarmedg,  ‘  if  ye  be  come  to 
betray  me’,  1  Chr.  12, 17;  conasscomdnat, 
to  betray  him,  John  13,  2  ( wanassaomit , 
he  was  betrayed  (?),  C.  182  [when  he 
was  betrayed  (condit. ),  as  in  1  Cor.  11, 
23,  whence  Cotton  probably  took  this 
word] ). 

wunasscomuwae,  adv.  treacherously,  Is. 

21,  2. 

wunasscomuwaenin,  n.  one  who  deals 
treacherously,  Is.  21,  2. 

*wunnachkemmuk.  See  wanahchiko- 
muk,  a  chimney. 

%unnagehan,  or  wunnegin  waupi 

(Narr.),  a  fair  wind:  wunnegitch  vmttln, 
when  the  wind  is  fair,  R.  W.  84.  Cf. 
mattagelian,  a  cross  wind,  ibid. 

wunnagetahhamwe  qussukquonash, 
hewed  stones,  1  K.  7,  9  (-agkuttahhame, 
v.  11,  12). 

wunnag[k]ittahwau:  - chikkup-poh, 

he  heweth  down  cedars,  Is.  44, 14. 


200 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25- 


wunnagkittuhhausuen,  -in,  a  carpen¬ 
ter,  Is.  44,  13. 

wunnaiyeu,  adj.  and  adv.  (he  is)  happy. 

See  wunniyeu. 

*wunnam  (Narr. ),  “their  red  painting, 
which  they  most  delight  in.” — R.  W. 
154. 

wunnamamoonk  (?),  n.  healthfulness; 
promotion  of  health,  Prov.  16,  24; 
=.imnnanumaonk,  a  blessing  (?).  See 
neetske&ucmk  (under  ne.etskesu). 

[Del.  nolamalsi,  I  am  well,  Zeisb.] 
wunnamonaenat,  v.  i.  to  beget  a  son  or 
sons:  unmnamonieu,  he  begets  a  son, 
Eccl.  5,  14;  pish  wunnamonaeu,  he  shall 
beget  sons,  Gen.  17,  20;  wunnamoniyeu, 
he  begat  (us),  James  1,  18;  noh  wunau- 
moniit,  -nail,  if  he  beget  a  son,  Prov. 
17,  21;  Ezek.  18, 10,  14;  nohxvanamoniit, 
he  who  begat  thee,  Prov.  23,  22;  wunna- 
rnonaek,  beget  (ye)  sons,  Jer.  29,  6  ( nco - 
naumonxyeum ,  I  beget  (a  son  or  sons),  C. 

181) .  Cf.  wuttaunaenat. 
wunnampcohaumaudnat,  v.  t.  an.  and  i 

inan.  to  answer  (a  question)  to  (any¬ 
one),  Matt.  22,  46;  Acts  24,  10.  See 
nampcoham. 

wunnamptamdbonk,  n.  belief,  faith, 
Heb.  11,  1;  C.  182:  kconamplamooonk, 
thy  belief,  2  Thess.  2,  13;  thy  faith, 
Matt.  9,  22;  xiashpe  minnamptamcoonk, 
-6onk,  by  faith,  Heb.  11,  3,  4,  5,  etc. 
wunnamptamunat,  (1)  v.  t.  to  believe, 
Luke  24,  25  [with  an.  obj.  expressed, 
to  believe  or  believe  in  (a  person)]. 
(2)  ivunnarnptauonat  (an.  and  inan.),  to 
obey:  mnamptauau,  ‘he  hearkened  to’ 
(him),  Gen.  23,  16;  nmnamptam,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  Mark  9,  24;  Acts  27,  25;  C.  182; 
kamamptamwa)  God,  ye  believe  in  God, 
John  14,  1 ;  xmmnamptamwog ,  they 
believed,  Ex.  4,  31 ;  vmnnamptam,  \ 
amamptam,  he  believes,  Prov.  14,  15 
( u'unnamptoadlinneat ,  to  be  believed,  C. 

182) ;  wunnamptaudog,  they  believed 
(him),  Ex.  14,  31;  nah  mat  oonamptauoh, 
he  did  not  believe  them,  Gen.  45,  26; 
koonamptau,  dost  thou  believe  on  (him)? 
John  9,  35;  onk  woh  nconamptau,  that  I 
may  believe  on  (him),  v.  36;  hoxvan 
wunnamptauont,  whoso  believeth  in 
(him),  Rom.  9,  33,  —hovxvn  wanamptog, 

1  John  5,  1,  5. 


wunnamptamunat — continued. 

[Narr.  coan&umalous,  I  believe  you 
or  I  will  obey  you.  “This  word  they 
use  just  as  the  Greek  tongue  doth  that 
verb  \ni6TEVGo\  hi6zeveiv ,  for  believ¬ 
ing  or  obeying,  as  it  is  often  used  in  the 
New  Testament.” — R.  W.  65.] 
wunnamuhqut,  adv.  truly,  verily  (El. 
Gr.  21),  Matt.  11,  11;  Heb.  11,  15; 
surely,  Is.  40,  7. 

wunnamuhquttee,  -teyeu,  adj.  true,. 
1  K.  10,  6;  Jer.  42,  5  ( wunumuhkutfyeu ,. 
truly,  C.  230):  minnamuhqutteyeuco,  (it) 
is  true,  Dan.  6,  12;  -yeuooash,  (words) 
are  true,  2  Sam.  7,  28;  ne  xvanumidikute- 
yeuxxk,  that  which  is  true  (truth  con¬ 
crete),  1  K.  22,  16,  =  wunnamuhqulte- 
yeuook,  2  Sam.  15,  20;  wunnamuhqutte- 
yeuonk,  truth  (abstract),  Ps.  15,  2. 

[Del.  wulamoe,  he  says  true  or  the 
truth;  xmldmoyu,  v.  adj.  it  is  true,  right, 
Zeisb.  Gr.  165.] 

*wunnamwateouunat,  to  prove;  (i.  e. 

to  know-true,  to  demonstrate),  C.  205. 
wunnanittuonk,  wunanetuonk,  n.  a 
blessing  (referred  to  the  object),  Deut. 
28,  2. 

wunnantamunat,  wunnanittamunat 

[ivunne-unnantamundt],  v.  t.  inan.  to 
bless  (it),  Deut.  28,  12;  2  Sam.  7,  29: 
ivunantash,  bless  thou  (it),  Deut.  33,  11; 
pish  wunrumtam,  he  will  bless  (it),  Deut. 
7, 13;  micheme  xvunnantamunach,  let  (it) 
be  blessed  forever,  2  Sam.  7,  29.  Pri¬ 
marily,  to  be  pleased  with  a  thing. 

[Narr.  nowecdntam,  noweetedntam,  I 
am  glad,  R.  W.  65.  Del.  nolelendam ,  I 
rejoice,  am  glad ;  nolatenami,  I  am 
happy,  Zeisb.  Voc.  50.  Cree  noonan- 
tornen,  we  rejoice,  Howse.  ] 
wunnanumaonk,  n.  a  blessing  (referred 
to  the  giver  or  agent),  Deut.  33,  7.  See- 
'wunnamamoonk. 

wunnanumau,  conanumau,  he  is  happy 
(is  blessed),  pass.  Rom.  14,  22;  Prov. 
3,  13.  See  wunne. 

[Del.  nolinamen,  I  like  it,  Zeisb.] 
wunnanumonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  bless,  to  in¬ 
voke  blessings  on  (Num.  24,  1)  or  con¬ 
fer  blessings  ( wunnaunumonat ,  C.  182; 
nen  noondnum,  I  bless,  ibid.) :  vmnnAnu- 
momp,  he  blessed  (them),  Deut.  33,  1; 
(onanumonaoont ,  they  to  bless  (them), 
Deut.  27, 12;  kwnanumoush,  I  will  bless 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


201 


wunnanumonat — continued, 
thee,  Gen.  22,  17;  nconanum,  I  bless 
(her),  Gen.  17,  16;  untnnanumeh,  bless 
me,  Gen.  27,  34;  pass,  pish  koonanumit, 
thou  shalt  be  blessed,  Dent.  27,  3;  pish 
wunnanittamun,  (it)  shall  be  blessed,  v. 
4,  5  (uiinnariUiinneat,  to  be  blessed,  C. 
182). 

^wunnapp inneat  (?):  kconepeam,  wel¬ 
come,  C.  217. 

wunnash,  v.  to  erect,  to  set  upright  (lit. 
to  set  on  end):  wunnashau,  beset  up  (a 
pillar),  1  K.  7,  21;  noli  wanashont  alipe- 
hanoh ,  he  that  setteth  snares,  Jer.  5,  26; 
wunnash,  set  (a  watchman  on  thetower), 
Is.  21,  6;  wunnash  ahkuhk,  set  on  a  pot 
(on  the  fire),  Ezek.  24,  3.  See  uunnoh- 
teauun&t.  Cf.  wanashque,  on  the  top  of, 
or  rather  ‘on  end’. 

[Del.  wo  nacli  qui  wi,  top  of  a  house 
or  tree,  Zeisb.] 

wunnashauonk,  (his)  spirit,  Prov.  18, 
14.  See  n ashauonk. 

wunnashque.  See  wanashque,  on  the 
top  of. 

wunnatcDtamauonat,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan. 
to  question,  to  ask  anyone  questions, 
Matt.  22,  46;  Mark  9,  32,  etc.  See 
natmtomau. 

*wunnauanounuck  (Xarr. ),  a  shallop; 
wunnauanounuekqiutse,  a  skiff.  “Al¬ 
though  themselves  have  neither,  yet 
they  give  them  such  names,  which 
in  their  language  signifieth  carrying 
vessels.” — R.  W.  98.  Cf.  kdunuk. 

*wunnaug  (Xarr. ),  a  tray;  pi.  -\-dnash, 
R.W.  50;  iminn a uga nemese,  a  little  tray, 
ibid.  See  wunnonk. 

*wunnaugonhdmmin  (Xarr.),  ‘.to  play 
at  dice’,  that  is,  by  throwing  painted 
plumbstones  ( asauanash )  into  a  tray, 
R.  IV.  146. 

wunnaumoniin,  n.  appellative,  a  son 
(i.  e.  anybody’s  son),  Prov.  17,  25; 
Heb.  5,  8  ( wunnaumonien ,  C.  162). 

wunnaumonuh.,  n.  constr.  (his  or  her) 
son,  Gen.  22,  3;  21,  2,  3,  5,  7;  (the 
son  of)  2  K.  4,  37:  nunnaumon,  my  son, 
Gen.  21,  23;  22,  7,  8;  nunnaumon  wun- 
naumonuh,  my  son’s  son,  Gen.  21,  23; 
kenaumon,  thy  son,  Gen.  22,  2, 12;  Lev. 
18,  10  ( kenomon ,  thy  son,  pi.  kenaumo- 
nog,  C.  162.);  en  wunnaumonat,  toward 
or  to  his  son,  Deut.  28,  56,  57;  on 


wunn  aumonuh — cont  i  n  ued. 

his  son,  Gen.  22,  6;  pi.  nunnaumonog , 
my  sons,  Gen.  48  (collectively,  all  my 
sons,  nunnaumonunk,  Gen.  48,  9;  1  Sam. 
2,  24);  wunnaumonuh,  his  sons,  the 
sons  of,  1  Chr.  21,  20;  2  Sam.  23,  6; 
Gen.  50,  12. 

*wunnaumwash  (Xarr.),  speak  the 
truth:  uunndumwaw  ewd,  he  speaks 
true;  coandumwen,  you  speak  true,  R. 
W.  63.  The  two  last  “are  words  of 
great  flattery,  which  they  use  to  each 
other,  but  constantly  to  their  princes 
at  their  speeches”,  etc.  wu nnaum- 
u'dyean,  ‘if  he  say  true’,  ibid.  64  ( nco - 
nomwam,  I  speak  truth,  1  Tim.  2,  7; 
umnnomu'deeyan,  if  I  speak  true,  John 
8,  46). 

*wunnaumwauonck  (Xarr.),  n.  ‘faith¬ 
fulness’,  R.  W.  64. 

wunnaunchemrokaonk  [ wunne-aunche - 
mookaonk ],  n.  good  news,  Prov.  25,  25; 
the  gospel,  Gal.  2,  2.  See  auncheinao - 
kau;  unnaunchemookaudnat. 
wunnaudnat,  3d  pers.  infin.  of  naudnat, 
nauwonat,  to  see  him,  2  Sam.  13,  6. 
wunne,  cone,  adv.  and  adj.  well,  beauti¬ 
fully,  pleasantly  (Lat.  bene);  good, 
beautiful,  pleasant:  wunne  wuttooantash, 
be  of  good  courage,  1  Chr.  19,13;  wunne 
alike,  a  good  land,  Deut.  8,  7;  cone  mee- 
chumoomash,  his  pleasant  fruits,  Cant. 
4,  16;  woli  krone  mukkoondminneau,  ye 
might  well  bear  with  him,  2  Cor.  11, 
4;  adj.  an.  with  prefix,  katni,  thou  art 
happy,  Deut.  33,  29;  pish  kconi,  thou 
shalt  be  secure.  Job  1 1 , 18;  onk  woli  nami 
u'uteh  ken,  that  it  may  be  well  with  me 
for  thv  sake,  Gen.  12,  13;  kmnaiimwco 
nish  usseog,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them, 
John  13,  17;  wunniUcheg,  they  who  are 
happy,  the  happy,  (Mai.  3,  15.  See 
wunnegen;  wunniyeu. 

[Quir.  u-erra,  wadwerre,  well  (adv.), 
Pier.  52  and  passim.  Del.  wvJ.il,  good; 
welhik,  the  best;  (an.)  welsit,  the  best, 
holy,  Zeisb.  Voc.  12, 13.  Chip,  weweni, 
adv.  ‘well,  right,  just,  exactly,  dili¬ 
gently’,  Bar.  Cf.  Chip,  oni-,  as  prefix.] 
wunnechcDteagk,  v.  (imperat.  2d  pers. 
pi.)  ‘set  on  bread’,  i.  e.  serve  the  food, 
Gen.  43,  31.  Cf.  wunnauq  (Xarr.),  a 
tray,  R.  W.  50. 


202 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


wunneechanat,  -onat,  v.  i.  3d  pers.  in- 
finit.  of  neechadnat,  to  conceive,  Heb. 
11,  11.  See  wompequauonat. 
wunneechaneunk,  n.  offspring,  collec¬ 
tively,  Rom.  9,  8  (all  children), 
wunneechamoh),  his  child,  constr. 
the  child  of,  i.  e.  offspring,  son  or 
daughter,  indeterminate  of  age  or  sex; 
pi.  u-unneechaneunwog,  children,  off¬ 
spring,  as  related  to  oochetuonganoouh, 
their  parents,  Matt.  10,21.  See  neechau. 
wunneechanonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  beget  (a 
child):  noli  waneechanit,  he  who  begets 
(a  child) ,  Dan.  11,  6. 

wunne etupanatamwe .  In  the  title  of  , 
Eliot’s  Bible,  excellent,  ‘holy’;  grace, 
‘grace  of  God’,  Acts  14, 48;  vbl.  n.,  holy 
man,  Mark  6,  20.  Cf.  malchetupanatam, 
‘profaned’,  Ezek.  22,  26. 
wunnegen,  ‘adv.  of  quality’  (El.  Gr.  22) 
and  adj.  (it  is)  good,  pleasant  (used  by 
Eliot  sometimes  as  the  equivalent  of 
wunne,  but,  strictly  regarded,  wunne  or 
V'unni  is  applicable  to  the  abstract,  the 
possible  or  suppositive,  or  the  subject, 
wunnegen  to  the  concrete,  the  actual, 
or  the  object;  yet  Eliot  was  compelled  i 
to  employ  the  latter  form  to  express 
abstract  good.  See  wunnegik*):  wun- 
naumun  .  .  .  na  en  wunnegen,  he  saw 
.  .  .  that  it  was  good,  Gen.  1,  4,  10, 18; 
ne  wunnegen  ut  wuskesukqut,  the  thing 
was  good  in  his  eyes,  Gen.  41,  37;  ‘he 
was  content’  with  it,  Lev.  10,  20;  anue 
wunnegen ,  (it  is)  better,  a  better  thing, 
Matt.  18,  8,  9;  ul  wunnegen  ohkeit,  .  .  . 
wunnegen  wutahtauonk,  ‘in  pleasant 
places,  ...  I  (have)  a  goodly  heritage’, 
Ps.  16,  6;  (rare  in)  pi.  wunnegenash, 
good  things,  Matt.  12,  35;  v.  subst. 
negat.  matin  wunnegeninnco,  -no,  it  is  not 
good,  Gen.  2,  18;  2  Sam.  17,  7;  Matt. 
19,  10;  quenau  wanne  wunnegenninaogk, 
thenceforth  it  is  (will  be)  good  for  noth¬ 
ing,  Matt.  5,  13;  wanne  wunnegennin- 
noogk,  no  good  thing  will  (he  withhold) , 
Ps.  84,  11. 

[♦Foot  note. — “On  reflection  I  am  convinced 
that  wunnegen  is,  primarily,  the  contracted  in¬ 
finitive,  or  3d  pers.  sing,  indie,  pres,  of  a  verb 
wunnegendt,  to  be  good,  as  wunnesendt,  to  do 
.good  or  well.  From  this  verb  wunnegik  and 
(negat.)  wunnegenninnmg.  etc.,  are  regularly 
formed.  No.  it  is  the  inanimate  noun,  or  3d 
pers.  pres,  indie.,  meaning  -good  thing' 

< bonum  or  koAov/  or  'it  is  good'.”) 


wunnegen — continued. 

[Abn.  Sriglten,  ‘cela  est  bon,  beau’, 
Rasies.  Xarr.  wunnegin,  edwish  [ kouesh ], 
welcome,  sleep  here,  R.  IV.  38.  Del. 
mi  lie  chen,  it  is  good  or  well  done, 
Zeisb.  Yoc.  34.] 

*wunnegennue,  adv.  famously,  C.  228. 
wunnegik,  wanegik,  -guk,  that  which 
is  good,  a  good  thing,  2  Tim.' 1,  14: 
nishnoh  waneguk,  every  good  thing, 
Pliilem.  6;  ne  teagua  wanegik,  any  good 
thing,  Josh.  21,  45;  wahteouun  wanegik 
kali  machuk,  to  know  good  and  evil, 
Gen.  3,  5;  pi.  wunnegikish,  wanegikish 
(more  commonly  wanegugish),  good 
things,  Josh.  23,  14,  15;  Ps.  103,  5.  See 
uxionegugish. 

*wunnegin  waupi.  See  *wunndgehan. 
wunnehteauunat,  v.  t.  inan.  to  beautify 
(it),  to  render  beautiful  or  pleasing,  Is. 
60,  13:  noli  wunnehteou  nishnoh  teag,  he 
has  made  everything  beautiful,  Eccl. 

3,  11. 

[Del.  wuliton,  to  make  (something) 
well;  maniton,  to  make  (?),  Zeisb.  Gr. 
160;  paliton,  to  spoil  something,  to  do 
it  wrong,  ibid.] 

wunnehtcDnuhquamuoo,  it  buds,  Is. 
27,  6. 

*wunnekuonk,  n.  the  birth  of  a  child, 
birth,  Ind.  Laws  vii,  7. 
*wunneneeh.huae,  kindly,  C.  228. 
wunneneheonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  do  well 
toward  (or  do  good  to)  another:  uunene- 
heog  nag  wanenehubjueagig,  if  ye  do 
good  to  them  that  do  good  to  you,  Luke 
6,  33;  wunnenehikkoo,  (do  not  my 
words)  do  good  to  (him),  Mic.  2,  7; 
uoli  kconenelieooog,  (when)  ye  may  do 
them  good,  Mark  14,7;  wunnenelieontuh 
wame,  let  us  do  good  to  all  men,  Gal. 
6,  10.  From  wunne-unneheonat. 
wunneonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  beautify,  to 
make  beautiful,  to  makegood  (?):  wun- 
neh,  kuhliog  nashpe  .  .  .  wunneetuonk, 
‘deck  thyself  with  .  .  .  excellency’ 
(beauty),  Job  40,  10.  See  wunnenelied- 
nat. 

wunnepog,  n.  a  leaf,  Lev.  26,  36;  Is.  64, 
6;  ( wonnejjog )  Job  13,  25  ( umnnepog ,  C. 
164):  amepog,  his  leaf,  Jer.  17,  8  (oonee- 
pog,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps.  1,3);  quash,  Dan. 

4,  12,  14;  ut  nooehunnve  wunnepogqut,  on 
the  tender  herb,  Deut.  32,  2;  meechu 
wunnepog  quash,  he  eats  herbs,  Rom. 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


203 


-wunnepog — continued. 

14, 2,  =wunnepaquash,  Ps.  105, 35,  =wun- 
nepukquash,  Mark  4,  32:  vmnnepogque 
meetsuonk,  ‘a  dinner  of  herbs’,  Prov. 
15,  17.  Cf.  weesadtippogquosh,  bitter 
herbs,  Ex.  12,  8;  Num.  9,  11. 

[Narr.  wunnepog,  leaf,  pi.  -\-guash, 
R. \Y.  89.  Del.  wit  nipak ,  Zeisb.  Yoc.  35.  ] 
wunnesenat  [wunne-ussenai],  v.  i.  to  do 
good,  to  do  well,  Num.  24,  13;  Mark 
3,  4. 

[Del.  ivulilissin,  to  be  good;  wulisso, 
good,  handsome,  Zeisb.  C4r.  166.] 
-*wunnetooahtauinat,  v.  t.  caus.  to  make 
good;  3d  pers.  ametodaht&ulnat,  ‘to 
make  (it)  good’,  C.  226. 
wunnetue,  wunnetu,  adj.  an.  good, 
Ps.  112,  5;  beautiful,  Gen.  29,  17;  1 
Chr.  16,  29  ( wunnetooe ,  good,  bonus, 
C.  226);  wunnetou,  a  good  man,  Ps.  112, 
5;  Matt.  12,  35.  Cf.  wenamvetu,  rich. 

[Narr.wiwmetw,  ‘  proper  and  personal  ’ , 
R.  IV.  60;  wunnetunita,  my  heart  is  good, 
ibid.] 

*wunnetunat,  to  be  good:  kconetunat, 
(thou)  to  be  good,  C.  226. 
wunnetuonk,  cone-,  n.  goodness,  Prov. 
20,  6;  excellency,  beauty,  Job  14,  10: 
ametuonk,  his  beauty,  its  beauty,  2  Sam.  I 
1, 19;  14,  25;  wutche  kooneetuonk,  for  thy 
good,  Deut.  10,  13. 

*wunniish  (or  nehunushshash) ,  fare  you 
well,  C.  227. 

*wunnikketeauunat  (?):  nuttaniikko 
u'unnikketeam,  I  am  pretty  well,  C.  225. 
See  keleau. 

[Narr.  konkeetedug,  they  are  well,  R. 
W.  28.] 

wunninabpeliteau,  he  maketh  (it)  dry, 
of  the  sea,  Hag.  1,  4.  See  nunassenat. 
wunniyeu,  wunnaiyeu  [ cona  yeu ],  adj. 
an.  (?)  (he  is)  happy,  Job  5,  17;  Ps. 
127,  5;  137,  8,  9:  noh  wunniyeu,  happy  is 
he  who,  Prov.  16,  20;  anue  wunniyeu, 
more  happy,  1  Cor.  7,  40  ( sun  .  .  . 
wunniyeuog,  are  (they)  well?  C.  225). 
See  wunne;  vmnnegen. 

*wunniyeue,  adv.  happily,  C.  228. 
wunnogkus,  (his)  belly,  Lev.  11,  42: 
kendgkus,  thy  belly,  Cant.  7,  2.  See 
menogkus. 

wunnogkussue,  -usse,  adj.  of  the  belly; 
as  n.  bowels,  Col.  3,  12;  Acts  1,  18. 


wunnogque,  wunogkcoe  [  —unmne-hogk, 
good-bodied  or  well-covered],  adj.  fat, 
1  Sam.  28,  24;  Ezek.  34,  20;  as  v.  wunog - 
kcnog,  they  shall  grow  fat,  Deut.  31,  20; 
mo  ahche  vmmgkm,  he  was  very  fat, 
Judg.  3,  17. 

[Narr.  wauurunockdo,  it  is  fat,  R.  W. 
143.] 

wunnogqutcheg,  pi.  the}7  who  are  fat, 
the  fat,  Is.  10, 16;  Ezek.  34, 16;  =iva6nog- 
qutcheg. 

wunnohquodt:  pish  vmnohquodt,  it  will 
be  fair  weather,  Matt.  16,  2  ( weekdh - 
quat,  fair  weather;  wunnohqual,  pleasant 
weather;  ivekeneankqnat,  warm  weather, 
C.  158).  See  onndhquat. 

[Narr.  wekineadquat,  fair  weather, 
R.  W.  81.] 

wunnohtealiuau,  he  maketh  peace,  Ps. 
147,  14. 

wunnohteauunat,  v.  t.  to  set  up,  to 
erect:  wunnohtoog ,  they  set  up  (towers), 
Is.  23,  13.  See  wunfiash. 
wunnompamukquok  (after  adt),  ‘in  an 
open  place’,  Gen.  38,  14. 
wunnompeuhkohteaonk,  n.  craftiness, 
Eph.  4, 14;  wunnombeukanittuonk,  a  con¬ 
spiracy,  2  K.  17,  4.  Cf.  asookekodtedmoo. 
wunnompeuhkonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  beguile, 
to  deceive  by  craft :  vrunnompeuhkonomp, 
he  beguiled  (Eve),  2  Cor.  11,  3. 
wunnompewessu,  adj.  an.  ‘subtile’, 
Gen.  3,  1  (=nehtompuwissuSnu,  2  Sam. 
13,  3):  wunnompnvussueeu,  adv.  sub- 
tilely,  1  Sam.  23,  22;  (- uwaeu )  with 
guile,  Ex.  21,  14;  wunnompuwmsuwde, 
with  subtlety,  Gen.  27,  35;  2  K.  10, 19. 
wunnompuwussinneat,  v.  i.  to  be 
crafty  or  subtle,  to  deceive  by  craft 
(with  affix  of  3d  pers.  pi.  Eph.  4,  14). 
wunnompuwussuonk,  n.  subtlety  (mn- 
omp-,  his  subtlety,  2  Cor.  11,  3). 
wunnomwausseonk,  n.  righteousness, 
right-doing,  Prov.  11,  18;  Matt.  5,  6. 
wimnomwayeuonk,  n.  truth  (abstract), 
Ex.  34,  6;  Prov.  8,  7;  Rom.  1,  18.  Cf. 
wunnamuhquttee. 

wunnonk,  n.  a  dish,  2  K.  21,  13:  nconon- 
ganit,  in  my  dish,  Matt.  26,  23;  C.  161; 
vmnnonganit,  in  the  dish,  Mark  14,  20; 
wunonk,  ‘platter’, Matt.  23, 25.  Gi.wun- 
nogkus,  belly;  wonogq,  a  hole  (dug 
out?). 


204 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BI  LLETIN'  25 


wunnonk — conti  nued . 

[Narr.  ivumiaug  [tmmrulug],  ‘a  trav’, 
R.  W.  50;  pi.  wunnaug&nash.  Micm. 
Slakan,  ‘un  plat’,  Maill.  10.  Del.  ula- 
canis,  a  dish;  ulacanahen,  to  make 
dishes;  ulacanahe-munschi,  (dish-tree) 
elm  tree,  Zeisb.] 

wunnonkou,  adv.  yesterday  (El.  Gr.  21), 
i.  e.  last  evening,  John  4,  52:  pajeh  wun- 
nonkcout,  until  evening,  Josh.  10,  26. 

[Del.  um  la  cu,  evening,  Zeisb.  Voc. 
34.] 

wunnonkcooDk,  wannonkcocok,  n. 

(when  it  was)  evening,  the  evening, 
Gen.  1,  5,  8,  13,  18. 

[Narr.  rmnnauquit,  evening,  R.  W. 
67.  Del.  imdacaniwi,  in  the  evening; 
u'ulaquike,  ‘last  night’,  Zeisb.  Gr.  171 
(‘this  evening’,  ibid.  178).] 
wunnonkquae,  adj.  and  adv.  in  the 
evening,  of  evening,  Zeph.  3,  3;  Gen. 
30,  16;  Esth.  2,  14. 

[Micm.  8elag,  ‘ce  soir’,  Maillard  28. 
Del.  wulaku,  (in  the)  evening,  Zeisb. 
Gr.  171.] 

wunndnuhkauonat.  See  wdunonuhkau- 
dnat,  to  flatter. 

wunnonuhkcDwaonk,  n.  flattery,  Dan. 

11,  21  ( wouwekoow&onk,  C.  220). 
wunnoohwhosinneat,  v.  i.  (to  be) 
adorned,  C.  217  (as  participle):  pish 
kenashpe  wunnaowhos,  thou  shalt  be 
adorned  with,  Jer.  31,  4.  See  wun- 
neonat. 

wunnoohamroonk.  n.  a  valuation  or  es¬ 
timated  value  (for  ransom?),  Lev.  27, 
16:  kaoncohamaxmk,  thy  valuation  (value 
fixed  by  thee),  Lev.  27,  12,  13. 
wunnoDwaonk  [irun ne-noo a ri onk],  n.  a 
covenant,  an  agreement:  nmnancaonk, 
my  covenant,  Gen.  17,  4;  nutayim  na>- 
noowaonk,  I  make  my  covenant,  v.  2; 
oonanvdonk,  his  covenant,  the  covenant 
of,  Ps.  78,  10;  105,  8;  vmnnoowdonk 
ayimaiek  nashpe  magcoonk,  ‘make  a  cov¬ 
enant  with  me  by  a  present’,  Is.  36, 16. 
wunncowdnat,  v.  t.  an.  to  make  a  league 
with,  Dan.  11,  6;  to  covenant  with: 
wunnohteahuau,  he  maketh  peace,  Ps. 
147,  14. 

“wunnuhketeaonkannu:  sun  wunnuh- 
keleaorikannu,  ‘is  it  a  healthy  time’?  is 
it  healthy?  C.  225. 


wunnumuhkinumunat,  v.  t.  to  turn  a 
a  thing  upside  down,  2  K.  21,  13:  aomnn- 
uhkinunmn,  he  turned  it  upside  down, 
Ps.  146,  9. 

*wunnupkomiyaonk,  n.  opportunity, 

C.  163. 

wurmuppauhwhunne,  adj.  winged, 
Deut.  4,  17. 

wunnuppoh,  (her  or  its)  wing,  the  wing 
or  wings  of  (constr. ),  Job  39,  26;  1  K. 
6,  24:  pasuk  wunnuppoh,  one  wing  (of), 
2  Chr.  3,  12  ( wunnuppoh ,  a  wing,  pi. 
-f -whunash,  C.  156). 

[Narr.  wunniip,  wing,  pi.  — pash , 
R.  W.  85.] 

wunnuppohwhun,  wunnuppuwhun, 
wunnupwhun,  n.  (Ms,  her,  or  its) 
wing  (constr.  -j -oh,  the  wing  or  wings 
of),  Deut.  32,  11:  wunnuppuhwhunduh, 
their  wings,  2  Chr.  3,  11;  Job  39,  26; 
pasuk  wunnuppohwhunoh,  one  wing  (of), 
2  Chr.  3,  11;  ut  icunnuppawhunit,  on 
the  wings  of,  2  Sam.  22,  11;  ut  woskeche 
imnnuppohwhunit,  upon  her  wings, 
Deut.  32, 11;  mogkinnupuhwhunau,  hav¬ 
ing  great  wings;  quogquonipuhwhunati, 
long-winged,  Ezek.  17,  3.  See  nuppoh. 

wunnupwoaonk.  pi.  -ongash,  (his)  pirov- 
erb ,  proverbs,  Prow  25, 1.  See  siogkco- 
waonk;  waantam weyeuonk. 

wunnusscoog,  n.  pi.  (his)  testicles,  Deut. 
23, 1:  adj.  wunnussue,  Job  40,  17;  quosh- 
qunnmscoont,  one  who  has  his  testicles 
broken,  Lev.  21,  20.  From  neesuog,  a 
pair  (?). 

wunnutcheg,  wunnutck,  n.  (his)  hand. 
See  menutcheg. 

wunogkooe.  See  u-unnogque. 

wuncowhonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  fix  a  valua¬ 
tion  on,  to  value  (for  ransom?):  pish 
amanchdli,  he  shall  value  him,  Lev.  27, 
12;  inan.  wunaohamundt:  pish  amooha- 
mun,  he  shall  estimate  it,  Lev.  27,  14. 
Cf.  manooham. 

wus,  n.  the  brim  or  edge,  (of  a  cup)  2 
Chr.  4,5:  ut  missadt,  on  the  edge  of  (a 
curtain),  Ex.  26,  4,  5;  on  the  brim  of, 
2  Chr.  4,  5;  pi.  umssash,  the  borders  of, 
2  K.  16,  17. 

[Narr.  iriiss,  ‘the  edge  or  list’  (of 
cloth),  R.  W.  134.] 

wusapinuk,  wussapinuk  [tcus-appinuk, 
that  which  is  on  the  edge  of],  n.  the 
bank  or  margin  (of  a  river,  etc.),  2  K. 


TKr  M  bull] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


205 


wusapinuk,  wussapinuk — continued. 
2,13;  Dan.  12,  5:  Irish  he  wussdpenuk,  by 
the  bank,  Dent.  4,  48;  wussapinuk  ut 
sepuut,  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  Gen. 
41,  17;  Anuwutchuan  wussAbanukquosh, 
(it)  overflowed  its  banks,  Josh.  3,  15 
(wussdpplnuk,  a  bank,  C.  158,  ICO), 
wushikco,  he  sneezed.  2  K.  4,  35.  See 
*annuonk;  *nanagkaoonk;  *sannegkivonk. 
wushiin-in,  n.  a  daughter-in-law,  a  son's 
wife,  Matt.  10,  35:  kushim,  thy  daugh¬ 
ter-in-law,  Gen.  38,  24;  (son’s  wife) 
Lev.  IS,  15;  wushimoh  (constr. ),  his 
daughter-in-law,  Lev.  20,  12. 

[Del.  chumm,  Zeisb.  Abn.  nesem, 
‘ma  brn  (dit  le  pere)’.] 
wushimoh,  n.  constr.  (his)  daughter- 
in-law,  (his)  son’s  wife,  Gen.  38,  11; 
wuhshimoh,  10. 

*wush.owunan  (Xarr. ),  n.  the  hawk, 
R.  W.  S7.  See  quanunon. 
wnshpunnauonat,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan.  to 
bind  up,  to  bind  to  or  upon,  an.  ending 
and  inan.  obj.:  aoshpunauoh  noochum- 
wehtahirhaongash,  he  bound  up  his 
wounds,  Luke  10,  34;  tmshpunnamh 
kummoxunash,  bind  on  thy  sandals, 
Acts  12,  8;  nvh  woshpununk  shetrtesash, 
he  who  binds  the  sheaves,  l’s.  129,  7. 
Cf.  assepinum;  kishpinum,  etc. 
wuskannem,  n.  seed  (semen),  lit.  his  or 
its  seed  (?)  (cf.  skannemuiutsh,  seeds, 
Gen.  1, 11, 12);  of  plants  or  grain,  Lev. 
27,  16;  Matt.  8,  20,  22,  23:  wuskannem 
mustard,  a  mustard  seed,  Matt.  13, 31 ;  of 
man,  Gen.  38,  9;  weepamaowe  (-muwAe), 
wuskannem,  semen  virile,  Lev.  15,  16, 
18;  19,  20;  pi.  witskan nem uneush ,  -uash, 
seeds,  Matt.  13,  31;  seed  corn,  Gen.  47, 
19,  23,  24;  aoskan-,  his  seed,  Lev.  27,  16; 
kaoskan-,  thy  seed,  Dent.  11, 10.  [wuske- 
minneash  (?),  but  cf.  wuskenuunneat,  to 
be  young.*]  See  sohqui. 

[♦Note. — In  another  place  in  the  manuscript 
occurs  the  note  " ska n n n» -un,  with  pronom. 
prefix.”] 

[Del.  woch  ga  nihm,  seed,  Zeisb.  Voc. 
34.] 

wuskappeum  (?),  n.  (his)  concubine: 
kaoskappeumog,  thy  concubines,  Dan.  5, 
23.  See  ooshkappeum. 
wuske,  weske,  adj.  and  adv.  (1)  new, 
Is.  65,  17:  wuske  ketassmt,  a  new  king. 
Ex.  1,  8;  wuske  teag,  a  new  thing,  Num. 


wuske,  weske — continued. 

16,  30;  wuske  mamak,  new  cloth,  Matt. 
9.  16;  pi.  wuskeaiash  kali  nukouue  hiash , 
things  new  and  old,  Matt.  13,  52.  (2) 

young:  wuske  penomp,  a  young  virgin, 

1  K.  1.  2;  but  rarely  used  in  this  sense 
except  in  compound  words;  cf.  wusko- 
sliim ,  etc.  (3)  lirst  in  time,  of  or  at  the 
beginning:  weske  kutehissik,  in  the  be¬ 
ginning,  Gen.  1,  1;  wuteh  weske  kesukmlt, 
from  the  first  day,  Dan.  10.  12;  wuteh 
weske,  from  the  very  first,  Luke  1,  3. 
Cf.  aske. 

[free  wfskutch,  formerly,  Howse  33. 
Del.  wuskigegu,  it  is  new,  Zeisb.  Gr.  165; 
wuski ,  new,  ibid.  168;  a  little  while  ago, 
ibid.  172.] 

wuskehettuonk,  n.  See  wuskehittuemk , 
violence  or  hurt  suffered,  a  wound, 
etc. 

wuskehuwaonk,  ti.  See  woskehuu'Annk, 
violence,  etc, 

wusken,  -in,  n.  a  youth,  a  young  man, 
Gen.  4.  23;  41,  12;  Keel.  11,  9;  Matt. 
19,  20,  22;  dim.  iruskenes:  ken  wuskenes, 
thou  art  but  a  youth,  1  Sam.  17,  33; 
wuskenesu ,  adj.  an.  he  was  a  youth,  1 
Sam.  17. 42  ( iruskenin ,  nunkomp,  a  young 
man;  wusskennin,  a  girl,  C.  157).  t'f. 
nunkomp. 

[Xarr.  miskene,  a  young  man,  R.  W. 
124.] 

wuskenue,  adj.  and  adv.  of  youth: 
kaiskenue.oi  thy  youth.  Keel.  11,  9;  12, 1. 

wuskenucoonk,  n.  youth,  the  season  of 
youth,  Eccl.  11,  10;  Ps.  103,  5. 

wuskenuunneat,  v.  i.  to  l>e  young: 
wutehe  wuskenuunneat,  from  his  youth, 
1  Sam.  17,  33;  wutehe  nooskenuunneat, 
from  my  youth,  Matt,  19,  20;  wuskenu- 
wuskenao,  he  is  young  (as  n.  a  young, 
man,  a  youth,  1  Sam.  17,  55;  obj. 
wuskenuh,  Gen.  18,  7);  wuske  nuog,  they 
are  young  (as  n.  pi.  young  men,  youths. 
Is.  40,  30;  Jer.  31,  13);  ash  wuskenuaj, 
he  was  yet  a  youth,  Judg.  8,  20.  [The 
form  indicates  ‘to  become’,  ‘to  grow’ 
(- euoo ) .  ] 

wnskesuk,  (his)  eye,  (his)  face.  See 
m  uskesuk. 

wuskishim.  See  wuskoshim. 

wuskittamwus  [iruske-niittmmnis],  n.  a 
young  woman,  Ruth  4,  12;  (pi-  obj.) 
Tit,  2,  4. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  2i> 


20(5 


wuskodtuk,  n.  the  forehead,  Ex.  28,  38; 
Ezek.  3,  9:  kuskodtuk,  thy  forehead,  v. 
8;  ut  wuskodtugqut ,  on  his  forehead, 
Rev.  14,  9.  See  muskodtuk;  woskeche. 

[Xarr.  mscdttuck,  the  forehead,  R.  W. 
58.] 

wuskon,  n.  (his)  bone,  Job  2,  5;  Ezek. 
37,  7 ;  pi.  -\-ash,  Judg.  19,  29;  Ezek. 
37,  1,  3:  muskonash,  the  bones,  Prov. 
14,  30  (unshkon,  weshkeen,  C.  157  [but 
perhaps  only  of  a  broken  bone]).  See 
dskon;  muskon;  ohkcon;  oskon. 

[Del.  u'och  knn,  bone,  Zeisb.] 
■wuskonontup,  n.  the  skull,  2  K.  9,  35; 
Judg.  9, 53;  Mark  15, 22 ;  =  wuskon-dniup, 
bone-head;  so,  mishkondntup  [—mishe- 
u-uskoYi-ontup],  John  19, 17  (muskonontip, 
C.  157).  Cf.  chepiontup;  mishkon&ntup. 
wuskoshim,  wuskishim,  adj.  young 
(of  an  animal) :  < alfe  wuskoshim,  a  young 
calf,  Lev.  9,  2;  tvuskishim,  a  young 
(pigeon),  Gen.  15,  9. 

[Del.  wusk  chum,  a  young  creature, 
Zeisb.] 

wuskoshimwus,  n.  a  whelp;  pi. 4- .soy, 
Prov.  17,  2;  Xah.  2,  12:  dim.  wuskosh- 
imcomcs,  Deut.  33,  22;  Xah.  2,  12. 
wuskukwhun-an,  n.  a  dove,  Cant.  5, 
12;  Hos.  11,  11;  Jer.  8,  7. 

[Xarr.  wuskowhan,  a  pigeon;  wusko- 
whannanaukit  [ wuskowh annan-aukil  (?)] , 
the  pigeon  country,  R.  W.  87.] 
wusqheonkane,  -ongane,  adj.  bloody, 
Ex.  4,  25,  26. 

[Xarr.  mishqub,  neepuck,  the  blood; 
mishquinash,  the  veins,  R.  W.  60  ( mis - 
quineash,  ibid.  158).] 
wusq(ue)heonk,  n.  (his)  blood,  Xum. 
35,  33;  Rev.  14,  20;  Matt.  16,  17:  noos- 
qheonk,  my  blood,  John  6,  54,  55,  56; 
CDsqheonk,  his  blood,  Gen.  37,  26;  42,  22; 
Ezek.  3, 18.  Cf.  musquihonk,  blood, 
wussagsohou,  n.  (her)  earring,  Gen. 

24,  30.  See  sogkussohhou. 
wussampenat,  v.  i.  to  view  or  look  out 
(from):  noosamp,  I  looked  (from  my 
window),  Prov.  7,  6;  wussampu,  he 
looked  (from  the  window),  Cant.  2,  9; 
yeug  wosompitcheg,  they  who  look  (out 
from  windows),  Eccl.  12,  3.  Cf.  nadtau- 
wdmpu;  womornpenat. 

[Xarr.  wussaumpatammin,  to  view  or 
look  about,  R.  W.  75;  wussaum  patd- 
moonck,  a  prospect,  ibid.] 


wussapinuk.  See  wusdpinuk. 
“wussappe,  adv.  thinly,  C.  230;  icumippi 
voppinnok,  thin  air,  ibid.  176.  See 
wosmbpe. 

wussaume,  adv.  too,  extremely,  very 
greatly,  Gen.  34,  7  (mtssdmme,  C.  173): 
wussaume  peasin,  ‘too  strait’,  2  K.  6,  1; 
wussaume  musquanatamwog,  they  were 
very  wroth,  Gen.  34,  7;  mahshagquod 
wussaume,  ‘the  famine  was  grievous’, 
Gen,  12,  10;  wussaume  noohk,  ‘if  the 
way  be  too  long’,  if  the  place  be  too 
far  off,  Deut.  14,  24. 

[Xarr.  wussaume  kusopita,  it  is  too  hot 
(to  be  eaten);  cosaCime sokeuummis,  you 
have  poured  out  too  much,  R.  W.  34. 
Cr eeoosdm,  overmuch,  Howse33.  Del. 
U'sami,  too  much,  Zeisb.  Gr.  172.] 
wussaumepcoh,  (he  is)  gluttonous,  a 
glutton,  Matt.  11,  19  ( =i\hquodtam - 
waenin,  Luke  7,  34).  See  *icussomup- 
podonk. 

wussaumepcowae'nin,  n.  a  glutton, 

Deut.  21,  20;  wussa u mepcowaen ,  Prov. 
23,  21. 

wusseet,  n.  (his)  foot.  See  musseet. 
*wusseke  (Xarr.),  ‘the  hinder  part  of  a 
deer’  (or  other  animal),  R.  W.  143. 

[Del  socan,  the  hind  part  of  any 
creature,  Zeisb.  Voc.  11.] 
*-vrasse]zitte&h.h.vLdii&t(wussikkt'teahd)iat, 
C.  237),  to  please:  -kittinneat,  to  be 
pleased;  nwssekittedh,  I  please,  C.  204. 
See  weekon la m  find l . 

wussenat,  v.  i.  to  flee:  noosem,  I  flee,  (or) 
I  fled,  1  Sam.  4,  16;  pish  naosemun,  we 
will  flee,  Is.  30, 16;  kcosemwco,  you  flee; 
icussemmog,  they  flee,  v.  17;  Prov.  28, 1 ; 
wussemco  ( =  -au ),  he  fled  from,  Ex.  2, 
15;  wussemook,  flee  ye,  Jer.  49,  8;  toh- 
wutch  wussemoan,  wherefore  didst  thou 
flee  away?  Gen.  31,  27.  Cf.  ussishdnat. 
*wussentam  (Xarr. ),  ‘  he  goesa  wooing’, 
R.  IV.  124;  wussenetdock,  ‘they  make  a 
match’,  ibid.  See  weetauomonat,  etc. 
wussentamoonk,  n.  a  wedding,  Matt. 
22,  7. 

*wussentamunat,  to  marry:  nnoseentam, 
I  marry,  C.  201.  See  weetauomdnat. 
wussentamwaen,  n.  a  bridegroom  (one 
who  marries) :  wessentamwden,  Jer.  16, 9. 
wussenumonat,  v.  i.  to  be  a  son-in-law 
of  (to  marry  the  daughter  of  ?),  1  Sam. 
18, 18, 23, 27 :  wussbium  ketasscot,  ‘  be  the 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


207 


wussenumonat — continued, 
king’s  son-in-law’,  1  Sam.  18,  22;  pish 
ken  unseenum ukqueh,  thou  shalt  be  my 
son-in-law,  1  Sam.  18,  21;  irasenumuk- 
qutche,  a  son-in-law,  Judg.  15,  6. 
wusshashquobok  (?),  n.  the  flag  (a  water 
plant),  Job  8,  11.  Cf.  misha-shq. 
wussin,  he  saith,  3d  pers.  sing,  indie. 

pres,  from  ussinat  or  wussindt. 
*wussinninneat,  v.  i.  to  adorn  (one’s 
self),  to  make  handsome;  noosin,  I 
adorn;  noh  wussinnu,  he  adorneth,  C. 
179. 

*wussinnuontamunat,  ‘  to  be  adorned  ’ , 
C.  179  (to  adorn  one’s  self  with,  inan. 
obj.  ?). 

wussisses,  wussusses,  (his)  uncle  (con- 
sanguineus?),  Esth.  2,  7;  father’s  broth¬ 
er,  Lev.  10,  4:  ncosusses,  my  uncle,  Jer. 
32,  8;  kussusses,  thy  uncle,  Jer.  32,  7; 
coshes-oh,  ISam.  10,  14;  14,  50;  ummit- 
tamwussoh  aoshesoh,  his  uncle’s  wife, 
Lev.  20,  20  ( ooshesin ,  an  uncle,  C.  162) . 
Dimin.fromcos/ic.  Cf.  adtonkqs,  ‘cousin  ’. 

[Xarr.  vmssese,  an  uncle;  nissese,  my 
uncle,  R.  W.  44.] 

wussissetcon.  See  mussissittam,  a  lip. 
wussittumcoonk,  n.  judgment,  sentence, 
Rom.  5,  16;  Is.  9,  7:  cosittummonk,  his 
judgment,  Rom.  2,  2. 
wussittumunat,  v.  t.  inan.  (and  intrans. ) 
to  judge,  to  pass  judgment  on,  1  Chr. 
16,  33;  Ps.  96,  13:  wussittumunat  awa- 
kompande,  to  condemn,  John  3,  17; 
noosittum,  I  judge,  Ezek.  34,  17;  ken 
kcosittum,  thou  who  judgest,  Rom.  2,  1; 
ken  vxissittuman,  thou  who  mayest 
judge,  thou  when  thou  judgest,  Rom.  2, 
1 ;  wussittum,  he  judges,  1  Cor.  2, 15;  v:m- 
sittuk,  when  he  judges,  Rom.  2,  16;  noh 
wussitluk,  he  who  judges  (when  he 
judges),  the  judge  of,  Gen.  18,  25; 
wasittumwdg,  if  ye  judge,  Matt.  7,  2; 
ivussittich  nashciue  ken  kah  nashaue  neen, 
let  him  judge  (the  matter)  between 
thee  and  me,  Gen.  16,  5. 
wussittumwaen,  -in,  n.  a  judge,  one 
who  judges;  pi.  -waenuog,  judges  (as  in 
title  of  the  book  of  Judges), 
wusso:  noh  tcusso,  she  is  a  man’s  wife, 
Gen.  20,  3  (she  ‘who  .is  another  man’s 
wife’,  Ind.  Laws  xi,  8) .  Cf.  mittamivus; 
uni  in  i tta m unssoh . 

[Abn.  tidssi,  je  suis  mariee  (ait 
mulier).] 


wussohsumoonk,  (his  or  its)  glory, Ex. 
24,  16,  17.  Cf.  sohsuinooonk,  1  Cor.  15,. 
41.  See  sohsiiinoomco;  wohsunxbonk. 

*wussomsippamcoonk,  n.  drunkenness, 
C.  165. 

*wussomuppooonk,  n.  gluttony,  C.  165 
[u-ussaume  uhpcooonk,  excessive  feed¬ 
ing],  See  ivussa  u mepaiwaen  in . 

^wussoohquattominash,  pi.  walnuts, 
C.  164:  wusscohquattomis,  a  walnut  tree, 
ibid. 

*wussoohquohham,  v.  i. :  ncosoohqiioh— 
hum,  I  write;  sun  n:oh  kcosoohqmhhain,  can 
you  write?  C.  216. 

*wussoquat  (Xarr.),  n.  a  walnut  tree; 
u'usswaquatdm  ineug,  w  a  1  n  u  t  s.  “Of 

these  they  make  an  excellent  oil,  .  .  . 
for  their  anointing  of  their  heads.” — 
R.1Y.  90.  From  sussequnat,  to  anoint  (?). 

[Peq.  uishquuts,  walnut  tree,  Stiles.] 

*wussuckh6su  (Xarr.),  adj.  painted, 
R.  IV.  107 ;  a  painted  coat  (or  skin) ,  ibid. 
154. 

*wussuckwh6mmen  (Xarr.),  to  paint, 
R.  W.  66.  See  umssukhumunat. 

wussue  [=«'ws&eH  (?)]:  u'ussue  ohkuk,  ‘a 
seething  pot  ’ ,  Jer.  1,  13;  v.  i.  imperat. 
wussish,  seethe  thou  it,  Ezek.  24,  5; 
wasit  ohkuk  (condit. ),  a  pot  when  it 
seethes,  ‘a  seething  pot’,  Job  41,  20. 
See  wunnash. 

wussukeh,  (her)  husband;  constr.  the 
husband  of;  v.  subst.  ken  ■wussukkii n, 
thou  art  a  husband,  Ex.  4,  25,  26.  See 
wa&ukeh. 

wussukhumauonat,  v.  t.  an.  and  inan. 
to  write  anything  to  or  for  a  person: 
kcosukkuhhuinauununnaont,  to  write  to  • 
you,  2  Cor.  9, 1;  Jude  3;  toll  dnsuhkhum 
ne  nuttinsuhkhwnun,  what  I  have  (is) 
written  I  have  written,  John  19,  22; 
koosukkuhlumduoiiumwao,  I  write  to  you, 

1  John  2,  12. 

wussukhumunat,  wussukkuhhumu- 
nat,  v.  t.  to  write,  Luke  1,  3:  woli  iioo- 
mkkuhhuin,  I  would  write  (it),  3  John 
13;  u'ussuhkoin,  icussukhum,  he  wrote, 
Ex.  34,  28;  Xum.  33,  2;  John  8,  8; 
nukkodirussukhumup,  I  was  about  to 
write,  Rev.  10,  4;  ahque  wussuku'hush, 
do  not  write,  ibid. ;  yeush  noosukkuhhum- 
nnash,  I  write  these  things,  1  Cor.  4,  14 
( umssoohkhaindnai  inissukquohhonk,  to¬ 
wnee  a  book,  C.  216). 


208 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bvlletis  25 


wussukhumunat,  etc. — continued. 

[Narr.  wussiickqitash,  ‘write a  letter’; 
wussuckirheke,  -y'unmi  (?) ,  write,  ‘make 
me  a  letter’  [for  wuss&ckichonk  ayimeh 
(?)  ] ;  wussuckwhike,  irussuckirlnmck,  a  let¬ 
ter.  ‘  ‘  F rom  icussuck-whiunnen ,  to  paint ; 
for,  having  no  letters,  their  painting 
comes  the  nearest.” — R.  W,  66.] 
wussukqun,  n.  a  tail  of  an  animal,  Job 
40,17;  Is. 9, 14:  inissukquat,  by  the  tail,  j 
Ex.  4,  4. 

[Narr.  wussuckqun,  a  tail,  R.  W.  103. 
Abn.  SsegSne,  queue  (de  castor).  Del. 
schu  cku  ney,  Zeisb.  ] 
*wussukquohhonk,  n.  a  book,  C.  216. 
“wussukwhosuonk,  n.  writing,  Ex.  32, 
16;  (‘evidence’)  Jer.  32,  14,  16,  etc.: 
lit  wussukivhonganit,  ‘in  a  book’,  Ex. 
17,  14,  but  elsewhere  i it  baokut  wussuk- 
whonk,  Dan.  5,  25.  (On  a  blank  leaf  of 
the  copy  of  Eliot’s  Bible  which  is  before 
me  a  former  owner  has  left  his  auto¬ 
graph,  ‘  ‘  nen  Elisha, yeu  nossoliquoh  wvnk ’  ’ 
(my  book),  and  underneath,  in  Eng-  j 
lish,  ‘‘I  Elisha,  this  my  hand.”) 
■wussumitteaonk,  n.  judgment  or  sen¬ 
tence  ( incurred,  referred  to  the  object), 
Job  27,  2. 

wussumdnat,  v.  t.  an.  to  judge,  to  pass 
sentence  on,  to  condemn,  1  K.  3,  9:  (3d 
pers.  sing.)  cosum&nat,  Is.  3,  13;  kaosum  I 
kulihog,  thou  condemnest  thyself,  Rom. 

2,  1;  - naumatuonk  (for  kamttum ?), 

thou  judgest  the  law,  James  4,  11;  ah- 
que  aosummk,  judge  (ye)  not,  Matt.  7, 1;  I 
wdsumont,  wAussumont,  wasumont,  par- 
ticip.  judging,  he  who  judges,  2  Tim.  i 
4,  1;  James  4,  11;  Job  21,  22;  (wus-)  J 
Prov.  29,  14;  vmsmmau,  he  judges 
(them),  Ps.  7, 11;  cosumuh,  lie  sentenced  j 
him  (‘gave  sentence’),  Luke  23,  24; 
comm&uh,  they  judge  him,  1  Cor.  14,  ; 
24;  kaosumomivop,  ye  have  condemned 
(him),  James  5,  6;  kaositteamwco,  ye  are 
condemned,  v.  9;  matta  awakonipande 
vnmumau,  he  is  not  condemned,  John 
3,18. 

wussusses.  See  trussisses. 
wut-,  prefixed  to  the  name  of  a  place  or 
people,  forms  a  gentile  or  ancestral 
noun,  as  wui-Hebreiv,  the  Hebrew,  Gen. 
14, 13;  wut-Amorite,  ibid. :  so  ukkananit, 
the  Canaanites,  v.  21;  i cut-Egyptianseog, 
the  Egyptians,  Ex.  7,  18;  vnit-ohkti,  an 
inhabitant  of;  md-ohtu,  Acts  20,  4. 


wutahtomp,  (his)  bow.  See  ohtomp. 
wutamehpunaonk,  n.  trouble,  Nell.  9, 
32.  See  wuttaniantaniunat. 
wutamiyeu  (adv.  as  n.),  the  hind  parts 
of  man  or  other  animal,  behind:  ul 
wutamiyeu,  ‘into  the  draught’,  Matt. 
15,  17;  aitdmiyeii,  his  hinder  part  (op¬ 
posed  to  wuskesuk),  Joel  2,  20;  cotdmi- 
yeumoash,  their  hinder  parts  (of  ani¬ 
mals),  2  Chr.  4,  4  ( wuttommiyeu ,  as 
prep,  behind,  C.  235).  See  wuttdt. 

[Cree  tUtdmik,  underneath,  Howse 
34.] 

wutappin,  n.  his  bed,  (’ant.  3,  7.  See 
appin. 

wutchaiyeumco,  it  belongs  to  (him). 
See  ivadchinat. 

wutchaubuk.  See  wadchdbuk. 
wutche,  wutcli,  cotch,  prep,  from,  Eccl. 
3,  11;  Ps.  78,  4;  for,  Eccl.  3,  1;  instead 
of,  in  the  place  of,  1  Pet.  3,  IS;  because 
of:  nman  wutche,  for  the  same  cause, 
Phil.  2, 18;  ne  wutche,  for  the  cause  that, 
for  that  cause,  therefore  (see  newutche) ; 
noh  wutchu,  ‘of  him’  (as  a  cause  or 
source) ,  Rom.  11,  36.  See  coch;  wadchi- 
vat;  waj.  Of.  aatshoh  (vmtchisheau) ,  the 
active  form. 

[Narr.  yd  iniche,  from  hence,  R.  IV.  74. 
Del.  untschi,  of,  by,  therefore;  uuntschi, 
of,  on  account  of;  wentschi,  therefore,  for 
this  reason,  Zeisb.  Gr.  178;  untschi,  wunt- 
schi,  wentschi,  of,  from,  on  account  of, 
for  the  sake  of,  ibid.  182.] 
‘‘wutcheh.wau  (?),  her  mother,  ('.  162. 
See  okas. 

[Narr.  witclnrhaw  (and  okasu),  a 
mother;  nichwhaw,  my  mother,  R.  W. 
44.] 

wutcheken,  wutchegen,  it  bears,  yields, 
brings  forth,  produces:  wutchegen  mee- 
chum,  it  bore  fruit,  Luke  8,  8;  wutcheken 
.  .  .  ahnondsash,  it  yielded  almonds, 
Num.  17, 8;  pish  wutcheken  .  .  .  u-aego- 
gish,  he  shall  yield  .  .  .  dainties,  Gen. 
49,  20;  pish  wutcheken  pasuk  bath,  (the 
land)  shall  yield  one  bath,  Is.  5,  10. 
wutehekoocD:  wunnutcheg  wutchekaxo,  his 
hand  was  leprous,  Ex.  4,  6. 
wutcheksuay^u,  -iyeu,  adv.  westward, 
to  the  west,  Gen.  13,  14;  uiitcheksuau, 
northwestward,  Acts  27, 12  ( =puhtadtu - 
niyeu  and  inaquamittinniyeu,  Mass.  Ps., 
Ps.  75,  6;  103,  12;  107,  3). 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENC4LISH  DICTIONARY 


209 


wutcheksuayeu,  -iyeu — continued. 

[Narr.  chekesu,  the  northwest,  R.  W. 
83;  Chekesmvand,  the  western  god,  ibid. 
110.] 

wutchepwaiyeu,  -woiyeu,  -woayeu, 
adv.  eastward,  to  the  east:  wutche 
wutchepwoiyeu,  from  the  east,  Is.  41,  2; 
Ps.  107,  3.  ^ 

[Narr.  chepewessin, the  northeast  wind, 
R.W.  83.] 

wutchepwosh,  n.  the  east  wind,  Job  27, 
21  [the  northeast  wind  (?) ;  see  (Narr. ) 
chepewessin]  ( imtchepwoshe  wittin,  east 
wind,  C.  158) :  suppos.  wadchepwashik, 
when  the  wind  is  east,  when  the  east 
wind  blows,  Is.  27,  8. 

*wutchettuonganog,  ancestors,  C.  162. 
See  mchetuonganog,  parents. 

*wutcheyeue,  adv.  merely,  C.  229. 

wutchiinneat,  v.  i.  to  be  profited  or  ad¬ 
vantaged  (to  profit  by).  See  cochiin- 
neat. 

wutchimau,  v.  (he  blames?) ;  pass,  he  is 
blamed,  1  Tim.  3,  2. 

wutchinat,  wutchinneat.  See  wadchi- 
■ not ;  *6teshem. 

*wutchipattukque  me  sunk,  curled 
hair,  C.  168. 

wutchomqut:  ut  ivutchomqut  kehtahhan- 
nit,  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  Amos  9,  3. 

wutchonquom:  wutchonquom  mcitugqut, 
to  the  root  of  the  tree,  Matt.  3,  10, 
=  wutchuhquoin,  Luke  3,  9.  Cf.  wad- 
chabuk,  a  root. 

*wutchumonate,  v.  t.  to  blame:  nen 
ncochum,  I  blame;  wutcMttinneat,  to  be 
blamed,  C.  182.  See  *ncochum,  I  blame. 

"wutohkinneat,  wadohkinneat,  v.  i. 
to  be  an  inhabitant  of  or  to  dwell  in 
(a  land  or  country),  Neh.  11,  2:  yeu 
nootolikin,  here  will  I  dwell,  Ps.  132,  14; 
wadohkeomp,  I  dwelt,  Gen.  24,  37;  uttoli 
wodohkeyog,  ut  toh  wodohke,  (the  land) 
which  ye  shall  inhabit,  wherein  I 
(shall)  dwell,  Num.  35,  34  (cf.  uttiyeu 
kutohk,  what  is  thy  country?  Jonah 
1,8);  pass,  wutokeinat,  to  be  inhabited, 
Is.  13,  20;  hoivan  woh  wadohket  kco 
.  .  .  viadchumut,  who  may  dwell  in 
thy  .  .  .  hill?  Ps.  15,  1;  wutohkish  en 
ohkit,  dwell  thou  in  the  land,  Gen. 
26,  2;  neg  wodohkitcheg,  they  who  dwell 
in  (a  place  or  country),  the  inhabit¬ 
ants  of,  Gen.  26,  7;  Is.  9,  2.  This 
B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 14 


wutohkinneat,  etc. — continued. 

is  one  of  a  considerable  number  of 
words  which  Eliot  made  use  of  to  ex¬ 
press,  approximately,  an  idea  which 
the  Indian  was  slow  to  receive — that  of 
fixed  and  permanent  habitation.  Thus 
ohtauun&t,  to  possess  (a  place);  apin- 
neat ,  to  be  or  remain  in  a  place,  to  stay; 
wutayinneat,  to  be  in  a  place  named,  in 
this  place  (yeu,  ayeuonk ),  and,  so,  to 
dwell  in  (a  house,  a  tent,  etc.);  weetom- 
onat  (from  wetu),  to  dwell  with,  to  live 
in  the  house  of  or  with;  wutohkinneat, 
to  be  of  the  land  of  ( wut-ohke ),  to  in¬ 
habit,  etc.  See  wadohkinneat. 
wutohtimoin,  n.  a  nation,  Is.  60, 12;  Jer. 
7,  28  (wuttohtimoin,  C.  157);  pi.  tcutoh- 
timoneash,  Gen.  10,  32;  Is.  40,  15,  17: 
wutohtimoinneunk,  the  nations  (collec¬ 
tively  or  corporately),  Jer.  31,  10. 
wutohtu,  n.  an  inhabitant  of  or  one  be- 
longingto  aplace:  Sopater  wutohtu  Berea, 
‘Sopater  of  Berea’,  Acts  20,  4;  wutch 
wutohtudut  Israel,  (a  captive)  ‘from  the 
land  of  Israel’,  2  K.  5,  2;  wutohtu,  ‘he 
dwelt’  (was  a  dweller)  in,  etc.,  Gen.  20, 
1;  26,  6. 

wutompeuk,  wuttompek,  n.  (his)  jaws, 
Judg.  15,  16,  19:  wutombeukancoaoash, 
their  jaws,  Job  29,  17;  adj.  wutompuk- 
one,  Prov.  30,  14. 

wutonkquosketueuonk,  n.  poison,  Ps. 

58,  4.  See  uhquosket. 
wutonse[nat  (?)],  v.  i.  to  proceed  from 
or  grow  from:  nutonsem  kah  noom  Godut, 
‘I  proceeded  forth  and  came  from 
God’,  John  8,  42. 

wutontseonk,  n.  descent,  lineage  (a 
proceeding  from),  2  Chr.  31,  19;  pi. 
-ongash,  ‘genealogies’,  2  Chr.  12,  15. 
See  ontseu. 

wutou:  vu  adtit.  teuton  ummeetsuonk,  she 
‘bringeth  her  food  from  afar’,  Prov. 
31,  14. 

wutcoshimau,  n.  appel.  the  father,  in¬ 
dividual  for  the  class,  Mark  13, 12.  See 
coshe. 

Wutcoshin(ne),  n.  the  Father;  obj. 

Wutooshinneuh,  John  6,  45,  46. 
wutcoshinneunk,  n.  the  fathers  (col¬ 
lectively),  Num.  31,  26;  Mai.  2,  10; 
1  John  2,  13.  See  ooshe. 
wuttaeiyeu,  adj.  inan.  behind,  2  Sam. 
10,  9.  [Probably  for  wutamiyeu.] 


210 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN’  25 


*wuttagkesinneat,  to  be  wet:  ncotdgkes, 
I  am  wet;  nootagkess'tmun,  we  are  wet, 
C.  215.  See  ivuttogki. 
wuttah,  his  heart.  See  irittah  ( m’tah ). 
wuttahhamonk,  -unk,  n.  a  well,  Gen. 
21,  25,  30;  24,  11;  John  4,  11:  Jakob 
cothomonk,  Jacob’s  well,  John  4,  6;  wut- 
tolihomonk,  ‘the  well’,  ibid.  See  kuttah- 
ham,  he  digs  (it). 

#wuttah.imneash.  (Narr. ),  n.  pi.  straw¬ 
berries,  R.  W.  90  ( unittahminneoh ,  a 
strawberry,  C.  164). 

[Chip,  odeimini,  heart  berry,  Bar. 
441.  Del.  wte  him,  Zeisb.  ( =wuttah- 
minne).  Alg.  oteimin,  pi.  -Ran.] 
wuttahtukquosli,  n.  pi.  (his)  temples, 
Judg.  5,  26  \wut-aeetaue,  on  each  side 
(?),  or  wetahtu- kquosh ,  brothers  or  sis¬ 
ters  (?)]. 

wuttaihe,  his,  (is)  his,  belongs  to  him, 
Lev.  27,  15,  19,  26:  nuttaiheh  kah  nen 
wuttaiheuh,  (he)  is  mine  and  I  am  his, 
Cant.  2,  16;  nish  vmttaiheash  Cesar,  the 
things  which  are  Caesar’s,  Mark  12,  17; 
noh  wadtiheit,  ‘he  whose  right  it  is’,  to 
whom  it  belongs,  Ezek.21,27;  nuttaihe, 
(is)  mine,  belongs  to  me,  Ps.  60,  7; 
nippe  nutaihen,  the  water  is  ours,  Gen. 
26,  20;  wame  ne  naurnan  nuttaihe,  all 
that  thou  seest  is  mine,  Gen.  31,  43; 
•wame  : .  .  nuttahein,  all .  .  .  is  ours,  Gen. 
31, 16;  ahtdonk  kuttahein,  the  inheritance 
shall  be  ours,  Mark  12,  7 ;  wame  nutlai- 
heog,  kuttaiheog,  all  (an.  pi.)  mine  are 
thine,  John  17,  10. 

wuttamantamunat,  v.  t.  to  be  troubled, 
to  have  care  or  trouble  about  anything 
( wuttanantamunat,  to  care,  C.  184): 
kootamantam,  thou  art  careful,  full  of 
care,  Luke  10,  42;  wuitamantam,  he  is 
or  was  troubled,  Dan.  5,  9;  nootamana- 
tam,  I  am  troubled,  Ps.  38,  6;  wutta- 
manatamcok,  be  ye  troubled,  Is.  32,  11. 
See  wuttooantamundt. 

[Narr.  netop  notammduntam,  friend,  I 
am  busy,  R.  W.  49.  Cree  dthem-issu, 

he  is  difficult  (?); - ehayoo,  he  per- 

plexeth,  embarrasseth  him,  Howse.] 
*wuttamauog,  n.  tobacco;  wuttdmmasim, 
give  me  tobacco,  R.  W.  55;  wuttdmma- 
gon  (and  hopuonek) ,  a  pipe,  ibid.  56. 
Peq.  vmttummunc,  a  pipe,  Stiles.  Mass. 
sun  woh  kcotam,  will  you  smoke?  C.  241, 
=kaotattam  (?),  drink  (?).  [wuttam  (he 


*wuttamauog' — continued. 

smokes)  is,  I  think,  for  wuttamau,  t.  an. 
form  of  vmtt.attam,  he  drinks.  Cf.  the 
Abn.  Sddman,  ‘petun’( tobacco);  Sdamc 
( =  wuttamau ,  El.),  il  petune,  Rasies.] 
See  uhpuwnkash;  wuttoohpoannweonish. 
wuttameheonat,  v.  t.  an.  to  trouble,  to 
disturb,  to  discomfort,  to  hinder:  aotam- 
eheonaoont,  to  trouble  them,  2  Chr.  32, 
18;  ahque  wuttamheh,  do  not  trouble  me, 
Luke  11,  7;  ahque  wuttamheh  kuhhog,  do 
not  trouble  thyself,  Luke  7,  6;  howan 
vmttamhehkitch,  let  no  man  trouble  me, 
Gal.  6,  17  ( wuttamhudnat ,  to  hinder; 
ncotamehh  uwa m ,  I  hinder,  C.  194). 

[Narr.  cotdmmish  ( kcotamehish ,  C. 
194),  I  hinder  you;  cotammdme,  cotam- 
rne,  you  trouble  me,  R.  IV.  49.  Cree 
ootumme-thoo,  he  is  busy;  ootumme- 
hayoo,  he  interrupts  him,  Howse  82.] 
wuttaonk,  n.  a  path:  um-may-eue  umta- 
ongancoash,  ‘the  paths  of  their  way’, 
Job  6, 18;  urnttaonganit,  ‘in  their  paths’, 
Prov.  2,  15;  ivuttaonganash,  her  paths, 
Prov.  3,  17. 

[Abn.  an8dfi,  chemin;  (suppos. )  ail8- 
dik.  ( may  is  not  found  in  Rasies.)] 
*wuttap6hquot,  wet  (weather),  C.  176. 
See  vmttogki. 

wuttash,  pi.  wuttaj,  let  it  seethe  (boil)? 
Ezek.  24,  5  (or  is  wuttaj  for  -cosh,  2d 
pers.  sing.?).  Cf.  wussue. 
wuttat,  adv.  behind  (El.  Gr.  21),  Judg. 
18,  12;  behind  all,  hindermost,  Gen. 
33,  2  ( wultate ,  after,  behind,  C.  235): 
wuttat  wagig,  they  who  are  last,  Matt. 
19,30;  uodtdt ohtagish,  ‘things behind’, 
Phil.  3,  13.  See  wutamiyeu. 

[Del.  wtenk,  afterwards,  Zeisb.  Gr. 
172;  at  last,  the  last,  ibid.  178.] 
wuttattamoonk,  cotta-,  n.  drink,  Matt. 
25,  35,  42:  nootlattamoonk,  my  drink,  Ps. 
102,  9;  cot-,  his  drink,  Is.  32,  6. 
wuttattamunat,  wadt-,  v.  i.  to  drink, 
2  Sam.  11,  11;  Neh.  8,  12;  Esth.  3,  15: 
vmttattam,  he  drank,  1  K.  19,  6;  mittat- 
tamwog,  they  drank,  Ex.  24, 11;  toh  wad- 
tattam,  what  he  drinks,  2  Sam.  19,  35; 
wuttatlamog,  if  you  drink,  1  Cor.  10,  31; 
umttattash,  drink  thou,  Gen.  24,  14,  18; 
Lev.  10,  9;  umttattamcok,  drink  ye,  Cant. 
5, 1;  wuttattaj,  let  him  drink,  John  7,  37 
(nmtdttam,  I  drink;  ndgum  wxdtdttam, 
he  drinks,  C.  189).  ( wuttattamunat  has 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


211 


wuttattamunat,  etc. — continued, 
the  form  of  a  verb  transitive  and  fre¬ 
quentative.  The  earlier  form  of  the 
intransitive  is  not  found  in  Eliot.  As 
meechinat  means  primarily  to  eat  vege¬ 
tal  food,  the  radical  verb  from  which 
wuttattamunat  is  derived  signified  to 
drink  water.  This  earlier  form,  without 
reduplication,  may  be  traced  in  some 
of  the  phrases  given  by  Roger  Williams 
and  Cotton :  aquie  waumatous  ( ahque  wa- 
meattoush),  do  not  drink  all,  R.  W.  34; 
sun  woh  kcotam  eyeu,  will  yon  smoke  it 
now?  [i.  e.  drink  (?)],  C.  241.  There 
was  another  word,  meaning  to  drink 
(intransitive),  whose  original  form  it  is 
not  easy  to  trace  in  its  compounds. 
The  radical  appears  to  be  sip,  related 
perhaps  to  saupae,  sabcie  (q.  v.),  sup- 
pequash  (tears);  possibly  to  sepe,  sep. 
kogkeissippamwaen,  a  drunkard  ( koghe - 
sip-,  C. ;  kakesup-,  Mass.  Ps. ) ;  tohneit 
wonk  ohksippamwean,  ‘if  you  will  leave 
off  drinking’,  C.  240  [ahque-sip-  (?)] ; 
nuttannaotam  matokqs  woh  matta  missip- 
pano  sokanunk,  ‘I  will  command  the 
cloud  that  it  rain  no  rain  upon  it’,  Is. 
5,  6;  tdpsippamhettit  ( tdpsuppamwehhittit , 
Mass.  Ps. ),  ‘when  they  have  well 
drunk’  [ tdpi-sippam-} ,  John  2,  10; 
nup-poingranatsum  coweeksipp&onk,  the 
(sweet?  wekon ?)  juice  of  my  pomegran¬ 
ates,  Cant.  8,  2.  Cf.  mussuppeg,  a  tear. 

[Narr.  niccciwkatone,  I  am  thirsty, 
R.  W.  33  ( =nuk-kohkuttcon ) ;  pdutous  no- 
tatdm,  give  me  drink;  vmttdttash,  drink, 
ibid.  34;  wuttattumulta,  let  us  drink, 
ibid.  35.] 

wuttattamwaitch,  n.  a  spoon,  Kum.  7, 
62,  68;  pl.+woa/t,  v.  86;  a  cup,  Jer.  25, 
15;  1  Cor.  10,  21;  wuttattamwaidj,  Gen. 
44,  2  ( nootattamwaetch ,  my  cup,  C.  161) . 
From  wutlattamwehednat,  to  give  to 
drink,  to  cause  to  drink,  ‘let  him  (it) 
give  drink  to  me’. 

[Narr.  kundm,  a  spoon;  pi.  kunna- 
mauog,  R.  W.  50.] 

wuttattash6nat,  v.  t.  an.  to  hide  (a 
person),  Ex.  2,  3:  vmttattashnh,  she  hid 
him,  Ex.  2,  2.  [=  wuttat-attahshdnat,  to 

hold  behind  anyone  (?);  suffix  an.  form 
from  adtashau,  he  hides.]  Of.  Wauta- 
cone  (?);  wuttunkhumundt. 

[Marginal  note. — “Wrong.”] 


wuttaun,  wuttaunoh.,  (his)  daughter; 
appel.  wuttaunin  ( wuttonin ,  C.  162),  a 
daughter,  Matt.  10,  35;  constr.  wuttau¬ 
noh,  the  daughter  of,  1  Chr.  2,  49;  pi. 
VMttaunog,  wuttanog,  wutlanuog:  nutlau- 
nes  ( nuttonnees ,  C.  162),  my  daughter, 
Deut.  22, 17;  Judg.  11,  35;  kultaunes,  thy 
daughter,  Gen.  29, 18;  nuttaunndnog,  our 
daughters,  Gen.  34, 9;  kuttauncooog,  your 
daughters,  Gen.  34,  9;  Jer.  29,  6;  wul- 
tonoh  nookas,  my  mother’s  daughter, 
Gen.  20,  12;  wutlaunhmk,  n.  coll,  the 
daughters,  all  the  daughters,  Judg.  21, 
21.  Cf.  weetahiu;  weetompas.  See  adtde- 
kit,  second  daughter. 

[Narr.  nlttadnis,  my  daughter,  R.  W. 
45.  Del.  wdan,  daughter;  tvda  nail,  his 
daughter,  Zeisb.] 

wuttaunaenat  (?),  to  have  (as  father  or 
mother)  daughters:  kah  ompetak  wutlo- 
neu,  ‘  and  afterwards  she  bare  a  daugh¬ 
ter’,  Gen.  30,  21;  matta  pish  kcotauniyeu, 
thou  shalt  not  have  daughters,  Jer.  16, 
2.  Cf.  ivunndmonaenat. 
wuttenantamoonk,  n.  (his)  will,  wish, 
Mark  3,  35;  the  will  of,  the  purpose  of: 
noh  aseit  wuttenantamoonk  ncosli,  he  who 
doeth  the  will  of  my  father,  Matt.  7,  21; 
kuttenantamoonk  n  nnach,  thy  will  be 
done,  Matt.  6, 10  ( — • —  ne  nqj,  Luke  11, 
2);  matta  nuttenantamoonk,  gut  kuttaihe 
nnaj,  not  my  will  hut  thine  be  done, 
Luke  22,  42.  See  unnantamcooitk. 
wuttin,  wuttinne,  he  himself,  she  her¬ 
self,  ille  ipse,  the  emphatic  pronoun 
of  the  3d  pers.  sing. :  uttoh  wuttin  touus- 
sunum,  how  has  she  become  a  desola¬ 
tion?  Zeph.  2,  15.  See  unnaiinneat. 
*wuttininumekossinat,  to  serve:  wuttin - 
numuhkoattinneat,  to  be  served,  C.  208. 
wuttinneumuhkauaonk,  n.  his  service, 
a  serving  (him) ,  service  rendered  to, 
Ezra  6,  18. 

wuttinneumuhkauonat,  v.  t.  an.  to 
serve  (him),  2  Chr.  29,  11;  34,  33: 
umttinneumohkauaog,  they  served  (him), 
Gen.  14,  4;  kmten'fimuhkauunup,  I  have 
served  thee,  Gen.  30,  26;  cans,  wut- 
tinneumuhkonuninumukup,  thou  wast 
made  to  serve,  Is.  14,  3;  matta  kmtin- 
ninneumuhkdnuwahinnoo,  I  have  not 
caused  thee  to  serve,  Is.  43,  23. 
wuttinniin  (?),  3d  pers.  sing.  pres,  indie, 
from  wuttinnaiinneat,  =  wut-unne-aiin- 


212 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  2 b 


wuttinniin — continued . 
neat,  to  be  like  (or  such  as)  himself,  to  be 
of  his  (own)  kind(?):  nedne  unnantog  ut 
wnttahhut,  ne  wuttinnim,  ‘as  he  think- 
eth  in  his  heart,  so  is  he’,  Prov.  23,  7; 
neaniit  wutiinneumin,  ne  vmttmniin  vms- 
sontimomun,  ‘as  with  the  servant,  so 
with  his  master’,  Is.  24,  2;  wvMinniin 
howan,  ‘whosoever’,  Matt.  16,  24,  25 
( wutlinnaiin  howan,  Prov.  6, 29);  ne  pish 
wuttinniin,  ‘so  will  be  his  manner’,  1 
Sam.  27,  11.  See  unnavinneal. 
wuttinnohkoe,  wuttinuhkoe,  adj.  and 
advf  right  (dexter),  Ex.  29,  20;  Lev. 
S,  23,  24;  Rev.  10,  2:  wuttinohkdunit,  in 
his  right  hand,  Matt.  27,  29;  Rev.  2,  1 
(unninuhkoe  menitcheg,  the  right  hand, 
C.  157).  See  imUtinnohkou;  nohkou. 
wuttinnohkou,  (his)  right  hand,  Dan. 

12,  7:  nuttinnohkou,  my  right  hand,  Ps. 
73,  23;  kuttinnohkou,  thy  right  hand, 
Ps.  18,  35;  irutch  rtmltinuhkounexyeue, 
from  the  right  side  (of  the  temple,  etc. ) , 
2Chr.  23, 10.  See muttinnohk&u;  nohkou. 

wuttinnrowaonk,  n.  (his)  command¬ 
ment,  Acts  15,  5;  the  Word,  John  1,  1 
( =  kuttoou'onk,  ibid. ) :  nuttinaoivaongash, 
my  commandments,  Gen.  26,  5.  [ un - 

7icowaonk,  from  unnaow&nat,  annamau 
(q.  V-),  he  commands.]  Cf.  kuttoowonk, 
kuttcowongash . 

wuttinnum,  n.  (his  or  her)  servant,  Gen. 
16,  3:  wuttinnumun,  Gen.  24,  5,  9;  wut- 
linneumun,  a  servant,  Lev.  25,  40  (pi. 
wuttinninneumun,  v.  44);  kuttinninneum, 
thy  servants,  Lev.  25,  44;  nuttinnum, 
‘mv  maid’  (servant),  Gen.  16,2;  ‘nut- 
tineneum,  my  man’,  El.  Gr.  12;  vmttin- 
neumolx,  his  servant  (constr. ),  2  Sam. 

13,  18;  wuttinnumoh,  Gen.  30,  7;  kittin- 
num,  thy  servant,  Gen.  16, 6;  kittinneum, 
Neh.  1,  7,  8;  pish  kaotinninneumun,  he 
shall  serve  thee,  Lev.  25,  40  ( wuttin - 
ninumin,  a  servant;  nuttinninnuum,  my  ! 
servant;  wuttinninnumoh ,  his  servant,  C.  | 
167;  vruttinnumin,  a  servant,  ibid.  208).  j 

wuttinnumuhkausu,  adj.  an.  (is  or  was) 
serving,  Gen.  29,  20  (he  served), 
wmttinnumuhkausuonk,  n.  service 
done,  the  doing  of  service,  Ezek.  29, 18. 
wuttinnumunneat,  v.  i.  to  be  a  servant, 
to  serve,  Ex.  21,  7. 

wuttinniimunneunk,  n.  coll,  the  serv¬ 
ants  collectively,  Ex.  21,  7;  wuttinneu- 
munneunk,  Eph.  6,  5. 


wuttinnunkumoin,  wuttinonk-,  n.  a 

kinsman,  Ruth  3, 12;  4, 1.  See  weetomp- 
ain. 

wuttinuh,  he  said  to  him:  howan  woh 
wuttugqun  vttoh,  etc.,  who  can  tell  him 
how,  etc.,  Eccl.  8,  7.  See  hennau. 

[Note.— The  definition  was  not  completed. 
Above  the  words  “said  to”  the  compiler  wrote 
“commanded”  in  pencil.] 

wuttinuhkoe.  See  wuttinnohkoe. 

wuttinwhunnutcheg,  wuttinwhun- 
itch,  n.  (his)  finger,  Matt.  23,  4;  Lev. 
4,  17,  30;  ( wuttinuhwhunitch )  Lev.  4,  25: 
nut-,  my  linger,  John  20,  25;  kut-,  thy 
finger,  v.  27;  kehtaoquanUch,  keituhq-, 
(great  finger,)  the  thumb,  Ex.  29,  20; 
Lev.  8,  23,  24;  uppuhkukquanitch,  (head 
of  finger,)  the  tip  of  the  finger,  John 
16,  24. 

*wuttip  (Narr.),  the  (his)  brain.  “In 
the  brain  their  opinion  is,  that  the  soul 
keeps  her  chief  seat  and  residence.” — 
R.  W.  58. 

*wuttishau  (Mass.  Ps. ),  =  a>tshoh,  El.,  in 
John  3,  8,  ‘the  wind  bloweth’;  wutti- 
shonk,  =  wutjishont ,  ibid. 

wuttitchuwan,  wuttitchcowan,  wad- 
tutchuan,  defect,  v.  (it)  flows  or 
flowed  from  (after  nippe,  sepu,  etc.,  in 
sing,  and  pi.,  with  or  without  the  pi. 
affix  -ash),  Ps.  105,  41;  John  7,  38: 
sepupog  wuttitchuwan,  ‘rivers  of  water 
run  down’  (from),  Ps.  119,  136;  sepu- 
ash  wadtutclvuog,  rivers  run  from,  Eccl. 

I,  7;  nuppe  wuttitchudnup  kah  kimitch- 
uan  anmmitchuwan,  ‘  the  waters  gushed 
out  (from  the  rock)  and  the  streams 
overflowed’,  Ps.  78,  20.  The  several 
words  which  describe  running  water 
are  used  by  Eliot,  with  little  appar¬ 
ent  regard  to  grammatical  construc¬ 
tion,  as  verb,  noun,  or  adjective,  as 
the  construction  requires.  The  radical 
is  uncertain,  perhaps  inttche  or  each 
(q.  v.).  In  Gen.  2,  10-14,  are  other 
forms  of  these  compounds:  seip  ne  au- 
shunk,  the  river  which  goeth  toward 
(flowing),  v.  14;  seip  ne  quanupishunk, 
which  compasseth  (flowing  about),  v. 

II,  13;  seip  vmtehishau,  a  river  went  out 
of  (flowed  from),  v.  10.  Cf.  anuwutchu- 
wan,  anitchewan,  it  overflowed,  overflow¬ 
ing;  kussitchuan,  it  flowed  in  a  stream 
(n.  a  stream) ;  pamltchvan, pumitchmran , 
it  ran  or  flowed  (generally  or  indefi- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


213 


wuttitchuwan,  etc. — continued. 

nitely);  sohirutchuan,  it  flowed  out  of, 
forth  from;  ,s ohkhetchuan,  it  gushed  out, 
burst  out,  Is.  35,  6;  unnitcliuan,  it  flowed 
to,  ran  to;  woweeyonchuan,  it  flowed 
round  about,  1  K.  18,  35. 

[Abn.  ari’tsSann,  il  coule,  v.  g.  le 
sang.  ] 

wuttogki,  n.  moisture,  Luke  8,  6.  See 
ogqushki,  wet,  moist;  *vmttap6hquot,  wet 
weather;  wuttagkesinneat,  to  become  wet. 

[Peq.  wuttuggio  eyew-keezuk  weenugh, 
wet  today,  very;  waughtuggachy ,  a' deer, 
i.  e.  wet  nose’,  Stiles.] 
wuttogque.  See  ogqu'e. 
*wuttohkohkcominne6nasli,  pi.  black¬ 
berries,  C.  164. 

wutt6huppa[enat].  See  uyuttuhppa[en- 
at\. 

wuttompek.  See  wutompeuk. 
wuttontauunat,  v.  t.  to  climb  to  or  into: 
wutt&ntauadt ,  if  he  climb  up  (into  it),  j 
John  10,  1;  kutbntauohtou,  he  climbed  I 
up,  went  by  climbing  (on  his  hands  and 
feet),  1  Sam.  14,  13;  nontaudheltit  kesuk- 
qut,  if  they  climb  up  to  heaven,  attain 
to  by  climbing,  Amos  9,  2.  See  toh- 
kootciuunat. 

[Narr.  atauntowash,  climb  the  tree; 
ntduntawem,  I  climb,  R.  W.  91.] 
wuttoohpocomweonish,  n.  tobacco,  C. 
241.  See  (Narr.)  wuttamduog;  uhpu- 
conkash. 

*wuttoonat,  to  complain:  ncotdnvam,  I 
complain;  nootowap,  I  did  complain, 
C.  186;  sun  kcotcowam  nuhhog,. did  you 
complain  of  me?  ibid. 

*wuttotukkon :  teadche  wuttotukkon,  ‘it. 

jerketh  or  suddenly  twitcheth’,  C.  195. 
wuttcoantamunat,  v.  t.  to  care  about,  to 
be  careful  of,  inan.  obj.  ( wuttanantamu - 
not,  to  care,  C.  186):  wutUoantam,  he 
careth  for,  1  Cor.  7,  32,  34.  Cf.  wutta- 
mantamunat. 

wuttcohuppa[enat] .  See  VMttuhppa\_en- 
at\. 

*wuttcokummissin,  a  grandmother,  C. 
162:  koknmmus,  thy  grandmother,  2 
Tim.  1,  5;  ( kokummes )  thy  aunt,  Lev. 

18,  14. 


wuttcon,  (his)  mouth, the  mouth  of  (him), 
Ex.  4,  11;  Prov.  10,  31.  See  muttcon. 
*wutta>nantamoonk  (?),  n.  ‘valor’, 
Man.  Pom.  86,  1.  1. 

*wuttd5tchikkmneasiii,  a  grandfather, 
C.  162. 

*wuttcowosketompaog,  pi.  ‘men  of  high 
degree’,  Ps.  62,  7. 
wuttugk.  See  wuhtnk. 
wuttuhhunk,  n.  a  paddle,  Dent.  23,  13. 

[Narr.  imtkunck,  a  paddle  or  oar, 
R.  W.  99;  pautous  nenotehunck  [= paud - 
taush  noottuhhunk'],  bring  hither  my 
paddle,  ibid.  Del.  tahacan,  paddle,  oar, 
Zeisb.Yoc.  29.] 

wuttuhppa[enat  (?)],  wu.ttcoh.up-, 
wadhup-,  wuttohup-,  v.  i.  to  draw 
water  (umttuhhupponat,  Mass.  Ps.,  John 
4,  7,  15):  wuttuhuppaog,  wutuhpaog,  they 
drew  water,  Ex.  2,  16;  2  Sam.  23,  16 
( =  quomphippaog,  1  Chr.  11,  18);  icut- 
tuhuppak,  draw  ye  water,  Nah.  3,  14; 
wadhupdhettit,  when  they  drew  water, 
Gen.  24,  13;  ncothupau  I  drew  water 
for  (them),  Gen.  24,  19;  wutlohupauau, 
she  drew  water  for  (them),  v.  20.  Cf. 
sokhippog,  ‘draw  out’  (water),  John  2,  8; 
numwdpag  .  .  .  nippe,  fill  (it)  with 
water,  v.  7. 

[Del.  thup  peek,  a  well,  Zeisb.  Voc. 

12.] 

wuttuhq,  wuttuhqun,  wuttuk  \qwut- 
uhtug,  of  the  tree],  n.  a  branch  or  bough 
of  a  tree,  Gen.  49,  22;  Jer.  23,  5;  33,  15; 
firewood,  Prov.  26,  20:  wudtuk,  wood, 
Is.  60,  17  (wuttoohqunash  or  mishash  (? ) , 
wood,  C.  164;  pohchatuk  (from  poksha- 
nat,  to  be  broken,  or  from  pohcheau,  it 
divides,  branches),  a  bough,  ibid.). 
See  vmhtuk. 

[Narr. wudluckqun,  ‘apieceof  wood’; 
wudtuckquanash,  lay  on  wood  (on  the 
fire),  R.  W.  48;  pauchautaqunnisash,  pi. 
branches  (of  a  tree),  R.  W.  89.] 
*wuttuhtuhkomunat,  v.  i.  to  arrive: 
ncDtuhtuhkom,  I  arrive,  C. 

[Cree  tuckoo-sin,  he  arrives  (bjr  land), 
Howse  50.  Narr.  ntiauke  wushem,  I  came 
by  land,  R.  IV.  31.] 
wuttuk.  See  vmhtuk;  vmttuhq. 
wuttunkhumunat,  v.  t.  to  cover  with: 
wuttunkhumun  monak,  she  covered  it 


214 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


wuttunkhumunat — continued. 

with  a  cloth,  1  Sam.  19,  13.  See  also 
unkhamundt;  cf.  *  Wautacone. 
wuttunkin[6nat]  ahtompeh,  to  bend 
a  bow:  noli  wadtunkinont  ahtompeh,  he 
who  bends  a  bow;  wuttunkinonch  wutoh- 
tompeh,  let  him  bend  his  bow,  Jer.  51, 
3;  but  kenaau  wonkindgish  ohtomp,  you 
that  bend  the  bow,  Jer.  50,  14,  29;  neg 


wuttunkin[onat]  ahtompeh — cont’d. 
paotunkanoncheg  ahtompeh,  they  who 
bend  the  bow,  Jer.  46,  9;  Is.  66, 19.  See 
poolonkunau;  wonkinonat. 
wutuhshame,  adv.  (?)  on  this  side,  Josh. 
8,  33  (opposed  to  ongkoue,  on  that  side, 
beyond):  wutuhshame  sepuut,  on  this 
side  of  the  river,  Dan.  12,  5  ( wuttoshi - 
maiyeu,  on  this  side,  C.  235). 


Y 


ya.  See  yo;  yodi. 

yaneinn:  wanne  yaneinno  vjutch  matta- 
inog,  ‘is  not  seemly  for  a  fool’,  Prov. 
26, 1. 

yanequohh.ro,  n.  a  veil,  Gen.  24,  65, 
=puUogquequohhou,  Gen.  38, 14,  =ong- 
quequohhou,  Ex.  34,  33;  2  Cor.  3,  14. 
yaneyeu:  pish  ydneyeuoo,  it  shall  be 
as,  or  like,  Is.  17,  5  (circumstance  to 
circumstance  or  fact  to  fact);  ne  wonk 
yane,  and  likewise  (in  the  same  man¬ 
ner),  John  6,  11.  Cf.  neane;  onatuh; 
tatuppe. 

yanitchan  [ yanitanum-mdcheg ,  he  shuts 
the  hand  (?)],  n.  a  handful,  Lev.  2,  2; 
pi.  -\-ash,  Ezek.  13,  19:  nequtnutchan,  a 
handful  of,  1  K.  17,  12. 
yanittanumunat,  yean-,  v.  t.  to  shut 
(a  door,  gate,  etc.):  ydnitanum  squont, 
he  shuts  the  door,  Judg.  3,  23;  yanil- 
timumwog,  they  shut  the  gate,  Josh.  2, 
7;  yednittanumau  (v.  i.),  he  shut  the 
door,  Gen.  19,  6;  pish  kednittanum, 
thou  shaltshut  the  door,  2  K.  4,  4. 
yanunumunat,  v.  t.  to  shut:  ydnunum 
ivuskesukquash,  he  shuts  their  eyes,  Is. 
44,  18;  yanunush,  shut  thou  (their 
eyes),  Is.  6,  10;  noli  yanunuk,  he  who 
shuts  (his  eyes)  Is.  33,  15. 

[Xarr.  yeaush,  shut  thedoor  after  you, 
R.  W.  50.] 

yau  [ yauwe\ ,  num.  four  (El.  Gr.  14), 
Ezek.l,  10:  yauog,  yauooog,  an.  pi.  four 
(living  beings),  Gen.  14,9;  Ezek.  1, 5, 8; 
yauunash,  pi.  inan.  four  (things),  Prov. 
30,  18,  21;  yauut  nai,  four  square,  Ex. 
38,  1 ;  yauquinogkok,  on  the  fourth  day, 
2  Chr.  20,  26;  nabo  yau,  fourteen; 
yauunchag  (-kodtog,  -kodtash),  forty, 
El.  Gr.  14. 

[Narr.  ydh,  four,  R.  W.  41.  Peq.  yauh, 
Stiles.  Del.  ne  wo,  Zeisb.] 


yean  [ yd-en ,  to  yonder,  thither] ,  prep,  to, 
as  far  as:  wutch  .  .  .  yean,  from  ...  to, 
Mic.  7, 12,  =  yaen,  Zech.  9,  10.  See  yeu 
unne. 

yeanittanumunat.  See  ydnittanumundt. 
yeu,  (1)  demonstr.  pron.  inan.  this:  an. 
yeuoh;  pi.  inan.  yeush,  an.  yeug,  these; 
pi.  an.  yeah,  these  (accus. ),  Gen.  15, 10; 
uttiyeu,  interrog.  which?;  pi.  uttiyeush 
(El.  Gr.  7);  yeu  nepauz,  this  month,  Ex. 
12,  2;  yeu  kodtumuk,  this  year,  Luke  13, 
7;  yeuwaj,  for  this  cause  (El.  Gr.  22); 
yeu  in  kali  yeu  in,  thus  and  thus,  2  Sam. 
17, 15.  (2)  adv.  here,  in  this  place,  2  K. 
2,  8;  Gen.  22, 1,  —yeuut,  Gen.  21,  23;  yeu 
nogque,  toward  this  way  (El.  Gr.  21); 
hither,  2  K.  2,  8,  See  ayeu. 

[Del.  yun,  here,  Zeisb.  Gr.  171.  Quir. 
yeuoh,  Pier.  5.  Narr.  yo  (q.  v. ).  Cree 
(an.)  ow'd,  (inan.)  oom'a,  this,  Howse 
188.  Chip,  (an.)  vsowh,  (inan.)  ooivh, 
Howse  188.  Micm.  St,  ‘ici’,  Maillard 
30.] 

*yeuh  (Narr.),  man  ( wenygh ,  woman), 
Stiles. 

[Peq.  nehycugh,  my  wife;  neliyusha- 
mug,  my  husband,  Stiles.] 
yeuhquog,  n.  pi.  lice,  Ps.  105,  31,  —yeu- 
kco{og),  yeuhkoo(og),  Ex.  8,  16,  17,  18. 
yeuoh,  this,  (an.)  ‘this  man’,  El.  Gr.  7. 

See  (Narr.)  ewb;  el.noh. 
yeu  unne,  adv.  in  this  manner,  thus, 
John  11,  48,  =yeu  in,  2  Sam.  17,  15 
(yeuunni,  thus,  C.  234). 
yeuyeu,  adv.  now  (El.  Gr.  21),  Gen.  21, 
23;  22,  2;  2  Cor.  6,  2. 

*yo  (Narr.),  —yeu:  yo  weque,  thus  far; 
ybwa,  thus,  R.  W.  55;  yo  wutche,  from 
hence,  ibid.  74  (=Mass.  yeu  wutche,  Ex. 
33,  15). 

[Del.  yu-wuntsclu,  from  hence,  there¬ 
fore,  Zeisb.  Gr.  171.] 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK— ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


215 


yo,  ya,  adv.  yonder,  that  way:  yeunog- 
que  in  kah  yd  in,  hither  and  thither,  to 
this  side  and  to  that;  yo  nuttonan,  we 
will  go  yonder,  Gen.  22,  5  ( wonk  ho 
kuppeyaunumun,  we  will  come  again 
[hither (?)]  to  you,  ibid.);  nwnchishyeu 
wutch,  yaaush,  go  hence  to  yonder  place, 
i.  e.  go  hence,  go  to  yonder  (from  yd- 
auonat ),  Matt.  17,  20. 

[Narr.  yo  now&kin,  I  dwell  here,  R.  W. 
29.] 

yoai,  ySaeu,  yoae  [yo  cujeii],  adv.  on 
that  side,  2  Sam.  2,  13;  Dan.  7,  5:  wutch 
yode  kesukqut  kah  yeu  onk  in  aongkoue, 
from  the  one  side  of  heaven  unto  the 
other,  Deut.  4,  32;  wutch  yode  .  .  . 
nogque,  on  the  one  side  ...  on  the 
other,  1  Sam.  14, 4;  yoaeu  .  .  .  nahohtoe 
ydayeuook,  on  the  one  side  (of  the  ark) 
...  on  the  other  side,  Ex.  37,  3;  ut 
yode,  at  the  sides  of  (the  ark),  v.  5;  wutch 


yoai,  yoaeu,  yoae — continued. 
yeodeu  .  .  .  ogkomae,  out  of  one  side 
.  .  .  out  of  the  other  (of  the  candle¬ 
stick),  v.  18;  pasuk  yodyeu  .  .  .  onkatuk 
ogkomaeu,  one  on  one  side  (of  him)  .  .  . 
another  on  the  other,  Ex.  17,  12;  yoaeu 
nannummiyeu,  on  the  northward  side, 
Lev.  1,  11.  Cf.  ongkome. 

[Del.  yam,  on  one  side,  Zeisb.  Gr. 
171.] 

*yote  (Narr.),  tire;  Yotdanit,  ‘the  fire 
god’,  R.  IV.  47,  110.  See  nootau. 

[Peq.  yewt,  fire,  Stiles.] 
yowutche  [yeu-wutche,  because  of  this], 
adv.  wherefore,  Matt.  18,  8. 

[Del.  yu  wuntschi,  from  hence,  Zeisb.] 
yoyatche,  adv.  always,  Matt.  28,  20;  26, 
11  (usually,  C.  230) ;  yeoyatclie,  Is.  45, 17. 
See  wameyeue.  Cf.  nagwuttede. 

[Micm.  yapchiS,  ‘toujours’,  Maillard 
28.  Del.  yanewi,  Zeisb.] 


ENGLISH— NATICK 


abnor,  uhquanumau;  inan.  uhquantam, 
he  has  an  extreme  aversion  to;  uhquan¬ 
umau,  he  is  abhorred,  is  loathsome;  uh- 
quanumukquok  (when  it  is  abhorred),  an 
al  lominable  or  detestable  thing, 
abide,  dppu;  it  abides  in,  appehtunk-un. 
able,  tapenum  ( idptnnum ),  he  is  able, 
potest.  From  tdpi,  sufficient, 
abomination,  uhquanumukquok. 
abound,  monat,  when  there  is  much  or 
plenty;  num-mcochekohtoh,  I  abound, 
Fhil.  4,  18. 

about,  (concerning)  papaume;  (round 
about)  quinnuppe;  waienu  ( waene ,  we- 
ivine,  C. ). 

above,  tvaabe,  woliqut;  ivutch  wohqut, 
ivutch  waabu,  from  above;  wohkumiyeu, 
upward;  kuhkuhque,  higher  up. 
abundance,  ne  masegik ,  when  it  is  plen¬ 
teous  (missechmonk,  C. ),  an  abounding; 
maunetash,  mish&unetash,  ‘great  store’, 
R.  W. ;  mummishkod  meechum,  ‘store  of 
victuals’ ;  rnonatash,  many  things,  abun¬ 
dance;  monaonk,  abundance;  mconatit, 
when  there  is  plenty, 
accept,  tapenearn,  he  receives  with  satis¬ 
faction;  tapeneaumcoonk,  acceptance; 
tapeneunkquot ,  that  which  is  acceptable. 
From  tdpi,  sufficient,  enough, 
accompany,  wechau,  he  goes  with,  an. 
obj.;  koowechaush  ( kowechaush ,  R.  W. ), 
I  go  with  you;  wechauattUtea,  let  us  ac¬ 
company,  R.  W.  From  weeche-au,  he 
goes  with. 

according  to,  neaunak  [ne  aunak,  that 
which  is  so]. 

acorn,  pi.  anauchemineash,  R.  W.  See 
nut. 

across.  See  crossover, 
act  (agere),  ussenat,  to  do,  to  act;  ms u,  he 
does;  usseu,  he  acts;  unnehhuau,  he 
does,  with  respect  to  others,  he  con¬ 
ducts  himself;  i/runneneheau,  he  did  well 
to,  conducted  himself  well  toward;  yeu 
nuiiinhikqun,  thus  he  deals  with  me. 
See  conduct  one’s  self;  do  to. 


action,  mseonk,  a  doing, 
add,  kcotnehteau,  kcotenahteau,  he  adds  (it, 
to  it) ;  ukkeotnehteauun,  he  adds  to  it, 
makes  an  addition  to  it;  kcochJteau  [A'ut- 
che-ohteau] ,  he  adds  to. 
adorn,  umnneheau,  he  adorns  (makes 
beautiful)  himself:  wunneh  kuhhog, 
adorn  thyself  ( wussinnu ,  he  adorns  him¬ 
self,  C. );  wunneliteou,  he  adorns  (inan. 
obj.). 

adorned,  inan.  w unnehteomuk,  an.  umn- 
noou'hosu. 

adultery,  mamussu,  he  commits  adultery; 
mam.ussekon,  thou  slialt  not  commit 
adultery;  maniussuaen-in ,  an  adulterer 
( mam maum,  pi. mam rnausach ick,  R.  W. ) ; 
manishquaausuen-in,  an  adulteress.  See 
fornication. 

advantage.  See  profit, 
adversary.  See  against;  enemy;  oppo¬ 
site. 

advice,  kemonittuonk,  good  advice  re¬ 
ceived.  See  counsel, 
advise,  kogkahtimau,  v.  t.  he  gives  advice 
to,  advises  ( kogkahqutteau ,  he  advises, 
C. ) ;  weogquttumcok  kah  keneelamcok,  ‘  gi  ve 
your  advice  and  counsel’,  Judg.  20,  7. 
affair  (matter  of  business),  unniyeuonk. 
affrighted,  chepshau,  chepshontam,  he  is 
affrighted,  startled,  astonished  ( kitchee - 
sahteau,  he  affrights;  kitchesshanittinneat, 
to  be  affrighted  (?);  kuttijshaniltuonk, 
fright,  C.). 

afraid,  ivabesu,  he  fears,  is  afraid;  noo- 
vxtbes,  lam  afraid;  qushau wabesvoneau, 
he  is  afraid  of  (him);  queihtam,  he  is 
afraid  (to  do,  to  go) — not  implying 
slavish  or  disgraceful  fear  ( wesassu ,  (he 
is)  afraid;  cowesass?  are  you  afraid?;  ta- 
whitch  wesasean?  why  fear  you?;  mano- 
w&sass,  I  fear  none,  R.  W. ).  See  fear, 
after,  adv.  after  that,  afterward,  ne  niah- 
che  (see  have,  auxil. );  prep,  asuhkaue 
[asuhkaueu,  it  goes  after,  follows] :  ne- 
gonne  onk  nen  .  .  .  asuhkaue  onk  nen, 
before  me  .  .  .  after  me,  next  after 

219 


220 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25- 


after — continued. 

(in  order  of  time  or  place);  nahohtdeu 
(secundus,  -a,  -um);  noh  asuhkiU,  he 
who  goes  or  comes  after.  Cf.  asuh,  or; 
neese  [ne-esse],  two. 

afternoon,  qudttuhqudhqud,  C.;  panicom- 
paw,  nawwduwqaw,  R.  W. ;  quttukqua- 
quaw,  after  dinner,  ibid.  See  day. 
afterward  (in  the  future),  ompetak. 
again,  (a  second  time)  nompe;  (in  addi¬ 
tion)  wonk  ( wonkanet ,  o^k,  or  wonk, 
again,  C.). 

against,  ayeuuhkone;  mutually  opposed, 
ayeuuhkonittue  (ayeukauniue,  C. );  ayeu- 
uhkonau,  he  goes  against,  he  makes 
war  on  (an.);  nup-penuanum-uk ,  he  is 
against  (at  variance  with,  contending 
with)  me.  piuhmke,  over  against,  op¬ 
posite  to;  reciprocally  opposite,  over 
against  each  other,  pdpiulisuke.  Cf.  pti- 
piske; pap-skeu;  neesit piskeu,  it  is  double; 
piskinnum,  he  doubles  (it).  See  oppo¬ 
site;  war. 

age.  See  old;  old  age. 
ago.  See  long  time  ago. 
agreement.  See  covenant, 
ah!  alas!  cowee!  woi! 
ail,  toh  kut-ushpunamf .  w'hat  aileth  thee? 
also  to 1  kut-uspinani  (and  tocketuspanem , 
R.  W.);  toh  uspunau  ( tahaspundyi ,  R. 
W. ),  tohspinau ?  what  ails  him,  what 
does  he  happen  on,  what  chances  he? ; 
so,  nag  wame  .  .  .  ushpunaog,  ‘  chance 
happeneth  to  them  all’,  Eccl.  9,  11; 
tatuppe  uspundog  wame,  ‘one  event  hap¬ 
peneth  to  them  all’  (they  chance  all 
alike),  Eccl.  2,  14. 

air  (atmosphere),  mamahche  kesuk,  =ma- 
mohehiyeu  kesuk,  the  empty  or  void  sky. 
alarm.  See  war. 
alewife.  See  fish;  menhaden, 
alike,  tatuppe,  equally, 
alive,  pomantog  (when  he  lives,  living), 
all,  wame,  wamu  (omnino) ;  wamut  (when 
there  is  all),  enough,  mdmusse  ( missesu , 
R.  W.),  totus,  ex  toto  (mamdsseylue, 
wholly,  entirely,  C. ).  From  missi 
( mussi ),  great,  by  reduplication, 
almost,  ndhen,  nearly,  nigh  to  ( omdgpeli , 
C.). 

alone,  nussu,  nusseu  [ noh  usseu,  he  who 
does?];  n’  nlshxshem,  I  am  alone,  R.  W. 
nomsiyeue;  wukse,  nonsiyeu,  all  alone, 
C. ;  nun-ndnsi-up,  1  was  alone,  ibid. 


alone — continued. 

nont,  of  himself  only,  I.  P.;  ruiunt, 
R.  IV.;  pusnk  naunt  God,  there  is  only 
one  God,  ibid. 

also,  wonk,  again,  moreover, 
always,  nagwuttede,  continually;  yoynt- 
ehe  [  =  yeu  ivutche,  from  this  time?], 
micheme,  forever.  See  ever, 
am.  See  appu;  ayeu;  na;  nont;  ohteau. 
amazement,  chepshaonk,  a  startling;  ehep- 
shau,  he  is  amazed,  affrighted;  mon- 
chanatam,  he  wonders.  See  wonder, 
among,  kenugke,  kunnuke.  Related  to 
konukkehtahwhau,  he  pierces,  pene¬ 
trates  (?),  kannukkashunk,  penetrating, 
piercing;  from  kenag,  that  which  is 
sharp.  Cf.  Lat.  inter,  interere,  intrare. 
ancestors,  wutchettuongdnog,  C.  From 
wutcheu,  suppos.  wadchit.  See  parents, 
anchor,  kenuhquab,  keriunkquap,  kenomp- 
squab  ( kunnosnep ,  R.  W. ;  kussuppanunk- 
quank,  C. ). 

and,  hah.  From  ’k  progressive, 
angle,  ndi,  angular,  having  corners  or 
angles;  naiyag  (when  it  is  angular  or 
cornering),  a  point,  angle,  or  corner; 
ut  yaue  naee,  at  the  four  corners  of;  yaue 
naiyag  tvetu,  the  four  corners  of  the 
house.  Cf.  kenai,  sharp;  kenag,  that 
which  is  sharp,  pcocliag,  an  interior 
angle  or  corner.  See  corner, 
angry,  musquanlam,  he  is  angry;  suppos. 
part,  noli  musquantog,  he  who  is  angry, 
i.  e.  any  angry  man;  imperat.  prohib. 
ahque  musquantash,  be  not  angry  (so, 
R.  W. ;  nummosqudntam ,  I  am  angry, 
C. );  act.  verbal  musquanlamajonk  ( mus - 
quannltam&onk,  C.);  pass,  verbal  mm- 
quanittuonk.  anger.  V.  t.  an.  musquanu- 
mau,  he  is  angry  at  or  with  (an.  obj. ) . 
From  musqui,  red,  bloody,  and  anlam,. 
minded,  purposing,  or  having  in  mind, 
animal,  odas,  6aus,  hoivaas  (odas,  ooicaas, 
boas,  C.),  animal,  creature  (pi.  odasineg, 
owaasmeg):  nishnoh  oaas  pdmontog, 
‘everything  that  hveth’  ( pomanam&e 
oowaasineg,  ‘living  creatures’,  C. ).  ne- 
lassuog  (pi. ),  tame  or  domestic  animals- 
( nelasdog ,  R.  W. ).  puppinashim  ( penas - 
him,  R.  W. ),  pi . -mivog,  beast.  Cf.  pup- 
pin  slums,  pi.  puppinslmasog ,  bird,  avis. 
Odas,  hoivaas,  is  evidently  related  to 
howan  ( awdiin ,  R.  W.),  someone,  any¬ 
one,  a  person.  The  termination  repre- 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


221 


animal — continued, 
sents  the  verb  of  animate  agency,  us-su, 
he  does?,  acts.  The  prefix  is  perhaps 
the  inseparable  pronoun  of  the  3d  pers. 
sing,  w’  ( ewd ,  he,  R.  W. ),  as  in  howan, 
awAun  [ewo-unni,  any  he], 
ankle,  mussipsk;  wussupskon,  his  ankle 
1  >on e[m’ sussuppoi-oskon,  theside bone?] . 
anoint,  sussequnnau,  he  anoints  (him); 
sussequnum,  he  anoints  (it)  ( mmisseg - 
quin,  I  anoint,  C. );  act.  verbal  susse-  j 
queonk,  anointing,  anointment;  pass,  j 
verbal  sussequnnitluonk,  being  anointed, 
another,  onkalog,  another  person,  pi.  onk- 
atogig,  others;  onkalog ,  another  thing, 
pi.  onkatoganash  ( onkatuk ,  onkne ,  be¬ 
sides;  onkatogdn  it,  otherwise,  C. ).  From  j 
onk,  wonk. 

answer,  nampooham,  he  answers;  nam-  j 
pmhamau,  he  answers  (him), 
ant,  annuneks. 

any,  anybody,  any  person,  howan  (aivd- 
un,  R.  W.,  whoso;  Del.  auwen,  who;  au- 
won,  howan,  anybody,  C. ) .  nanwi, nanwe: 
nanwe  wosketomp,  any  man,  0. ;  nanwe 
missinninnuog,  common  people,  C.  Adj. 
inan.  teagwe:  ut  teagwe  mehtvgkit,  on  any 
tree;  ne  teaguas,  any  thing, 
apart,  chippi,  cheppi  (it  is  separate): 
chippeu,  he  separates  himself;  chippau, 
he  separates  himself  to,  ‘consecrates 
himself’. 

appear,  nunnogquis,  I  appear,  C. ;  anuk- 
quok  (when  it  appears),  the  appearance 
of  a  thing  (nonqdsmonk,  appearance, 
looks,  C.).  See  looks, 
appease,  um-manunnehlaun,  he  appeas- 
eth  (strife,  Prov.  15,  18),  from  manunne, 
quiet,  calm,  moderate.  /  mahtednum,  he 
appeases  or  pacifies,  C. ;  mahteannonat, 
to  quiet,  ibid.,  from  mdhtco,  he  makes 
an  end,  has  done. 

appoint  (a  person  to  post  or  place),  keliti- 
mau,  he  appoints  (him);  kuk-kehtim, 
thou  appointest  (him);  noh  nukkehtim, 
he  whom  I  appoint. 

appoint  or  designate  (a  place  or  inan. 
obj. ),  kuhqullum,  he  appoints  (it) .  Adj. 
kuhquttv.rn.me,  appointed, 
apron,  aidah,  aulawhun,  audtd,  the  apron 
or  covering  worn  in  front  by  the  In¬ 
dians;  ‘a  pair  of  small  breeches  or 
apron’,  R.  IV. 


archer,  pepumwaen-in,  one  who  shoots 
habitually,  pi.  -innuog;  pepumutcheg 
(pi.),  they  who  are  shooting,  actually. 
From  pummu,  he  shoots,  with  fre¬ 
quentative  reduplication, 
arm,  mulipit  ( mehpit ,  C. );  wuhpit,  his 
arm  ( wuppittene ,  pi .-nash,  R.  W. ) .  m’ap- 
pehi,  related  to  ttppih,  a  trap;  suppos. 
appehit,  (when)  it  holds  fast  or  catches, 
around,  vjaeenu,  adv.  and  prep,  it  goes 
around,  winds  oncurves  around  ( waene , 
weiv&ne,  about,  C. ) ;  quinnuppe,  adv. 
[quin-appu,  quinuppu,  it  turns  about], 
about,  around;  quinuppohke  [ quinnup - 
pu-ohke\,  everywhere,  all  about, 
arrive,  ntiauke  wushem,  I  come  by  land, 
R.W.  31.  Cf.  Cree  tuckoo-sin,  lie  arrives 
(by  land) ,  Howse  50.  For  nutohke  (?). 
Cf.  aukeewushauog,  ‘they  go  by  land’, 
R.  IV.  nom.ishoonh6mm.in,  ‘  I  come  by 
water’  (i.  e.  by  boat,  mushoon),  R.  IV. 
31. 

arrow,  kduhquodt,  kdunkquodt  (suppos. 
part,  inan.,  having  a  pointed  or  sharp¬ 
ened  end);  pi.  -\-ash.  cauquatash,  ar¬ 
rows,  R.  IV.  Peq.  keeguum,  arrow; 
nuckhegunt,  my  arrows, 
artful.  See  crafty. 

as,  veane  [ ne-unni ,  like  that,  of  this  or 
that  kind],  as,  so,  in  like  manner; 
onatuh  [ unne-toh ],  as  though,  as  if,  as 
when,  used  with  the  suppos.  mood; 
wehque  [au-uhquaeu,  going  to  the  ex¬ 
treme  or  limit]  as  far  as;  wutch  .  '.  . 
wehque  (with  verb  of  motion),  from 
...  to  (yo  weque,  thus  far,  R.  IV.); 
adtahshe,  attooche,  uttmche,  ahhut  tahshe 
[for  adt  tohsu,  =ut-tahshe ],  as  much  as, 
as  many  as,  as  often  as  ( ayatche ,  as 
often,  R.  W. ).  See  like;  long  as;  such, 
ascend,  kuhkuhquev,  he  goes  up,  denoting 
voluntary,  progressive  upward  motion; 
wa&pu,  waabeu,  he  rises  up  or  ascends, 
denoting  change  of  place,  without  re¬ 
spect  to  locomotion;  with  inan.  subj. 
waape-mco,  it  rises,  ascends  (is  raised), 
as  smoke,  the  water  in  a  river,  etc.; 
ushpeu,  ushqmshau,  he  ascends  into  the 
air  quickly  or  with  swift  motion,  as  the 
soaring  of  a  bird,  etc. ;  with  inan.  subj. 
ushpema),  usspemoo,  it  mounts  aloft,  is 
borne  upward.  See  go. 


222  BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY  [bulletin  25 


ashamed,  akodchu,  he  is  ashamed;  nut- 
akodj  ( rmt-dgkodch ,  C.),  I  am  ashamed; 
akodchehheau,  he  makes  (him)  ashamed, 
puts  (him)  to  shame  (nut-dgkodchehik- 
qun ,  it  ashameth  me,  C. ). 
ashes,  pukquee.  Cf.  puk'd  (Narr.  puck), 
smoke;  pukquee,  mire,  mud;  pohqut 
(that  which  is  broken  off?),  a  brand, 
ash  tree,  monunks,  Is.  44,  14. 
ask,  nateDlomau,  he  asks  (him)  a  question, 
questions;  naia>tomwehteau,  natootomuh- 
tectu,  he  inquires,  asks  a  question;  nalco- 
tomuhkau,  he  makes  inquiry  of,  he  asks 
questions  of  (about  anything)  ( natco - 
tomwehkau,  nataotomuhkuu,  he  asks,  in¬ 
quires,  C. ;  n’ natotemuckaun,  I  will  ask 
the  way  (inquire  about  it) ,  R.  W. ;  kun- 
natotemif  do  you  ask  me?  ibid.), 
ask  for,  wehquetum,  he  asks  for  (it);  weh- 
quetumau,  he  asks  (him)  for  (it)  ( km - 
wequetummdush,  I  beseech  you,  C. ). 
Cf.  wehkomau,  weekomau,  he  calls  (him), 
assemble,  miaeog,  maiyaeog,  they  as¬ 
semble,  meet  together;  mukkinneonk 
moema)  or  miyaemoo,  the  assembly  meets 
(is  gathered  together) ;  freq.  mohmoiog, 
they  meet  often  or  habitually  ( miawi - 
tuck,  let  us  meet;  miawehettit,  when 
they  meet,  R.  W. ) .  From  mide,  miyae, 
moee  ( moywe ,  C. ),  together.  V.  t.  an. 
mianau,  he  assembles,  causes  (them)  to 
assemble,  gathers  together  ( midioene ,  'a 
court  or  meeting,  R.  W. ). 
assembly,  moeuwehkomonk,  mishoeonk,  a 
great  many  together;  mukkinneunk,  a 
gathering. 

astonished,  chepshau,  he  is  astonished, 
amazed;  monchanatam,  he  wonders.  See 
amazement;  wonder, 
astray ,  panne,  out  of  the  way;  panneau,  he 
goes  astray;  suppos.  part.  an.  panneont, 


astray — continued, 
going  astray,  erring,  wauonu,  irdonu, 
he  goes  astray,  wanders  out  of  the  way; 
suppos.  part.  an.  wddnit,  wauonit,  going 
astray;  hence,  wayont,  waonl,  sunset¬ 
ting  ( ivawonntiog ,  they  wander,  C.). 
From  waeenu  {wewtne,  C. )  and  au,  he 
goes  round. 

as  yet,  ashpummeu,  ash  pame. 
at,  adt,  ahhut,  ut.  At  or  in  a  place  (the 
locative  case) ,  expressed  by  the  termi¬ 
nation  -ut,  -at,  or  -it,  with  or  without  a 
governing  preposition, 
attempt,  kodussu  [kod-ussu~\,  he  attempts 
(nen  nukkodussep,  I  attempted,  C.). 
aunt  (?),  okummes  [from  okas-,  related  to 
the  mother] ;  kokummes,  thy  aunt,  Lev. 
18,  14;  but  thy  grandmother,  1  Tim. 
1 ,  5.  See  grandmother, 
autumn,  nepun  ( neepun ,  R.  W. ;  nepinnae, 
C. ),  the  harvest  season,  the  latter  part 
of  summer  and  beginning  of  autumn 
( taqubnck ,  the  fall  of  the  leaf,  R.  W.; 
’ninnauwaet,  fall,  C. ).  See  seasons, 
avoid,  chippinum,  he  avoids  (it),  puts  it 
away;  cMppehtau,  he  avoids,  keeps  away 
from  (it);  qussdhkom  (?),  he  shuns  or 
avoids  ( nuk-quisuhkom,  I  shun  or  avoid, 
C.). 

awl,  m’ukqs  (mucksuck,  awl  blades,  R. 
W.).  Cf.  kous,  a  thorn;  m’uhkos,  a  nail 
or  talon.  puchvMganash,  awl  blades, 
R.  W. ,  from  puckhummin,  to  bore,  ibid. 
See  point. 

ax,  togkunk  ( togkong ,  C. ),  pi.  -fas/t,  that 
which  strikes;  suppos.  part.  inan.  from 
togkom,  he  strikes  an  an.  obj.  chichegin, 
a  hatchet,  R.  W.;  pi.  chicheginash.  Cf. 
Del.  pachkshican  or  kshican,  a  knife; 
m’ chonschican,  a  large  knife,  Hkw., 
Corr 


B, 


babe.  See  child;  infant, 
back,  muppusk,  muppisk  ( muppuskq ,  C.; 
uppusquan,  R.  W.),  from  poske,  poskeu, 
it  is  bare,  naked,  unprotected,  with  in- 
def.  prefix,  wi’ poske;  kuppusk,  thy  back; 
nuppusk,  nuppisk,  my  back;  ttppisk,  his 
back;  uppisquanit,  uppuskquanit,  at  bis 
back,  on  his  back,  behind  him. 


backward,  (oppos.  to  faceward)  ontconu : 
ontconu  penushau  or  antcoshau,  he  fell 
backward;  (oppos.  to  forward)  quslikee: 
qushkeu,  he  goes  back,  returns;  qush- 
kema>,  it  goes  backward;  nukqvLslikem 
(nuk-quishkeem,  C.),  I  go  back,  asdu- 
shau,  he  retrogrades,  moves  backward; 
niU-assousham,  I  go  backward. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


223 


bad,  matche  (Lat.  male) ;  suppos.  part, 
inan.  mat  chit ,  when  it  is  bad;  concrete 
n.  matchuk,  machuk,  evil,  that  which 
is  bad;  adj.  matchetou  \_matchetco,  he  is 
bad],  bad,  evil,  wicked;  matchesu  [ mat - 
che-ussu,  he  does  badly],  a  bad  person, 
i.  e.  (one,  he,  who)  acts  badly;  vbl.  n. 
of  agency  matcheseaen-in,  an  evil  doer; 
act,  vbl.  matcheldonk,  badness,  wicked¬ 
ness  (in  disposition,  purpose,  or  nature) ; 
pass.  vbl.  matchenehettuonk,  wickedness 
encountered  or  referred  to  its  object; 
act.  vbl.  matchesuonk  [from  matchesu'], 
the  doing  of  evil,  badness  in  action. 
From  matta,  mat,  adverb  of  negation. 
Cf.  Engl,  not,  naught,  naughty. 

bag-,  basket,  mancot  [ m’ncot ],  pi.  rn’nco- 
tcish;  munndte,  a  basket,  R.  W. ;  mun- 
notgh,  Stiles;  sogkissdnute,  a  hand  bas¬ 
ket,  C.  “Instead  of  shelves,  they  have 
several  baskets,  wherein  they  put  all 
their  household  stuff;  they  have  some 
great  bags  or  sacks,  made  of  hemp, 
which  will  hold  5  or  6  bushels.” — R.  W. 
50.  ‘  ‘  Notassen,  or  bags  which  they 

plait  from  hemp.” — De  Vries,  Mega- 
polensis,  2  N.  Y.  H.  S.  Coll,  hi,  95, 
107,  158.  From  nootin-at,  to  lift  or 
take  up  a  burden  ( niduidsh ,  ‘take  it  on 
your  back’,  R.  W. );  see  bear,  petunk 
(when  it  is  put  in;  suppos.  part,  inan. 
from  petauun,  he  puts  it  into) ,  a  bag  or 
pouch  for  carrying  small  articles:  “pe- 
touwdssinug,  their  tobacco  bag,  which 
hangs  at  their  neck,  or  sticks  at  their 
girdle,  which  is  to  them  instead  of  an 
English  pocket.” — R.  W.  108. 

bait  (for  fishing),  onawangonnakaun, 
R.  W.  Cf.  Abn.  aSangan,  Rasies. 

bake  (roast),  appcoau,  apwau,  appcosu, 
he  bakes,  roasts,  or  cooks;  apwonat  wey- 
aus,  to  roast  flesh  ( appcosish  weyaus, 
roast  the  meat,  C. ).  The  primary  sig¬ 
nification  appears  to  be  to  prepare  for 
food. 

bald,  mood  (smooth);  mukkukki  (bare): 
mcosontuppco,  he  is  bald,  has  a  bald  head 
( musanlip ,  a  bald  head,  C. );  mukukkon- 
tuppco,  he  is  bald. 

ball  (for  playing),  pompasuhkonk.  From 
pompu ,  he  plays;  asuhkau,  he  chases, 
follows  after:  pomp-asuhkau,  he  chases 
in  sport. 


bank  (of  river),  wusapinuk  ( wussdpplnuk, 
C. ) ,  =  wus-appin-uk,  where  the  edge  or 
margin  is,  that  which  is  at  the  edge 
(urns). 

bare,  mukkukki  ( muckucki ,  ‘bare,  with¬ 
out.  nap’,  R,  W.,  of  cloth);  mukkookeg, 
‘strip  yourselves’,  Is.  32,  11.  Hence 
mukkcokinau,  he  robs,  plunders,  strips 
bare;  mukkcokinnuwaen-in  (n.  agent, ),  a 
robber,  and  perhaps  mukki,  mukkutch- 
ouks  ( muckquachucks ,  R.  W. ),  a  child, 
a  boy.  See  bald;  naked, 
bargain  (agreement),  wunncowAonk, 
=  wunne-ncowaonk,  good  saying,  satis¬ 
factory  talk.  See  trade, 
bark  (v. — as  a  dog),  wohwohteau,  he  barks 
( wohwdhteau ,  C. ) ;  wohwohkau,  he  barks 
at,  keeps  barking  (onomatopoetic;  so 
wohwatwivau,  ‘ho!  holloo!’,  C. ). 
bark  (n.),  wunnadteask,  C. ;  wuchicka- 
peuck,  ‘birchen  bark  and  chestnut 
bark,  which  they  dress  finely  and 
make  a  summer  covering  for  their 
houses.’ — R.  W.  48.  Cf.  Abn.  maskSe, 
pi.  -kSdr,  ‘dcorce  de  bouleau  a  caba- 
ner’,  etc.,  Rasies, 
barn,  auqun-nash,  barns,  R.  W. 
barren,  mihcheeu,  viehcheeyeu  (she  or  it  is 
empty,  is  nought);  mehcheyeue,  barren 
( mohchiyeue ,  empty,  C. ) ;  mehcheyeuonk, 
barrenness,  sterility;  matchekine  ohke, 
barren  land.  From  mat,  matche,  or 
mahtsheau. 

barter.  See  sell;  trade, 
basket.  See  bag. 

bass  (afish),  Labrax  lineatus  (?) ,  missuck- 
eke,  R.  W. ;  pi.  -kequock;  suckequog 
(pi.),  Stiles.  Peq.  m’ssugkheege.  qun- 
namag,  bass,  C. (?). 

bastard,  nanwetu  (nanwetiie,  C. ).  From 
nanwe,  general,  communis,  and  ivelu. 
bat,  maltappasquas,  matabpusques. 
battle,  ayeuwuttuonk,  ayevtedonk  [making 
war,  vbl.  from  ayeuhleau,  he  makes 
war  against],  matwauonck,  R.  W .  Cf. 
malivau,  he  is  an  enemy, 
bay,  pcoluppog,  pmluppag. 
be.  See  appu;  ayeu;  na;  nont;  ohteau. 
beads.  See  wampum, 
beans,  luppuhquam-ash  (pi.)  [from  tup- 
puhquew,  it  turns  or  rolls] ;  manusqussed- 
ash,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  mushquissedes,  Stiles, 
bear  (n.),  mosq,  masq,  mashq  ( moshq ,  C.j 
mosk  or  paukunnawwaw,  R.  W.;  Muh, 


224 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


bear — continued. 

vupxoh,  Edw. ;  Del.  mak’hk,  machk, 
Hkw. ).  From  maowhau,  (mauqaau,  R. 
W. ),  he  devours,  eats,  an.  obj.(?). 
Peq.  a’hAwgurut,  Stiles;  Narr.  konooh, 
ibid.  See  wolf. 

bear  (v. ),  kennunnum,  he  bears  or  carries 
(it),  takes  it  along;  with  an.  obj.  kenu- 
nau,  konunau,  he  carries  (him);  with 
suffix  ukkenunoh,  he  carries  or  bears 
him;  konununt  (suppos.  part.  an. ),  when 
lie  carries  or  bears:  konunont  ahtompeh, 
carrying  a  bow  (see  take),  k dunum, 
he  bears,  sustains,  holds  up;  suppos. 
part.  inan.  kdunuk,  when  it  carries,  it 
carrying,  a  carriage  or  anything  used 
for  carrying  burdens;  freq.  kogkounnum, 
he  supports,  holds  strongly  or  firmly. 
nayeutam,  he  bears  (it)  on  his  person 
as  a  burden;  imperat.  2d  pers.  sing. 
nayeutash,  bear  or  carry  it  ( nidutash , 
take  it  on  your  back,  R.  W. );  suppos. 
pass.  part,  nayeumuk,  naiamuk,  (when 
he  is)  borne  or  carried  on  the  back  (of 
a  man  or  beast),  hence  nayeumuk,  when 
he  rides:  nayeumukquoy  kamelsoh,  ‘they 
rode  on  camels’,  Gen.  24,  61;  noh  naw- 
mukqut  ( nayeumukqut ),  he  who  rides,  a 
horseman;  pi.  neg  nayeumukqutcheg, 
riders,  horsemen.  So  nahnayoHmewot, 
R.  W.;  nahnaiyeumdoadt,  a  horse  ‘or  a 
creature  that  carries’,  C. ;  Del.  nayun- 
dam,  to  carry  on  the  back  or  shoulders; 
nanayunges,  a  horse,  ‘the  beast  which 
carrieson  its  back’,  Hkw.  Perhaps  from 
nauwaeu,  he  bends  down;  nauwaehtam, 
he  bends  or  stoops  to  it.  See  horse, 
bear  children,  neechau,  nechau,  she  is  in 
travail  or  brings  forth  ( neechavj ;  paug- 
cdtche  [pakodche ]  nechauiuaw,  she  is 
already  delivered,  R.  IV.).  See  beget, 
bear  fruit.  See  produce, 
beard,  weeshittoon,  =weshak-toon,  hair  (of 
the)  mouth  (?).  See  hair, 
beast,  puppinashim,  pi.  -\-wog  ( penasliim , 
pi .  -f-  wock,  R.  W. ).  See  animal, 
beat,  ialtagkomau,  he  beats  (him);  suf¬ 
fix  wul-tattagkomouh,  they  beat  him; 
tattogkodtam,tohtogkodtam,  he  beats  (it). 
Freq.  from  togkomau,  he  strikes  (him), 
and  togkodlam,  he  strikes  (it),  pogguh- 
hain  ( pockhornmin ,  to  beat  out  corn, 
R.  IV.),  he  threshes  or  beats  out  corn. 
See  grind;  strike. 


beautiful,  vmnnegen  (good,  handsome, 
desirable,  pleasing);  wunnehheau,  he 
beautifies  himself,  makes  handsome; 
vmnnehteou,  he  makes  (it)  beautiful  or 
pleasing. 

beaver,  tummfmk,  pi.  -\-qnaog  (tommunque, 
Peq.;  tumunk,  C. ;  tummdck,  R.  W. ). 
From  tummigquohhdu,  he  cuts  off  (sc. 
trees)?  Cf.  Abn.  tema’kSe,  pi.  -kSak, 
castor  vivant.  noomppnfiog  (pi.)  and 
stimhuppatiog,  R.  W.  See  *amisque. 
because,  newutche,  ne  ivutche  (for  this, 
from  this).  See  cause;  therefore; 
wherefore. 

become.  Cotton  gives  ‘I  am  become, 
nuttinni ’;  ‘  to  become,  unniinat  ’ .  Eliot 
has  the  verb  unnaiinneat,  ‘so  to  be ’  (l 
Cor.  7,  26),  evidently  from  unni,  such  or 
of  the  kind,  to  be  of  the  kind,  to  be 
such,  to  become  such.  In  two  or  three 
instances  this  verb  is  employed  as  the 
representative  of  the  verb  ‘to  become’, 
though  it  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  its 
exact  equivalent;  thus  toh  dniit,  what 
may  have  become  of  him,  Ex.  32, 1 ,  23 
(  —  toh  adhs,  where  he  might  be,  Acts 
7,  40). 

bed  (place  for  sleeping),  appin;  vrutappm, 
his  bed  [ wutappin ,  he  sat  there] . 
bees,  aohkeaummussog  ( ohkeommoosog ,  C. ). 
beiore  (in  front  of),  anaquohtag  [when  it 
is  opposite,  anmqueu-ohlag'],  before  (it); 
anaquabit  [when  he  is  opposite,  ana>- 
queu-apit ],  before  (him);  unaquabeh, 
before  me;  anaquabean,  before  thee; 
anaquabhetlit,  before  them  (anaquabit, 
before  him,  C. ;  anaquohtag  wek,  lief  ore 
his  house,  ibid. )  [ anmqueu ,  opposite, 
from  nuhquaeu,  he  looks  toward] .  nego- 
nulikau,  he  goes  before  or  in  advance 
of,  he  leads;  negontmau,  he  sends  (*.  e. 
in  advance  of  himselt)  to  another.  See 
lead. 

before  (preceding  in  time),  negonaeu;  adv. 
negonne,  formerly,  before  time;  asquam, 
not  yet;  quoshae,  beforehand,  anticipa¬ 
tory. 

beg  (ask  alms),  weenshau,  he  is  beg¬ 
ging;  n.  agent,  ueenshaen,  a  beggar; 
vieenshamau,  he  asks  for  (it)  as  alms: 
a)-wensham-uh  ne  tvaguas,  ‘  he  asked  an 
alms  from  them’,  Acts  3, 3. 
beget,  unmneechanau,  he  begets  (a 
child  or  children,  without  reference  to 
sex);  wunnaumonieu,wunnamonnjeu,  he 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


225 


beget — continued. 

begets  (a  son  or  sons) ;  icuttaumyeu,  wut- 
tdneu,  he  begets  (a  daughter  or  daugh¬ 
ters).  With  a  feminine  nominative 
the  same  verbs  signify  to  bear,  to  bring 
forth. 

begin,  expressed  by  ncoche  [no  wutche ] 
or  kcoche  \ko  wutche~\  in  combination 
with  a  verb.  The  former  regards  the 
beginning  only  as  a  completed  act  or 
point  of  time  without  regard  to  ensuing 
or  progressive  action  or  to  lapse  of  time; 
the  latter  ( kcoche ,  kutche)  indicates  pro¬ 
gression  from  a  starting  point, beginning 
of  action  yet  in  progress  or  continuous. 
See  2  Cor.  8,  6:  neyane  ncoche  ussip,  ne 
ko  tatuppe  kesteunkquneau,  ‘as  he  had 
begun,  so  would  he  [go  on  and]  finish.’ 
nooche  wekitteau,  he  began  to  build;  yeu 
ncoche  ussenaout,  this  they  began  to  do; 
neyane  ncoche  ussip,  as  he  began  to  do; 
kutche  ussean,  kah  wonk  nuppakodche  us- 
sem,  ‘when  I  begin  [to  do]  I  will  also 
make  an  end’  (do  thoroughly),  1  Sam. 
8,  12;  kutchissik,  kddshik,  (when  it  be¬ 
gan)  in  the  beginning,  Gen.  1,  1;  Is. 
64,  4;  wutche  kutchissik  onk  yean  wehq- 
shik,  from  beginning  to  the  end  ( nen 
kilche  or  nuk-kilcheussem,  I  begin;  kutche, 
begun,  C.);  kachemoo,  (it  begins,)  it 
starts  from,  issues  from  (as  a  stream, 
etc.).  See  come  from, 
beguile.  See  deceive, 
behave.  See  conduct  one’s  self;  do  to. 
behavior,  dnniyeuonk.  See  business, 
behead,  tummigquohwdu,  he  beheaded 
(him)  ( timequassin ,  ‘to  cut  off  or  be¬ 
head’,  R.  W.). 

behind,  wuttdt,  wodtat  (wuttate,  C. ) :  wutlat 
wagig  (those  who  go  behind),  ‘they 
who  are  last’;  wodtat  ohtagish  .  .  .  ne- 
gonohtagish,  ‘things  behind  .  .  .  things 
before’,  Phil.  3,  13.  wuttamiyeu  (it  is 
behind),  the  hind  parts  or  posteriors;  3d 
pers.  cotamiyeu ,  his  hind  parts.  See  back, 
behold!  (interj.),  kusseh,  lo!  behold!  see 
thou!  Cf.  Lat.  ce,  ecce  (  =  ce-ce),  Fr. 
void. 

believe,  wunnamptam,  he  believes 
(it);  wunnamptau,  he  believes  (him); 
nconamptam,  I  believe  (wunnamptamw- 
onk,  belief,  faith;  pi.  wunnampuhtogig, 
believers,  C.).  “This  word  they  use 
just  as  the  Greek  tongue  doth  that 
B.  A.  E.,Bcll.  25 - 15 


believe — continued. 

verb  TtiSEvetv ,  for  believing  or  obey¬ 
ing,  and  they  say,  coanndumatous,  I  will 
obey  you  [or,  I  believe  you].” — R.  W. 
65. 

*bell,  kookcokanogs  (onomatope). 
^bellows,  popcopcotauwandmuk,  C.  [that 
which  is  blown  with;  from  pcotauaeu, 
he  blows]. 

belly,  menogkus  ( munnogs ,  bowels,  C. ); 
wunnogkus,  his  belly  ( wunndks ,  R.W.), 
from  wonogq,  a  hole  (?).  misshdt, 
C.,  for  mishehit,  suppos.  part,  from 
mishehheu,  he  is  lifted  up,  made  great, 
enlarged.  See  bowels, 
belong  to,  nuttaihe,  it  belongs  to  me, 
is  mine;  kuttaihe,  it  is  thine;  wuttaihe, 
it  is  his;  nuttaihein,  nuttaihen,  it  is  ours; 
nish  wuttaihe-ash,  the  things  which  are 
his.  ohtau  (he  has),  it  belongs  to  (him) 
as  a  quality,  attribute,  or  appendage; 
kut-ahtau-un  ketasscotamoonk,  ‘thine  is 
the  kingdom’,  Matt.  6,  13;  noh  ohtunk, 
he  having,  the  owner,  he  to  whom  it 
belongs;  ne  teaguas  ohtunk,  anything 
which  is  (belongs  to),  Ex.  20, 17.  Vbl. 
n.  ohtoonk,  ahtoonk,  a  having  or  be¬ 
longing,  a  possession.  In  compound 
words  -ohlde  signifies  belonging  to,  of 
the  nature  or  quality  of.  vmtchaiyeumco, 
it  belongs  to,  in  the  sense  of  it  pro¬ 
ceeds  from,  is  caused  by,  or  the  like; 
menuhkesuonk  ivutchaiyeumco  Godut, 
power  belongs  to  God,  Ps.  62,  11.  See 
his;  mine;  thine. 

below,  adv.  and  prep,  agwe,  agwu,  ogwu. 
ohkeiyeu  ( olikeieu ,  C. ),  below,  i.  e.  earth¬ 
ward.  agwe,  or  agwu,  the  more  common 
form,  is  apparently  contracted  from 
ohkeieu. 

bend,  woonki  ( wduki ,  R.  W.),  it  bends, 
is  crooked;  wonkinnuni,  he  bends  (it) 
(wonkunum,  C. ) ;  ne  woonkag,  that 
which  is  bent;  pi.  woonkagish,  bent  or 
crooked  (things).  See  crooked, 
bend  one’s  self,  nciuwaeu,  he  bends 
down  or  stoops;  nauwosu ,  nauwoseu 
[ nauwaeu-ussu ] ,  he  performs  the  act  of 
bending  or  stooping;  nddusit,  when  he 
bends,  bending;  nuuwanum  uppuhkuk, 
he  bends  his  head;  nauwaehtam,  he 
bends  down  to  or  before  (it);  nauwa- 
kompau,  namvosikompau,  he  bends  or 
stoops. 


228 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


bent.  See  crooked. 

berry,  in  compound  names,  -minne,  pi. 
minneash,  small  fruit  of  any  kind  (wut- 
tahimnemh.  strawberries,  R.W. ;  wattah- 
minneoh,  a  strawberry,  C. ) .  See  whor¬ 
tleberry. 

besides,  onkne  (more  than  that,  further), 
C. ;  wonk;  as  conjunction,  chauhohkwh, 
‘except,  besides’,  El.  Gr.  22;  chonchippe 
( chippe ,  Mass.  Ps. ),  he  or  it  excepted, 
saving,  excepting;  kcotne,  C.  [for  qut 
ne  ?] . 

besiege,  weenuhkauwaog  neg,  they  besiege 
or  encamp  round  about  them;  weenuh- 
kom,  he  besieged  (it)  [ = waeenu-uhkorn, 
he  goes  round  about] . 
bestow.  See  give. 

betray,  vmnasscomau,  he  betrayed  (him); 
wanascomit,  when  he  was  betrayed  (wa- 
nasscomit,  betrayed,  C. );  naonasscnm,  I 
betray;  n.  agent,  wunassmmwaenin,  a  be¬ 
trayer,  one  dealing  treacherously, 
between,  nasliaue  (nasliaue,  G.)'.  nashaue 
mayash,  between  the  paths, 
beyond,  ongkoue ,  aongkoue  ( onkkdue,  C. ) : 
watuhshame  .  .  .  ongkoue,  on  this  side 
.  .  .  beyond  (a  river,  etc.);  ongkome, 
ongkom&e,  on  the  other  side  of:  y6ai .  .  . 
ogkomai,  on  this  side  ...  on  the  other 
side  ( acdwmuck ,  R.  W. ;  so,  Acawmenda- 
kit,  England,  ibid.,  =agkome-en-olike-ut, 
in  the  land  on  the  other  side  or  beyond; 
Alg.  gaamink,  on  the  other  side,  Lah. ). 
From  onkhum,  he  covers  or  hides  (it), 
bind,  klshpinum,  he  binds,  ties,  makes 
(it)  fast;  kushpinush  ( kspunsh,  R.  W. ), 
bind  it  or  tie  it  fast;  kishpinau,  he  binds 
(him);  v.  i.  act.  kishpissu,  he  makes 
fast,  and  pass,  he  is  made  fast  or  tied. 
togkuppinau,  he  binds,  holds  fast  by 
bonds  (him);  freq.  or  intens.  tohtogk-, 
tattagk-,  tahtogkuppinau.  vmshpunnum, 
he  binds  up  or  together,  =assepinum. 
keneepinau,  he  binds  (him),  as  by  oath, 
imposes  an  obligation, 
birch  bark.  See  bark  (n.). 
bird,  puppinshaas  (pi.  -\-og),  a  bird  or 
fowl,  avis  ( n’peshawog ,  pi.,  fowl,  R.W. ; 
puppinushaog,  Mass.  Ps. ).  Cf.  Chip. 
penaisi.  psukses,  ‘a  little  bird’, pi.  -\-og 
(pussekesesuk ,  R.  W.;  pismksemesog, 
birds,  C.,  i.  e.  very  small  birds,  a  dimin¬ 
utive  of  the  2d  degree) . 


birth,  neetuonk,  neekuonk  [from  netu, 
iiekit ,  a  bringing  forth,  and  pass,  a 
being  brought  forth] ;  imnneetuonk,  umn- 
neekuonk,  his  birth.  See  born. 

bit,  chogq;  chohkag,  a  spot,  spotted;  kod- 
cliuhki,  a  piece  or  fragment.  See  piece; 
spot. 

bite,  sogkepcoau,  he  biteth;  sogkepwau 
( nussogkepmwam ,  I  bite,  C. );  suppos. 
noh  sagkepwut,  he  who  is  bitten.  Cf. 
sogkunum,  he  catches  hold  of,  hooks 
into.  See  hook. 

bitter,  we&oykon;  vbl.  n.  weesogkinooonk, 
bitterness  ( weesogkZyeu ,  bitterly,  C. ). 
Cf.  wee&we,  the  gall;  weesoe,  yellow. 

black,  mooi  (rndwl,  sucki,  R.  W. ) ;  adj.  an. 
mcoesu,  (he  is)  black;  pi.  inan.  mco- 
eyeuash;  an.  rnmemog  ( mooasue  woske, 
blackman,  C.,=mooosketomp,  El.  Gr. ). 
sucki,  R.  W.;  an.  suclxsu :  “hence  they 
call  a  blackamoor  suck&uttacone ,  a  coal- 
black  man;  for  sucki  is  black,  and 
waiitaeone,  one  that  wears  clothes,”  R. 
W. ;  but,  strictly  speaking,  sucki  was 
dark  colored  and  not  black.  The  dark 
purple  shells  from  which  the  more  val¬ 
uable  peag  was  made,  and  the  dark 
peag  itself — blue,  purple,  or  violet — 
were  named  from  their  color  snckau- 
hock. 

blackberries,  wuttohkohkoominned- 
nash  (?),  C. 

blackbird,  ch6gan;  pi.  -rieuck,  R.W. :  “Of 
this  sort  there  be  millions,  which  are 
great  devourers  of  the  Indian  corn”, 
ibid.  Peq.  auchugyeze  [ =cliohkmi ,  choh- 
kesitche,  spotted?],  massowyan,  Stiles, 
the  bobolink,  Emberiza  oryzivora  ? 

bladder,  mununneetau:  mununneetoe  qus- 
suk,  stone  in  the  bladder,  Man.  Pom.  88. 

blame,  wutchumonate,  to  blame;  ncochum, 
I  blame,  C.  (?) ;  wutchimau,  he  is  blamed, 
1  Tim.  3,  2;  wulchimuneach,  let  me  bear 
the  blame;  monteag  wutchimau,  he  is 
blameless  (is  nothing  hlamed).  See 
condemn. 

blast  (of  air),  pcopcotau&onk,  a  blowing 
strongly.  From  poopootau,  intens.  from 
pcotau,  he  blows. 

blasting  (of  grain) ,  pissogquodtin, pisscog- 
quodtin.  Cf.  pmagquan,  mud;  pmag 
( pissugk ,  C.),  dirt,  mire. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATIVE  DICTION ARY 


227 


^blanket,  pinaquet,  qunndnnonk,  C.; 
squaiis  auhaqut,  a  woman’s  mantle; 
acbh,  the  deer  skin  (worn  by  men), 
R.  W. ;  rnauuek  (= monak ),  nquittiashla- 
gut,  an  English  coat  or  mantle,  ibid. 
See  clothing. 

blemished.  See  deformed;  maimed, 
bless,  vmnndntam,  he  blesses  (it)  [  =  irun- 
ne-antam,  lie  is  good-minded,  regards 
favorably  or  feels  kindly] ;  nconantcim,  I 
bless  (it),  I  give  blessing.  Hence  the 
name  Nonantum  of  the  first  village  of 
‘praying  Indians’  gathered  by  Eliot. 
wunndnumau  ( wunnaunomau ,  C. ),  he 
blesses  (him);  vbl.  n.  (act.)  wunndnu- 
maonk,  a  blessing  given;  (pass.)  wun- 
nanittuonk,  a  blessing  received, 
blind,  pogkenum,  he  is  blind  (n’pockun- 
num,  I  am  blind,  R.  W. );  suppos.  part. 
pogkenuk,  blind;  pi.  pogkenukeg,  the 
blind.  From  pohkendi  ( pohkunni ,  C. ), 
it  is  dark. 

blood,  musqueheonk  [■ m’squeheonk ];  wus- 
queheonk ,  wusqheonk,  his  blood;  ncos- 
qheonk,  my  blood  ( mishqui ,  neepuck, 
blood;  misquinash,  veins,  R.  W.)  From 
musqut,  musqueu,  (it  is)  red;  musqueh- 
heau,  it  makes  red,  causes  redness;  sup¬ 
pos.  part.  inan.  musqheunk,  making  red. 
bloom,  blossom,  peshauau,  it  blossoms, 
bursts  forth;  pishaumoo,  it  is  blossomed; 
suppos.  part.  pass,  pishaumcouk,  blos¬ 
somed.  From  pokshau,  it  breaks.  See 
flower. 

blow  (n. ),  togkomooaonk  [act.  vbl.,  a 
striking  of  an  animate  object,  from 
togkomau,  he  strikes] ;  togkomitteaonk 
(pass.  vbl. ,  a  being  struck) ;  togkodtuonk, 
a  stroke  or  stripe,  primarily  the  striking 
of  inan.  object;  tatteaonk,  a  stroke,  C. 
See  beat;  strike. 

blow  (v. ),  pcotau,  pcotaeu,  he  blows. 
This  form  is  not  found  in  Eliot,  but  is 
indicated  by  derivatives;  from  it  is 
formed  the  intensive  and  transitive  pco- 
pcotau&onk  (act.  vbl. ),  a  strong  blowing 
or  blast,  pcotantam,  he  blows  or  breathes 
on  (it)  (pcotontou,  he  blows;  nuppco- 
pcotontdwam,  I  blow,  C. );  imperat. 
pootantash,  blow  thou  on  (it)  ( potdunt - 
ash,  ‘blow  the  fire’,  R.  W.;  potawash, 
‘make  a  fire’,  ibid,  [f or pcotaush,  from 
pcotaeu ,  as  above]),  waban  cotshoh,  the 
wind  blows,  John  3,  8  [for  wadchieu, 
umtcheau,  comes  from]. 


blue,  peshaui,  R.  IV.;  peshai,  C. ;  peshdn- 
ndqiiat,  blue  color,  C.,  i.  e.  peshai- 
anogkenuk,  when  it  is  painted  (or  looks) 
blue  (cf.  peshaui,  up-pesliau,  a  flower). 
oondi,  blue;  oonoagk,  blue  cloth  (cf. 
oon/n,  deep). 

bluefish  (Temnodon  saltator),  Peq. 
aquaunduut  (Stiles). 

board  (n. ),  pahsamogk,  pi.  -ogquash.  From 
pohshinum,  he  cleaves  or  divides  (it), 
boast,  muskoau,  muskouau,  he  boasts; 
pi.  mdskdacheg,  boasters,  waeenomau, 
he  praises;  waeenomont  wuhhogkuh, 
praising  himself,  boasting;  pi.  waeeno- 
moncheg,  boasters,  misheheau  wuhhog¬ 
kuh  (he makes  himself  great) ,  he  boasts, 
boat,  mushoon,  mislioon  ( mushdan ,  C. ; 
Peq.  mesh  ire,  Stiles;  mishoon,  ‘an  In¬ 
dian  boat  or  canoe  made  of  a  pine,  oak, 
or  chestnut  tree’,  R.  TV.;  dimin.  mish- 
oonemese,  a  little  canoe,  ibid.;  mishoon 
hdmwock,  they  go  by  water  (by  boat), 
ibid. ;  peontdem,  C. ;  pencoon,  boat;  peoo- 
nog,  a  ‘little  ship’,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  6, 
22;  21,  8;  Narr.  umpshu,  a  canoe,  Stiles; 
paugaternissaiind ,  an  oak  canoe;  kowaw- 
wawadnd,  a  pine  canoe;  ivompmissadnd, 
a  chestnut  canoe;  wunnauanodnuck,  a 
shallop;  dimin.  -uckquMe,  a  skiff,  R.  W. 
“Although  themselves  have  neither, 
yet  they  give  them  such  names,  which 
in  their  language  signifieth  carrying 
vessels”),  kehtamog,  kuhtconog,  a  ship 
( kifunuck ,  R.  W.;  kehtamog,  C. ). 
body,  muhhog,  m’hogk  ( molding ,  C. ),  a 
body  of  man  or  animal;  nuhhog  ( nohhog 
C.  nohdck,  R.  TV.),  my  body,  myself; 
nohhogandnog,  our  bodies,  C. ;  kuhliog 
( kohhog ,  C. ;  rohock,  R.  TV.),  thy  body, 
thyself;  wuhhog  ( wuhock ,  R.  TV.),  his 
body,  himself. 

boil  (n.),  mogquen,  —mogquenu,  it  swells 
or  bulges  out;  from  rnogke,  great, 
boil  (v.),  tchauopham  weyaus,  lie  boiled 
theflesh(i.  e.  he  put  it  in  water),  nepa- 
taush  sabaheg,  boil  (thou)  pottage  (ne- 
pattohkukqudnat,  to  boil  the  pot,  C., 
from  nepatau-ohkukq) .  touopham,  it 
boils  or  seethes,  is  boiling;  tduppuh- 
hosit,  (when  it  is)  boiled,  ‘sodden’; 
nutauicohpahham,  I  boil  (it),  i.  e.  make 
it  boiled  [from  toudlipeu,  it  is  in  the 
water],  wussue  ohkuk,  a  boiling  pot; 
wussish  ohkuk,  make  the  pot  boil;  wasit 
I  ohkuk,  a  pot  when  it  boils,  nootau  quo- 


228 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


boil — continued. 

qu&nchekomehteau  nippeash,  fire  causeth 
the  waters  to  boil,  Is.  64,  2. 
bonds,  kishpwsuongash ,  pi.  of  kishpism- 
onk,  from  hshpism,  he  ties, 
bone,  mwkon,  his  bone,  the  bone  of; 
umskon  ( weshkeen ,  wishkon,  C. );  pi.  mus- 
konash,  bones;  wuskonash,  his  bones. 
Cf.  dskon,  a  horn;  askdn,  uskon,  a  hide 
( oskon ,  C.);  wutaskon,  his  hide,  we- 
ween,  a  horn,  0. 

*book,  vmssukwhonk  ( u'usmkquohhonk, 
C.),  vbl.  n.  from  wussukhum ,  vmsuk- 
kuhhum,  he  writes,  continues  writing. 
See  write. 

bore,  pukqusmm,  he  bores  a  hole  (in  or 
through),  2  K.  12,  9;  puckhummin,  ‘to 
bore  through’,  R.  W.;  pukquag ,  (when 
it  is  bored)  a  hole,  eye  of  a  needle, 
Mark  10,  25;  puckwheganash,  awl 
blades  for  boring  the  wampum  beads, 
R.  W.  Cf.  puhpuhke,  hollow;  papuk- 
quanne,  papaquanne,  thoroughly;  poh- 
quae,  open;  pohki,  clear,  transparent. 
poahkussohhug  mukqs,  he  bores  his  ear 
(bores  to  him  the  ear),  Ex.  21,  6. 
born,  neekit  (when  he  is  brought  from); 
neetu  (he  comes  forth,  is  born,  primarily 
grows) :  noh  neekit  ut  neekit,  ‘ one  born  in 
my  house’,  Gen.  15,  3.  See  birth, 
borrow,  nogkohkou,  he  borrows;  nogkoh- 
kouun,  (it  is)  borrowed;  n.  agent,  nog- 
kohkouaen,  -min,  so  -kuhkauwaenin,  a 
borrower,  namohkctu,  he  borrows;  na- 
mohkaush  wish  quash,  ‘go  borrow  ves¬ 
sels’,  2  K.  4,  3.  The  causatives  of  | 
both  verbs  are  used  for  the  verb  to  lend : 
numohkaihhuau,  namohkohheau,  he 
lends;  nogohkohheau,  nogoh kaeihhuau, 
he  lends;  suppos.  noh  nogohko&rtit,  a 
lender. 

bosom  (pectus,  sinus),  pcochenau  ( up - 
pooeMnou,  C. ) :  uppcoeheneadut,  in  his 
bosom  [ pohshindeu ,  it  is  divided  in  two, 
is  halved].  See  breast, 
both,  neeswe,  Matt.  13,  30;  15,  14  [net-  j 
neesiue,  C.  ?);  neese,  two. 
bottle,  quoncocisq  (quanoowask,  C. ),  i.  e.  a 
gourd;  wisq,  a  vessel.  From  asq,  a 
gourd  (?). 

bottom,  ohkeil;  ut  agwe;  ohkeiyeu  ne,  the 
bottom  of  it;  vmteh  umskeche  onk  yaen 
ohkeit,  unitch  woskeehe  onk  yaue  dgin 
from  top  to  bottom,  Matt.  27,  51; 


bottom — continued. 

Mark  15,  38;  ut  wutchdmqut  kehtahhnn- 
nit,  ut  agwe  kehtahhannit,  in  the  bottom 
of  the  sea  ( ndumatuck ,  in  the  bottom, 
R.  W.). 

bough,  branch,  wuttuhq,  wuttuk  [umt-uh- 
quae,  at  the  ends  or  outermost  parts  ?] . 
pauchautaqunn£sash,  branches,  R.  W. ; 
pohchdtuk,  a  bough,  C. :  pohchohkom  poh- 
chatuk,  he  breaks  a  limb,  ibid,  wild- 
tuckqun,  a  piece  of  wood,  R.  W.;  pi. 
ximttoohqilnash,  wood,  C.  chedouash,  che- 
ouash,  branches  (of  a  vine),  Gen.  40, 
10,  12. 

bought,  adtoadche.  See  buy. 

boundary,  chadchabmumoank,  a  bound 
mark,  i.  e.  division;  from  chachaube- 
num  ( chadchapfinum,  C.),  he  divides. 
kuhkuhhunk,  a  boundary  (a  marking 
out);  kuhkuhkeg,  (that  which  marks)  a 
bound  mark,  limit. 

bow,  n.  an.  ahtomp,  ohtomp:  nutahtom]> 
(Peq.  n’teump,  nutteumpsh,  Stiles),  my 
bow;  vmtahtompeh,  their  bows;  pooton- 
kundog  vmtahtompeuh ,  they  bend  their 
bows,  Ps.  64,  3;  ohtomp  kah  kduhquod- 
tash,  bow  and  arrows. 

bow  down,  nauwaeu,  he  bows  down; 
nawosu,  he  makes  a  bowing  or  bending; 
nauwaihtam,  he  bows  down  to  (it) ;  nau- 
waehtauau,  he  bows  down  to  (him). 
See  bend. 

bowels,  menogkus  ( munnogs ,  C. ),  the  belly 
or  the  bowels,  wuttinnomhog,  the  en¬ 
trails,  =  umt-anome-hog,  of  the  inside  of 
the  body.  See  belly. 

boy,  mukkatchouks  ( mdckquachucks,  R. 
IV.;  Peq.  and  Narr.  muckachux,  Stiles), 
a  man  child,  a  boy  ( nonkdp ,  nonkum- 
paes,  a  boy,  C. ;  but  nunkomp  is  rather 
a  young  man);  nummuckqudehucks,  my 
son,  R.  IV. ;  muckquachuckquUmese,  a  lit¬ 
tle  boy,  ibid. 

bracelets,  kehtippittendpeash,  kehtedppete- 
ndpeash,  from  k elite,  great,  petauun,  it  is 
put  on,  appu  (?) ;  or  is  it  from  k elite  and 
appeh  (suppos.  appehit),  trap,  gin,  that 
which  holds  fast  ?.  See  ring. 

brag,  mishcowau,  he  brags  or  swaggers, 
C.,  =  mishehheau  (?),  he  makes  himself 
great.  See  boast. 

brain,  wuttip,  R.  W.  (where  “their opin¬ 
ion  is  that  the  soul  keeps  her  chief 
seat  and  residence”);  waantam  wuttup, 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


229 


brain — continued. 

a  wise  brain,  C. ;  rnetuppdash  (pi.), 
brains,  ibid, 
bramble.  See  briar, 
branch.  See  bough, 
brand,  noatau  pohqut,  a  firebrand  [ pohqut , 
when  it  is  broken]. 

brant  goose  (Anas  bernicla),  menuks,  pi. 
menuksog,  C. ;  Peq.  a'kobyeeze,  Stiles; 
munndcks,  pi.  munnticksuck,  R.  W. 
brave.  See  man;  valiant, 
breach,  pokshaonk,  a  breaking, 
bread,  petukqunneg,  pi.  -\-ash  ( puttuck - 
qunnege,  R.W. ;  petukqulneg,  C. ),  a  cake, 
bread  in  a  cake  [that  which  is  round; 
from  petukqui,  puttukqui,  round] ;  pe- 
tukqunnunk,  n.  collect,  bread:  weekog 
petukqunnunk,  unleavened  (i.  e.  sweet) 
bread;  weekonne petukqunnegash,  unleav¬ 
ened  cakes. 

breadth,  ne  koshkag,  ne  kishkag,  ne  anooque 
kishkag,  its  breadth,  the  breadth  of  it. 
From  kishke  ( kishki ,  C. ),  broad,  from 
side  to  side;  kishke,  at  the  side  of.  Vbl. 
n.  kushkesuonk,  breadth  (abstractly). 
mishekishkae  ay  monk,  a  broad  place; 
mishonogod  squont  .  .  .  mishonogok  may, 
(it  is)  a  wide  gate  ...  a  broad  way, 
Matt.  7,  13;  mishekiskemaogkehtu,  ‘in 
the  broad  ways’,  Gant.  3,  2. 
break,  pohqunnum,  he  breaks  (it)  asun¬ 
der  or  in  two,  as  a  staff,  a  thong; 
pohqunau,  he  breaks  asunder  (an  an. 
obj.,  a  bow,  a  kettle,  etc.);  pohquetah- 
ham,  he  breaks  asunder  (an  inan.  obj. 
pertaining  to  or  for  another):  pohque- 
tahhamwog  wuhkontash,  they  broke  his 
legs;  pohquetahhash  weepittuash,  break 
thou  their  teeth,  Ps.  58,  6;  poksheau, 
pokshau,  it  breaks  or  bursts  asunder, 
with  violence,  it  is  broken  (poohquls- 
shau,  C. ;  pokesha,  pokeshaunva,  R.  W. ); 
pokshadtam,  he  breaks  (it)  with  violence 
Or  suddenly,  sohqunnum,  sukqunnuni, 
he  breaks  (it)  in  pieces,  as  bread;  soh- 
quettahham,  sukquehtham,  he  breaks  in 
pieces  (an  inan.  obj.  peraining  to  or  for 
another). 

breast,  (pectus)  poochenau  (it  divides  in 
two,  is  halved);  ( mamma? )  raohpanag 
(mohpdnneg,  C. );  mapdnnog,  the 
breast,  R.  W. ;  wohpanag,  his  or  her 
breasts,  sometimes  pi.  wohpanagash. 
See  bosom. 


breath,  nashauonk,  nashaonk,  the  breath, 
the  spirit,  El.  Cf.  Del.  lechewon,  Plkw. 

breathe,  nahndshau,  he  breathes,  (nah- 
nashanat,  to  breathe,  C. );  nahnashant, 
when  he  breathes. 

briar,  bramble,  kous;  asinnekous  [ has - 
sune-kous,  stony  (i.  e.  very  hard)  briar 
?],  a  thorn;  pi.  komsog,  asinnekdussog. 
Cf.  muhkos  [rn’koux  ?],  the  nail  of  a 
man  or  talon  of  a  beast;  mukqs,  an 
awl. 

bride,  weetauadteaen-in  [wetauadteadt, 
when  she  is  married,  taken  as  a  wife] 
(nancetauadtam,  I  (a  woman)  am  mar¬ 
ried,  G.).  See  wife. 

bridegroom,  wussentamwAen,  -ivaenin 
[ wussentam ,  he  marries  ( imissentam ,  ‘he 
goes  a-wooing  ’ ,  R.  W. )  ] .  See  husband ; 
marry. 

^bridge,  toyusk,  R.  IV.  Cf.  tcoskeonk,  a 
ford. 

bright,  iv6hsmn.de  ( wossumaoe ,  C. ),  bright, 
shining,  as  a  torch  or  fire;  wohsippde, 
wohsippohtde,  bright,  glittering,  as 
stones,  polished  metal;  voohsuppae 
(and  wosittde)  togkodteg ,  glittering 
sword. 

brightness,  - uohsumdoonk ,  a  shining 
forth,  emitting  light,  uvnipag,  bright 
light,  that  which  is  bright;  from  wompi, 
white. 

brim.  See  edge. 

bring,  paudtau,  he  brings  (it)  hither: 
paudtaush  ( padtous ,  R,  W. ;  patauish,  C. ), 
bring  thou  it  hither;  paudtah,  bring 
(it)  to  me;  paudtdcok  ( pautduog ,  R.  W.), 
bring  ye  it.  pdsooau,  he  brings  (him) 
hither  or  near;  with  suffix  uppascouh , 
he  brought  him  to  him  (noh  pasoo, 
bring  him,  C.);  from ■  pdhsu,  pasoo,  he 
is  near,  sohhcowunau,  he  brings  (him) 
out,  caus.  from  sohham,  he  goes  out; 
caus.  inan.  sohhcowuttau,  he  brings  (it) 
out.  petukodtum,  he  brings  (it)  in.  pat- 
chippohfmat,  ‘  to  bring  up  anything  from 
a  place’,  C.  (?).  See  fetch. 

bring  forth.  See  bear  children;  pro¬ 
duce;  yield. 

broad,  kishki,  koski.  See  breadth. 

broken,  pokshde  ( pokesha ,  pokeshamoa, 
R.  W. ;  qiooliquisshau,  C. ).  See  break. 

brook,  sepuhe,  sepuus;  sepodse,  little  river, 
R.  W.;  sebuxezes,  sebuczzue,  Narr.,  Stiles. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN'  25 


230 


brook — continued. 

Dimin.  from  sepu,  a  river.  Dimin.  of  2d 
degree  mpohnese,  a  little  rivulet,  R.  W. 
broth,  pottage,  sdbaheg,  sebaheg,  mbaheg, 
that  which  is  made  soft  or  thinned. 
From  saupde,  sabde,  soft,  thin,  melting, 
brother,  wemat-oh,  his  brother,  the  broth¬ 
er  of  (him);  wemat-in  (cowemdttin,  C. ), 
a  brother,  i.  e.  any  brother,  the  brother 
of  any;  neemat,  my  brother;  keemat,  thy 
brother;  pi.  wematog,  his  brothers  ( wee - 
matUtuock,  they  are  brothers,  R.  IV.). 
weetahtu-oh,  her  brother  or  sister,  prop¬ 
erly  one  of  the  same  family  or  born 
in  the  same  house  ( uetat ,  a  sister,  C. ). 
nun-noht&nukqus,  my  brother;  kenohto- 
nukqus,  thy  brother;  wunnohtdnukqux- 
oh,  her  brother,  the  brother  of  (her). 
weetompas-su  (his  or  her  friend),  his  or 
her  brother  or  sister  ( wetompcis-in ,  a 
sister,  C. );  neetompas,  my  brother  or 
sister;  keetompas,  thy  brother  or  sister 
( Abn.  nidahbe ,  moil  frere,  seu  un  etran- 
ger  que  j’aime  comme  mon  frere, 
Rasies).  N.  collect,  weemattinneunk,  all 
the  brothers,  the  brotherhood,  wee- 
sumus-soh,  his  or  her  younger  brother 
or  sister,  the  younger  of  brothers  or 
sisters  (weisummis,  a  sister,  RAY. ;  Muh. 
ngheemm,  a  younger  brother  or  sister, 
Edw.  91).  rnohtommegit,  mohtomigitche, 
his  or  her  eldest  brother  or  sister,  the 
first  born  of  brothers  or  sisters  (Muh. 
netohcon,  an  elder  brother;  nmase,  an 
elder  sister,  Edw.  91).  See  sister. 

It  is  doubtful  whether  Eliot  had 
himself  mastered  the  distinctions  in 
the  expression  of  degrees  of  relation¬ 
ship  between  male  and  female  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  same  family.  From  a  com¬ 
parison  of  the  .revised  edition  of  his 
translation  with  the  translation  of 
John’s  Gospel  printed  with  the  Mas¬ 
sachusetts  Psalter  in  1709  it  appears 
that  weemcit-oh  expressed  the  relation 
of  brother  to  brother,  wun-nohtonukqus- 
oh  of  brother  to  sister,  weetahtu-oh  of 
brother  or  sister  (without  distinction 
of  sex)  to  brother,  and  ireetompassu  of 
brother  or  sister  to  brother  or  sister, 
used  by  either  sex  of  either  sex.  I'or 
the  Abnaki  see  Rasies  under  parent.ee, 

S(ElTR. 


build  a  house,  wekitteau,  he  builds  his 
house,  makes  his  wigwam  (houses 
himself);  wekuhkau,  he  builds  a  house 
for  (another  person), 
building,  n.  wekitteaonk  (pass.  vbj.  being 
built),  -komuk,  which  seems  to  signify 
an  inclosed  place,  a  shelter  or  covert, 
was  used  in  the  composition  of  names 
of  buildings  other  than  dwelling  houses 
erected  by  the  English.  Thus  qurmunk- 
que-komuk  (quinuhqui-kdmuk,  C. ),  a  high 
tower;  mayyeakomuk  [ miyae-komuk ],  a 
meeting  house,  C. ;  mechimukkomuk 
(feeding  house),  a  barn,  ibid.;  umkeche 
komuk ,  the  top  or  roof  of  a  house,  etc. 
burden,  weatmn,  weanin;  weasmnau,  he 
bears  a  burden ;  weassuk,  when  he  bears 
a  burden;  pi.  neg  wemmkeg,  bearers  of 
burdens  ( nidutdsh  and  weawhush,  take 
it  on  your  back,  R.  W. ). 
burn,  v.  i.  chikohteau,  chikohtau,  it  burns; 
nootau  chikohtop,  the  fire  burned  ( chik - 
koht,  C. ;  chickot,  fire,  R.  W. ) ;  from  cheke, 
chikke,  violent,  fierce,  and  ohteau,  it  has 
itself,  it  inherently  is);  chikohtae,  burn¬ 
ing,  on  fire.  V.  t.  chikkosum,  chikohmm, 
he  burns  (it);  with  an.  obj.  chikkossu 
( nut-chi kko* .  I  burn,  C. ).  Ybl.  n.  (act. ) 
chikkdhsuonk,  chikkosuonk,  a  burning; 
(pass.)  chikkoswuttdonk,  a  being  burned. 
Y.  i.  nashquneau,  it  burns,  primarily  it 
rages.  Cf.  nashquit  (when  it  storms 
violently),  a  tempest  or  destructive 
storm  (nun-nishquet,  I  rage;  nashquit- 
tin,  a  northerly  storm  or  a  tempest,  C. ). 
Suppos.  part,  concrete  najhquttag,  that 
which  burns,  a  fire  ( squtta ,  R.  \V. ); 
uashqunnde  mohkossaash,  burning  coals. 
Y.t.  nashqussu  [ nashqun-ussu ,  he  makes 
burn],  he  kindles,  sets  on  fire;  some¬ 
times  v.  i.  nashqundnumohteau,  he  kin¬ 
dles  fire.  See  consume, 
burnt,  chikkohtauun;  chikkommun  (ol 
inan.  obj.),  pi.  -fcw/i. 
burrow,  wtmogq  ( a  hole ) ;  owonogkuog , 
oowonogkcoog,  they  burrow  (have  holes), 
burst,  pashksheau,  it  bursts  asunder; 
paskuhkom,  pashkuhkom,  he  bursts  (it) 
asunder.  From  pdhxhe,  half;  polisheau, 
it  divides  in  two.  See  gun. 
bury,  posekinnau,  be  buries  ( him ) ; 
suffix  up-posekin-duh,  they  buried  him 
( nup-poosdkin ,  I  bury,  C. ;  posakunna- 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


231 


bury — continued. 

mun,  to  bury,  R.  W. ) ;  posekinit  (when  he 
is  buried) ,  his  burial ;  posekinitieaonk, 
a  burial,  being-buried.  From  poskeu, 

’  he  is  naked;  poskinau,  he  strips  (him) 
naked  or  is  naked, 
bush,  nepeurtk;  chippishinneuhtugk. 
business,  affair,  unniyeuonk  [act.  vbl. 
from  unnaiinneat,  to  be  so  or  in  such  man¬ 
ner],  condition,  case,  circumstances: 
ponniyeue  unniyeuonk ,  ‘rude  behavior, 
manner,  way,  state,  condition  ’ ,  0. ; 
wunnegen  unniyeuonk,  a  good  cause, 
ibid.;  matcheniyeuonk,  ‘evil  case’,  El.; 
wultinniyeuongash,  his  affairs,  pisscrn- 
matdonk,  pissishaonk  (pissaiyeuonk,  C. ), 
business,  employment, 
but,  con j.  gut  (gut,  gut  onch,  C.);  webe, 
ivepe  (only),  but,  Mass.  Ps.;  gut  onch, 
ohnchikoh,  but  yet. 

buy,  adtoaii,  he  purchases  from  (him); 
noli  adtoadt,  he  who  buys,  a  buyer; 


b  uy — con  tinned. 

adioadche,  bought,  purchased;  act.  vbl. 
adtoaonk,  a  purchase  ( oadtulikau ,  he 
pays  (him);  oadtuhkah,  pay  me;  nut- 
tottowam,  I  buy,  C. ).  manohamin,  he 
buys  it,  R.  W. ;  kum-mandhaminf  have 
you  bought  (it)?;  kum-manohamoush, 
I  will  buy  it  of  you;  kuttattauamish, 
I  will  buy  this  of  you,  ibid.  Elsewhere, 
manooham ;  an.  obj.  mancowhau,  he  re¬ 
deems  or  ransoms,  taphum,  tabhum 
(he  satisfies,  makes  satisfaction),  he 
buys  (it ) ;  taphumau ,  he  buys  it  of  ( him ) ; 
nut-taphumauop,  I  bought  (it)  of  (him). 
From  tdpi,  it  is  enough,  it  suffices. 

by,  prep,  nashpe,  by,  by  means  of,  with 
(object,  agent,  or  instrument)  (nashpe, 
nashpene,  by  or  through,  C mitche, 
by,  proceeding  from. 

bye  and  bye,  naim,  namitch,  R.  W. 


c 


call  (v. ),  wehkomau,  weikomau,  he  calls 
(him) :  wehkoni  kahsuk,  call  thy  husband 
( wecum ,  R.  W.) ;  wehguetum,  he  calls  for 
(it),  asks  for  (it) ;  wehguetumau,  he  calls 
on  (him)  for  (it),  asks  (him)  for  (it); 
koowehguetumoush,  I  pray  thee  ( kanve - 
guetummdush,  I  beseech  you,  C. ). 
call  by  a  name  (appellare),  hettamun, 
it  is  called  ( tahettamen ,  what  call  you 
this?  R.  W.,  =  toll  hettamun,  what  is 
it  called?) :  nepish  hettamun  may,  it  shall 
be  called  the  way,  etc. ,  Is.  35, 8.  hennou, 
hennau,  he  is  called  (by  the  name  of): 
toh  kuttehenitf  what  is  thy  name  (how 
are  you  called)?  (tahena?  what  is  his 
name?  R.  W. );  hennou,  ahunou,  he  calls 
(him);  suffix  wuttinuh,  he  called  him. 
call  by  a  name  (nominare),  usso- 
ivenau,  he  calls  or  names  (him):  pish 
kuttussowen  Jesus,  thou  shalt  call  his 
name  Jesus,  ussowetam,  he  calls  or 
names  (it) :  tohussowetam ?  (taliossowetam , 
R.  W. )  what  is  the  name  of  it?  usso- 
wessu,  (he  is)  called  or  named ;  asscowedt, 
called  (when  he  is  called),  C. ;  ntdssa- 
wese,  I  am  called  or  named,  etc.,  R.W. 


calm,  auwepin,  the  wind  ceases  ( au - 
ivtipu,  a  calm,  R.W. ;  amvepue  ahguompi, 
a  calm  season,  C. ;  awtipesha,  it  calms, 
R.  W.).  Cf.  waban,  wind, 
camp,  luppuksinnooonk  [act.  vbl.  from 
tuppuksinncoog ,  tuppuksinwog,  they  en¬ 
camp]  . 

can  (auxil. ),  woh,  ‘may  or  can’,  ex¬ 
pressing  ‘a  possibility  to  be’,  El.  Gr. 
20:  uttoh  ivoh  yeusli  en  nnih,  how  can 
these  things  bet  John  3,  9;  matta  woh 
wunnampaihamauoh ,  he  could  not  an¬ 
swer  him.  See  able;  unable. 

*candle,  weguananteg  (wasdguandnetick, 
C. ;  weguanantig,  R.  W. ).  See  light, 
canoe.  See  boat- 

cap,  hashoonukoo  ( ashonaguo ,  or  saunketip- 
po,  cap  or  hat,  R.W. ;  onkgueekhco ,  a  hat, 
C.  Cf.  onkgueg,  onkwheg,  that  which 
covers  over;  a  cover), 
captain,  mugwomp,  mugguomp,  pi.  -Jaog 
( keenomp ,  muckguomp,  pi.  -pauog,  ‘cap¬ 
tains  or  valiant  men’,  R.  W.;  umuk- 
guompde,  valiantly,  C. ),  =mogke-omp, 
great  man  (relatively  great  or  by  com- 


232 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


captain — continued, 
parison ) .  keenomp  ( kenompde ,  valiantly ; 
kenompaonk,  valor,  C. ). 
captive,  missin,  indef.  missinnin  ( missin - 
nege,  R.  W. ;  num-missin&m  ewo,  this  is 
my  captive,  R.  W. ).  missinnin  prima¬ 
rily  signifies  a  man  (homo)  of  any  other 
(that  is, inferior)  nation,  as  distinguished 
from  wosketomp,  the  tribe-man  (vir); 
literally  it  is  ‘one  of  the  many’,  missi- 
ninnu;  pi.  missinninnuog ,  people  (nin- 
nvmvtsin&wock,  ‘folk’,  R.  W. ),  answer¬ 
ing  to  Greek  oi  itoXXoi  etymologically, 
but  more  exactly  to  (icipfiapoi,  ‘barba¬ 
rians’,  in  its  applied  use;  misdndou,mis- 
sinnao,  he  is  a  captive,  an  outside  or  for¬ 
eign  barbarian. 

capture,  missinohkonnu,  he  takes  or  car¬ 
ries  away  captive  (him  or  them); 
with  suffix  nah  ummissinohkonuh,  he 
took  them  captive.  See  catch;  seize; 
take. 

care  for,  uni ttcoantam,  he  cares  for,  is 
careful  of  (it);  wuttamantam,  he  is  care¬ 
ful,  or  full  of  care  ( wuttanantam ,  C. ; 
notammduntam,  ‘I  am  busy’,  R.  W.). 
nanaantam,  he  takes  care  of  (it);  nan- 
auantamde,  careful,  C. 
carry,  kup-pumminegkon-ish,  I  will  carry 
thee;  nup-pumminneeteam  hussun,  I 
carry  a  stone,  C.  (?).  sohharwuttau,  he 
carries  (it)  forth.  See  bear;  bring, 
carve,  kogkdhsum,  kogoksum,  kuhkussum, 
he  carves,  shapes  by  cutting,  cuts 
out,  engraves  (it);  kogoxumcoonk,  ‘en¬ 
graving’,  carving;  kogoksumwe,  carved, 
‘ graven ’ . 

cast  (a  stone),  iogkonat  qussuk,  to  hurl  a 
stone  at  an  object,  from  the  hand  or  a 
sling.  From  togkom,  he  strikes, 
cast  away,  pogketam,  he  casts  (it)  away 
( nup-pdketam ,  I  throw  away,  C. ); 
pogkenau,  he  casts  (him)  off  or  away 
(n’paMtam  [the  inanimate  form  of  the 
verb  is  here  given,  wrongly],  I  put  her 
away,  R.W.) ;  noh  pagkenont  ummittam- 
wussoh,  he  who  divorces  or  puts  away 
his  wife;  pognit,  (when  she  is)  put  away, 
divorced. 

cast  down,  unnohkonau,  nohkonau, 
ncokinau,  he  casts  (him)  down;  suffix 
wuttinnohkonuh  ohkeit ,  he  cast  him  to 
the  ground;  nwksh.au,  nohkshaw,  he 


i  cast  down — continued. 

casts  himself  down  (quickly  or  vio¬ 
lently);  naoknhkonau,  he  casts  (him) 
down  (from  a  high  place);  suffix  v:un- 
nwkuhkonuh,  he  casts  them  down; 
unnohteau,  lie  casts  (him)  into  or  to; 
unnohtedog  nootaut,  they  cast  (them) 
into  the  fire;  unnohteam,  unnuhteam,  he 
casts  (it)  down;  penohkonau,  he  casts 
or  throws  (him)  down  ( penohkonat ,  to 
throw  down,  C. );  penuhkau,  he  cast 
down  upon  (him);  uppenuhkauoh  qus- 
sukquanash,  he  cast  down  on  him  stones, 
Josh.  10,  11;  penuhteau,  he  cast  down 
(it)  upon  (it):  penuhteau  wuhhogkuh  en 
ohkekontu,  he  cast  himself  down  on  the 
earth,  1  K.  18,  42.  In  all  these  forms 
the  theme  is  ncokeu,  nohkeu,  he  de¬ 
scends,-  en  ohke-au,  goes  earthward. 

cast  into  the  water,  chauopham 
(chowwoppdmmin,  to  cast  overboard; 
chouwophasa,  cast  (thou)  it  overboard, 
R.  W. );  chauohpuMeash  om,  ‘cast  a 
hook’,  Matt.  17,  27.  So,  chauopham, 
he  boils  or  seethes  (it),  i.  e.  puts  it  in 
water.  Cf.  chauopsheau,  he  casts  himself 
or  falls  into  the  water. 

catch  (ensnare),  puttawhau,  ' putluhhau, 
he  catches  by  a  snare,  ensnares;  and 
pass,  (but  more  usually,  pultohham,  put- 
tahham,  he  is  caught,  ensnared) ;  puttah- 
harnwog,  they  are  snared;  puttuhhnk, 
when  he  is  snared;  Jcuppitham,  thou  art 
caught  (in  a  snare),  Jer.  50,  24;  puttah- 
hamwehettit,  when  they  are  caught  (as 
fishes  in  a  net) ;  puttuhhukquehettit,  when 
they  are  caught  (as  birds  by  a  snare), 
Eccl.  9,  12.  Cf.  petshau,  he  falls  into 
(a  pit  or  snare) ;  petutteau,  he  goes  into, 
enters;  petau,  he  puts  into. 

catch  (lay  hold  of),  tohqunau  mosquoh, 
he  catches  a  bear;  wutohqun6uh,  they 
catch  him;  tohqunum  ( tohquinum ,  C. ), 
he  catches,  seizes  hold  of  (it).  Cf. 
togqun  nishwe  .  .  .,  ‘it  received  and 
held  three’  (thousand  baths),  2  Chr. 
4,  5.  wuttannun,  he  catches  or  lays 
hold  on  (him)  by  (a  part  or  member); 
nuttannun  anveeskiUam-il,  I  caught  him 
by  his  beard;  noh  anunont  anumwoh 
wehtauogut,  one  taking  a  dog  by  the 
ears. 

caterpillar,  mwpdog,  maopauwk. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


233 


cattle,  netassu  (netas,  C. ),  pi.  netassuog, 
any  domestic  or  tamed  animal, 
caught  (by  inan.  obj. ),  uppuhkuk  sogkut- 
tin,  his  head  caught  (in  a  tree), 
cause ;  causing.  Efficient  causality  was 
expressed  by  a  special  form  of  conjuga¬ 
tion  of  the  verb,  of  which  Eliot  gives 
an  example  in  his  Indian  Grammar, 
page  59,  and  of  which  frequent  use  is 
made  in  his  translation  of  the  Bible. 
Its  characteristic  is  the  insertion  of 
-wah-  or  -eh-  after  the  root  of  the  verb, 
as  pogkenumicog  they  are  blind,  pog- 
kenwnvwahedog  they  are  made  to  be 
blind;  naotarn  he  hears  (it),  ncotam- 
waheh  cause  thou  me  to  hear;  wahteau 
he  understands,  wahteauwaheli  cause 
thou  me  to  understand;  noli  panneont 
he  who  goes  astray,  noh  panneahlieont 
he  who  causeth  (others)  to  go  astray, 
etc.  The  formal  cause  and  the  material 
cause  are  expressed  by  wutch,  alone  and 
in  compounds,  entering  into  the  compo¬ 
sition  of  nearly  all  verbs  which  include 
the  idea  of  source,  origin,  production, 
or  the  like,  as  referred  to  the  issue  or 
thing  produced,  the  animate  or  inani¬ 
mate  object  proceeding  from,  issuing 
from,  or  caused  by  another.  See  be¬ 
cause;  father;  from, 
cave,  cavern,  hassunnegk. 
cedar,  chikkup  ( utchukkuppemis ,  C. ;  mish- 
qudwtuck  [ = musqui-uhtug,  red  wood], 
R.  W.). 

change,  dsoovmnum  wuthogkaounash,  he 
changes  his  garments;  dscovmnont,  if 
he  change  (beast  for  beast,  Lev.  27, 
10) ;  rnatta  nut-ohosue  usm,  I  change  not 
(I  do  not  changeably);  oscowemoo,  it  is 
changed,  it  changes;  pajeh  dsooivemoouk, 
till  it  is  (shall  be)  changed, 
cheat,  asookekodteamoo,  he  uses  deceit, 
deceives  intentionally  ( nut-assookekod - 
team,  I  cheat,  C. ) ;  noh  asookekodteamwit, 
the  deceiver,  he  who  deceives  (habit¬ 
ually);  n.  agent,  asookekodteamooen,  one 
who  deceives  (actually).  See  deceive, 
cheek,  manoonau,  m’namau;  nannoonau, 
my  cheek;  wannmnau  ( wonnunou ,  C.), 
his  cheek  [noonau,  he  sucks?], 
cherish,  nussohkommoosdowam,  I  cherish 
or  nourish  ( summoonittinneat ,  to  be 
cherished  or  nourished,  C.). 


chestnut,  wompumus  ( wompirnish ,  R.W. ), 
a  chestnut  tree;  wdmpimineash,  chest¬ 
nuts,  R.  W.;  waumpmunch  (Narr. ), 
Stiles;  Del.  wapim,  chestnut,  Hkw. 
[■ wompi-minneash ,  white  fruit  or  nuts]. 

chew,  pasquodtam,  he  chews  (it)?;  as- 
quam  pasquodtamcomuk,  before  it  was 
chewed,  Num.  11, 13  [pasquag ,  line,  mi¬ 
nute;  cf.  pup-pissi,  dust],  onchittamau 
or  kohkodhumau,  it  chews  the  cud; 
onchittamont,  kohkodhumont  (suppos. 
part,  an.),  chewing  the  cud.  oneheteau- 
un,  ‘revised’  or  ‘corrected’,  is  used  on 
title-page  of  Rawson’s  edition  of  Samp. 
Quinnup.  (Sincere  Convert],  1689. 

chief,  kehche,  kehte,  kehtau,  he  is  chief 
or  relatively  great.  See  old.  missag, 
mohsag,  relatively  great  or  important; 
anue  mohsag,  that  which  is  more  or 
most  great;  missugke,  great,  powerful, 
important;  masugkenuk,  (when  he  is) 
very  great,  chief;  wame  masugkenuk, 
‘the  Almighty’,  piahquttuk, piahquttu- 
munutehe,  chief  or  principal  (man,  serv¬ 
ant,  etc.),  Gen.  40,  20,  22.  See  ruler; 
sachem. 

child,  mukki,  pi.  -\-og;  dimin.  mukkies,  a 
little  child  (mukkoies,  C. ;  num-muckiese, 
my  child,  R.  W.).  nconuk,  (when  he 
sucks)  a  sucking  child;  nconukde  muk¬ 
kies  ( nondnnis ,  ndonsu,  R.  IV.;  Narr., 
nunnese  Stiles;  Peq.  nuzaus,  Stiles)  a 
suckling,  peisses,  peississu,  (he  is)  very 
small  [an.  dimin.  from  pea-,  little] ;  peis- 
sissit  [suppos.  part,  from  peississu] ,  when 
he  is  very  small;  noh peississit,  ‘he  who 
is  least’,  Matt.  11,  11;  pi.  peississitcheg. 
Intens.  or  dimin.  of  endearment,  papeis- 
sesu, papeississit, papeasek  (inan.,  but  ap¬ 
plied  to  children,  ‘little  thing’)  (pa- 
pods,  a  child,  R.  W. ;  nip-pdpoos,  my 
child,  ibid.;  Peq.,  pouppous  Stiles;  Lat. 
pupa,  pusa).  mukkutchouks  (mdckqua- 
chucks,  R.  W. ),  a  male  child,  a  son. 
See  boy.  nunkomp  ( nonkup ,  C. ) ,  a  boy, 
a  youth;  dimin.  nunkompaes,  nunkompa- 
emes  (nonkumpaes,  C.)  [ nunkon  ( nauki ), 
light,  levis,  and  omp,  man],  nunksqua, 
nunksq  (nonkishq,  C. ),  a  girl,  young 
woman  [ nunkon-squa ] ;  dimin.  nunk- 
squaes,  nunksquaemes.  See  young,  nee- 
chanog,  pi.  (they  are  born)  children 
(without  regard  to  age  or  sex),  off¬ 
spring;  wunneechan,  his  child  (Muh. 


234 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


child — continued. 

vmechun,  Edw.;  kenechdnog,  your  child¬ 
ren,  C.) ;  u'unneechdnmnk,  the  children, 
as  a  body  or  class,  collectively.  See 
daughter;  son. 

*chimney,  wanachikomuk  ( wunnachkem - 
muk,  C. ;  wunnauchicdmock,  R.  \V.) , 
=wanashque-komuk,  on  the  top  of  the 
house. 

chin,  misham,  C. 

chogset.  See  cunner. 

choke,  nuppashoon,  I  am  choked,  C. ; 

nupwoshwdog,  they  are  choked,  El. 
choose,  pepknam,  pepeneam,  he  chooses 
(it);  pepmash,  choose  thou;  pepenau, 
he  chooses  or  selects  (him);  mahche 
pepen&uonche,  after  having  chosen 
him,  C.  From  pencowe,  it  is  different; 
pe-penau,  he  differences, 
chosen,  pepenoowonche,  -auonohe,  one  who 
is  chosen. 

circle.  See  round. 

circumcise,  quoshqussau,  quosquswau,  he 
circumcises  (him);  quoshqussaum,  (he 
is)  circumcised;  suppos.  part,  noh 
quoshqussuk,  being  circumcised, 
circumcision,  vbl.  n.  quoshqussansuonk. 
*city,  kehtolan,  keihtotan,  great  or  chief 
town.  See  town. 

clam,  poquauhock,  R.  W.;  Peq.  pouh- 
quauhhaug,  p’ quauglihaug,  Stiles;  the 
round  clam  (Venus  mercenaria),  from 
the  black  or,  rather,  dark  purple  margin 
of  the  shell,  of  which  the  Indians  made 
the  '  mckauhock  ov black  money’,  R.W. 
104.  The  first  portion  of  the  name, 
pooquaw,  is  retained  in  Nantucket;  the 
last,  quauhaug,  in  other  parts  of  New 
England.  Rasies  gives  (Abn. )  ‘pek8e, 
pi.  pekSahak,  huitres’.  The  deriva¬ 
tion  is  not  clear.  Perhaps  pukquag, 
that  which  is  bored,  and  hang  ( hogk ), 
a  shell;  or  pukquag  ( p6quag )  may  be 
employed  in  its  derived  sense,  an  in¬ 
closure,  with  reference  to  the  box-like 
character  of  the  shell  as  contrasted  with 
the  gaping  valves  of  the  Mya.  xickls- 
suog  ( siikkwsttog ,  C. ;  Peq .  sucktawaug, 
Stiles),  long  clams,  Mya  arenaria 
[  =  mhq -,  sohq-ussuog,  they  spit  or 
squirt]. 

claws,  talons,  onkqunnesog;  wonkqu.nnr- 
»og,  their  claws  \uhquon-eme,  dim.  a  lit¬ 
tle  hook],  muhkos,  pi.  muhkossog,  the  i 


claws,  talons — continued, 
nails,  claws,  hoofs  [m’uhkdus,  a  sharp 
point]. 

clay,  mancomk,  pi.  mana>n»kog,  ‘bricks’, 
clean,  pahke,  pohki  (pohkoiyiue,  C. ;  pah- 
keyhui,  eleanlily,  ibid. ) ;  pahkesu,  (he is) 
clean,  made  clean  or  pure;  pahketeau, 
he  cleans  (it),  makes  clean, 
clear,  pdhkt,  pohki,  (it  is)  clear  ( pahke - 
yefte,  pduqui,  R.  W. ) ;  pohqu&e,  open, 
manifest,  that  may  be  seen  through 
(pahkee,  pohkiyeu,  clearly,  C. );  pdhkok 
(when  it  is  clear,  transparent) ,  the  clear 
sky  (pduqui,  pduquaqu&t,  ‘it  holds  up’, 
R.  W.,  i.  e.  it  is  clear).  Related  to 
puhqui,  it  is  hollow,  bored  through; 
p6quag,  a  hole;  hence,  that  which  may 
be  seen  through.  Cf.  Greek  8ia,  8id 
ay  go,  8  sihgo(8  sixvvpi)  ,possW)\y  8  aico, 
to  divide. 

cleave,  pohuhinurn,  he  divides,  cleaves 
in  two,  literally  he  halves  (it),  from 
pohshe,  half,  palipasnehtau,  he  cleaves 
it,  makes  it  divide  [pohshe,  with  redup. 
freq.  and  cans.  inan.  form), 
climb,  kiUdntauohlou,  he  climbed  up, 
went  by  climbing;  wutSntaucm,  he 
climbed  up  to  or  into  a  place  ( n’tdun - 
tawem,  I  climb;  atduntowaah,  climb 
thou,  R.  W. );  tohkaotaau,  he  climbs 
on  (it),  as  a  ladder,  a  rock,  a  tree 
( niit-tohkcos ,  I  climb,  C.). 
close,  closed,  kuppohham,  he  stops, 
shuts,  closes  (it);  noh  kobhog,  he  who 
stops  or  closes;  kobhamuk,  suppos.  part, 
inan.  pass,  closed,  when  it  is  closed 
( k&ppash ,  ‘  shut  the  door’,  R.  W. ;  kup- 
pohhash  usquont,  shut  the  door,  C. ); 
kuppi,  thick,  close,  dense  ( cuppl-mach - 
dug,  a  thick  wood,  a  swamp,  R.  W.); 
kuppahtu,  in  a  thicket  or  thick  wood; 
kuppadt,  kuppdd  (when  it  is  close),  ice 
(Peq.,  kuppal  Stiles);  kuppohhou  (the 
instrument  of  closing),  a  door;  kopp6- 
muk,  kobhamuk,  kobhog,  a  closed  place,  a 
harbor  or  haven;  kuppnlUmi  [ =kuppi - 
toon,  closed  mouth,]  a  dumb  person, etc. 
See  shut. 

*cloth,  monak  ( mai'tnek ,  R.  W. ;  monag, 
C. ),  m’6nag,  m’onagk,  in  compound 
words  - onagk :  womponak  (ivompinuit, 
R.  W.),  white  cloth;  msquonagk  (mwh- 
quinuil,  R.  W. ),  red  cloth,  comaunekun- 
nvo,  have  you  any  cloth?  R.  W.,  i.  e. 
i  kum-maunek-unnuo.  mdnak  was  often 


TRUMBULL] 


EXGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


235 


cloth. — (Continued. 

used  for  a  garment,  cloak,  coat,  or  other 
clothing.  That  which  is  traded  (?);  cl'. 
kit  m  man  oh  a  m  i  n  f  have  you  bought? ;  n  u  m  - 
mouanaquish,  I  come  to  buy  (of  you); 
mouanaqushauog,  chapmen,  R.  AY.  Or, 
with  reference  to  its  texture,  monak, 
that  which  is  many  (?). 
clothe,  hogkco,  he  is  clothed  (with);  hog- 
kush  ( orquash ,  R.  AY.),  ‘put  on’,  be  thou 
clothed  with;  hogqut,  agquit  (when  he 
puts  on),  clothed  with;  ne  agquit,  ne 
ciqut,  that  which  he  is  clothed  with 
(squaus  auhaqut,  ‘a  woman’s  mantle’, 
R.AA". ) ;  ogqunneat,  hog-,  to  wear  clothes, 
to  be  clothed  (ogquinneut,  to  put  on, 
C. );  nut-ogquannehhuam,  I  clothe,  C., 
i.  e.  make  clothed.  V.  t.  ogqunnum,  I 
put  on  (clothes).  From  hog,  the  body, 
the  person  (?).  Cf.  ohkmn,  a  dressed 
skin  ( acoh ,  ‘their  deer  skin’  mantle, 
R.  AAT. );  hogkooonk,  clothing;  hogki, 
scales;  onkhum,  he  covers  (pass,  he  is 
covered);  onkqunneat,  to  be  clothed, 
clothing,  hogkooonk  ( aukcoonk ,  C. ),  pi. 

-ongash,  garments.  See  dress, 
cloud,  matokqs,  mahtohqs  ( mattduqus ,  R. 
AA'. ) ;  wompaiokqs,  a  white  cloud;  matoh- 
quodt  ( mattaquat ,  R.AA".),  when  it  is 
cloudy  or  overcast,  ‘foul  weather’ 
[ =Tn’u'uttogki ,  moisture,  wet?], 
coal,  mohkuss a,  mohkos,  a  burning  coal; 
pi.  mohkossaash,  coals  of  fire:  anue  maoi 
onk  ne  mohkos,  blacker  than  a  coal 
\_=m'kossa,  that  which  is  hot  (?),  or 
inooikossa,  black-hot  (?)].  Cf.  Abn. 
mkase,  charbon  eteint;  mkaseskStai, 
charbon  ardent,  Rasies. 

*cock,  monsh  ( monish ,  nampash,  ‘a  hen,  a 
cock’,  C. ;  perhaps  intended  for  monish 
nompashitn  (a male);  chicks,  “takenfrom 
the  English”,  R.AA".). 
codfish,  anishdmog,  C.,  from  anussu, 
anisliu,  it  is  tainted,  putrid,  or  smells 
badly,  descriptive  enough  of  a  badly 
cured  codfish;  pauganaiit,  pi.  —amwock, 
R.AA".  (but pdkonnotam,  haddock,  C.). 
cold,  sonqui,  (it  is)  cold  or  cool  (to  the 
touch);  ohke  sonkqui,  the  earth  is  cold, 
C. ;  sonkippog,  cold  water  (saunqui  nip f 
is  the  water  cool?  R.  AA". ;  saunkopaugot, 
cool  water,  ibid.);  adj.  an.  sonkquesu, 
he  is  cold  (annum  sonkquesu,  the  dog  is 


cold — continued. 

cold;  nus-sonkques,  I  am  cold,  C. ). 
tohkoi  ( tahkl ,  tatakki,  R.AA".),  it  is  cold 
weather  ( mcocheke  tohkoi,  it  is  very  cold, 
C. ;  t  ah  kies,  cold,  R.  AA".,  but  rather, 
cool,  a  little  cold,  dimin.  of  tahki) ;  adv. 
tohkaeu,  in  cold  weather;  suppos.  inan. 
tohkag,  (when  it  is)  cold.  Cf.  taquonck, 
autumn;  taquattin,  it  is  frozen,  R.AA".; 
tcojni,  tohpu,  frost;  tahtippadtou,  he 
quenches,  he  cools  (it);  t ihtappadtam , 
he  quenches,  quoshquodchu,  he  feels 
cold,  suffers  with  cold  ( quosquateliu , 
he  is  cold,  C. ;  nuckqusquatch,  mickqus- 
quatcMmin,  I  am  cold,  R.  AA".;  annum 
quosquatcheo,  the  dog  is  cold,  C. ). 
collect.  See  assemble;  gather, 
come,  pey&u,  he  comes,  oppos.  to  mon- 
chu,  he  goes,  both  verbs  having  re¬ 
gard  to  the  place  where  the  speaker  is 
or  is  supposed  to  be;  peyaush  ( peyosh , 
C. ),  come  thou;  peyunk,  come  ye;  sup¬ 
pos.  part,  payont,  when  he  comes,  he 
coming;  paahettit  ( peyahettit ,  R.  AA". ), 
when  they  come,  they  coming  or  being 
come  (tahirhitch  kup-peeyaumen  ?  what 
come  you  for?  R.  AA".,  —tohwutch  kup- 
peyauma)?) .  See  arrive, 
come  or  proceed  from,  vrutcheu,  tead- 
chiyeu,  he  proceeds  or  originates  from 
or  in  (having  regard  to  the  origin  or 
source),  sometimes  vmtjishau;  suppos. 
part,  vadchiit,  wajhet,  he  who  comes 
from:  toll  vadchiit,  ‘whence  he  was’, 
i.  e.  whence  he  came,  Judg.  13,  6;  ne 
wadchieh,  ‘whence  I  am’,  John  7,  28; 
inan.  pi.  mushconash  initjishaash,  boats 
came  from,  John  6,  23  ( tunna  wutshati- 
ock f  whence  come  they?;  wetuomuck 
noteshem,  I  came  from  the  house;  ndv- 
icaluck  noiesliem,  I  came  from  afar,  R. 
AA".)  From  vrutche,  from,  kachcmco,  kut- 
chemoo,  it  proceeds  or  comes  from  (with 
regard  to  procedure  or  progress);  knen 
kilche,  I  begin,  C.,  i.  e.  I  go  onward  from; 
or  nukkitchefissem,  ibid.  See  begin; 
earth;  father;  proceed, 
comfort,  tapehhuau,  tapheau,  he  com¬ 
forts  (him),  lit.  causes  (him)  to  be 
content  (nut-tappeh,  I  comfort,  C. ;  tap- 
pehhudnat,  to  comfort,  ibid.).  Caus. 
from  taupi,  tdpi,  it  is  sufficient,  or 
enough;  tapantam,  he  is  satisfied,  See 
satisfv. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


236 


command annuman,  annamau  (he  speaks 
with  authority  to),  he  commands 
(him);  annamdnish,  I  command  thee 
( but-annamuk ,  he  commands  thee;  nul- 
annaonuk,  he  commands  me,  C.);  ioh 
ancmt,  ne  dnont,  what  he  commands; 
suppos.  part,  noli  dnont,  he  who  com¬ 
mands,  he  when  commanding;  mittin- 
nanvaonk,  (his)  saying,  command.  See 
say;  think. 

commandment,  naumatuonk,  pi.  -ongash, 
law,  commandment,  anncoteamcoonk: 
iruUannooteamcoonk  God,  a  command¬ 
ment  of  God;  act.  vbl.  from  annooteam, 
annootam,  he  commands  (inan.  obj.  or 
intrans. )  ncowaonk,  a  saying  (by  a 
superior  to  an  inferior),  a  command¬ 
ment;  from  nanvau,  he  says.  See  say. 
kuhkuhwaonk,  ordering,  an  order  or  j 
command  [lit.  a  marking  out,  from 
kuhkenau,  he  marks  out,  sets  in  order], 
common,  moochekeyeuco,  it  is  abundant, 
it  is  common;  nanwe  rnimnninnuog, 
common  people;  nanwe  petukquneg,  com¬ 
mon  bread  ( nanwe  wosketomp,  any  man, 
C. );  ‘nanwe  wul-Epistleum  Jude’,  the 
general  epistle  of  Jude, 
commonly,  wekdnche,  C. 
commotion,  wogkoueonk  (a  stirring  up, 
or  setting  in  motion),  a  stir,  tumult, 
commotion. 

companion,  weetomnkqutch  (he  who  goes 
with  or  accompanies);  weetomp,  a  com¬ 
panion,  comrade,  friend.  See  friend, 
compare.  See  liken, 
compel,  chetanmCau,  he  compels  (him), 
C. ;  chetimau,  El.  See  force,  v. 
complain,  quenow&uog,  they  complain, 
R.  W.  (rather,  they  are  in  want,  lack 
something);  tahwhilcli  quenawdyean? 
why  complain  you  (sing.)?  R.  W. 
completely,  pakodche  (paucdtche ,  ‘al¬ 
ready’,  R.  W.,  and  paugcotche) :  pakod¬ 
che  xissenat,  to  do  completely,  to  ac¬ 
complish;  freq.  papogkodche,  to  the  full 
or  uttermost.  See  finish, 
conceal.  See  hide. 

conceive,  wompequau,  wompequaeu, 
-qutiou,  she  conceives,  is  pregnant;  wom- 
pequait,  if  or  when  she  conceives; 
adj.  wompequde  ( wompiquo ,  C. ),  with 
child,  pregnant;  wompequauonk  (a  con¬ 
ceiving)  ,  conception, 
concerning,  prep,  papaume. 


condemn,  pakodchimau,  pogkodchimau 
(he  makes  an  end  of,  finally  disposes 
of),  he  utterly  censures  or  condemns 
( pogkodchummu&nat,  to  condemn,  to 
convince  (?),  C.).  From  pakodche, 
completely,  utterly;  lit.  there  is  an 
end  of  it,  he  finishes  it.  wusmmau,  he 
judges,  sentences,  or  condemns  (him). 
See  judge. 

condition,  circumstances,  unnlyeuouk 
(his  affairs,  matters,  res).  See  business. 

conduct  one’s  self  or  behave  toward, 
do  or  act  toward,  unnehhuau,  unne- 
heau,  unheau,  he  deals  with,  treats, 
acts  toward,  does  to  (him);  ne  pish 
kuttinhen,  that  or  thus  thou  shalt  do 
to  me;  toll  kittinliesli?  what  am  I  doing 
to  thee?  how  do  I  act  toward  thee?; 
ne  unneheh,  so  deal  thou  with  me, 
2  Chr.  2,  3;  unnehhuk  ( unneheuk ) 
nag,  deal  ye  with  them,  deal  with 
them;  ne  nuitinlieun  ne  anhit,  I  do  to 
him  as  he  hath  done  (as  he  may  do, 
suppos.)  to  me,  Prov.  24,  29.  This 
verb,  of  very  frequent  use,  is  a  causa¬ 
tive  from  neane,  such,  so:  unnehheau, 
he  causes  it  to  be  so  to  him. 

coney,  icciiituckques,  R.  W.  In  the  re¬ 
print  ‘the  conck’,  but  in  the  original 
‘the  conie’.  mohtukquasog,  conies,  Ps. 
30,  26  {wulitukquasuog ,  Mass.  Ps.,  Ps. 
104,  18). 

confess,  sampmam,  sampaoantam,  he  con¬ 
fesses  (it);  sampooctu  ( samppoowau ,  C. ), 
he  confesses  to  (him).  From  sampwe, 
sampwi,  rectus. 

conjuror,  pauwau  ( powwdw ,  R.  W. ),  a 
priest,  conjuror,  or  sorcerer.  See 
priest;  wizard. 

conquer,  sohkom,  he  conquers,  over¬ 
comes,  prevails  over  (it):  sohkom  otan, 
he  took  the  town;  sohkash  machuk, 
overcome  (thou)  evil,  Rom.  12,  21;  an. 
sohkau,  he  prevails  over,  conquers 
(him);  suffix  wus-sohkau-oh,  he  pre¬ 
vailed  over  him;  noh  sohkauonl,  he  who 
prevails  or  conquers  (suppos.  when 
conquering) ;  pi.  neg  sohkauoncheg,  they 
when  conquerors,  the  conquerors,  dn- 
nuau,  dnnuivau,  he  overcomes  or  con¬ 
quers,  C.  (?). 

consider  of,  meditate  on,  devise, 

nalwontam,  he  considers  of  (it). 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


237 


consume,  mohtupohteau,  mohtuppaeu  (it 
passes  away),  it  is  consumed,  wastes 
away,  dissolves,  vanishes,  or  the  like;  j 
with  a  pass,  signif.,  mohtuppabno,  it  is 
consumed,  melted  ( mohtupaenate ,  to  j 
consume;  num-mohtupaem,  I  consume  or 
I  am  sick,  C. ).  With  the  sense  of  mis¬ 
fortune  or  disaster,  mahtsheau ,  it  wastes 
away,  consumes;  so,  mahtsheau,  inah- 
sheau,  it  decays,  it  fails,  it  vanishes 
away.  From  mache.  See  decay;  have; 
pass  away;  sick,  ncotau  mahchekussum, 
the  tire  consumed  (it);  ncotau  mahclie- 
kussuau,  the  fire  consumed  (him),= 
mahche-chikossum,  made  an  end  of  burn¬ 
ing.  mohtuttano,  it  is  consumed;  mah- 
tugquash  mohtutta-ash,  the  trees  are  con¬ 
sumed,  i.  e.  burned  up.  mahtsuwae, 
mahtsuhhuae,  consuming  (as  a  fire). 

contempt,  vbl.  n.  act.  mishananumaonk, 
a  despising  or  contemning;  pass,  mish- 
ananittuonk,  a  being  despised  or  con¬ 
temned.  See  despise. 

contend  -with,  be  at  difference  with, 

penuanumau,  he  contends  or  is  at 
strife  with  (him);  noh penuanumont,  he 
(when)  contending,  he  who  contends; 
mutual  an.  penuanittuog ,  they  contend 
with  one  another.  F rom  penowe u,  there 
is  a  difference;  penoiee,  different, 
contented,  tapantam,  he  is  satisfied  with 
(it);  he  is  contented,  =tdpi-antam,  sat¬ 
isfied,  or  enough-minded, 
contention,  vbl.  n.  act.  penuanumaonk, 
having  a  difference  with;  recip.  and 
pass,  penuanitluonk  (mutual  difference), 
contention,  strife. 

continual,  nagwuUeae;  adv.  nagwutteaeu 
(it  continues  or  is  continual),  at  all 
times,  always  ( nagwutteaeyewoonk ,  per¬ 
severance,  C.). 

■^converted,  quimnuppekompau,  (hestands  ' 
turned  about),  he  is  converted.  N. 
agent,  (indef.)  quinnuppekompauatnin, 
anyone  who  stands  turned  about,  a  con¬ 
vert  (as  in  the  title  of  the  translation 
of  Shepard’s  “Sincere  Convert”,  Sam- 
pwutteahae  Quinnuppekompciuenin ) . 
cook.  See  bake;  roast, 
copulate,  wehpam.au,  he  has  sexual  con¬ 
nection  with  (her),  he  lies  with,  as 
man  with  woman;  with  suffix  cowelipo- 


copulate — continued. 
muh,  he  lay  with  her;  w epamcoe  wics- 
kannem,  semen  virile;  wepumawdonk, 
sexual  connection;  but  the  same  (?) 
verb,  wehpumau,  wepimau,  signifies  he 
eats  with,  shares  a  meal  with,  as  pish 
kco-wepimimwco,  ye  shall  eat  with  me, 
1  Sam.  9,  19  (wehpitlituk,  let  us  eat  to¬ 
gether,  Exp.  Mayhew).  See  couple. 

cord,  string,  pemunneat,  pemunneoht 
(peminneaht  ome,  a  (fishing)  line,  C.,  = 
aumanep,  R.  W. ;  pe&menyaht,  a  cable  (?), 
C. ).  tuttupun,  tuttuppunohtog  (it  is 
twisted),  a  cord,  string,  or  thread;  ha- 
shabpe  tuttuppun,  a  tow  thread;  musqui 
tuttuppun,  a  scarlet  thread. 

cormorant,  kuts,  kuttis,  kuttuhsu,  pi.  -nog 
( kitsuog ,  R.  W. ). 

corn,  weatchimin  (the  plant  or  corn  in 
the  field);  pi.  iveatchiminneash  (the 
fruit)  ( eachimmineash ,  C. ;  ewdchimneash, 
R.  W.;  Peq.  wewautchemins,  Stiles; 
Karr,  accoquiss,  Stiles;  Abn.  skam8n,  pi. 
-nar,  mesikStar,  ‘ble  entier,  qui  n’est  pas 
pile’;  8ahbighen8r  skam8nar,  or  8ah.be- 
menar,  ble  blanc;  8is8menar,  ble  jaune) . 
This  name  is  compounded  of  min,  pi. 
mmneash,  grain,  fruit,  and  a  word  which 
is  related  to  meech,  he  eats,  and  meechnm 
(he  eats  it),  food,  the  primitive  form  or 
radical  force  of  which  I  can  not  fix. 
munnequomin,  green  corn  (in  the  field) ; 
pi.  munnequaminneash,  green  ears  of 
corn;  missunkquaminneash,  dry  ears; 
dimin.  missunkquaminnemesash,  dried 
up  or  blasted  ears,  appcosuash  (and 
apwosue)  weatchiminneash  (contract. 
appuminneonash) ,  parched  or  roasted 
corn  ( aupuminneanash ,  R.  W. );  from 
apwou,  appcosu,  he  roasts.  noohJdk 
( nocake ,  Wood;  nokehick,  R.  W.),  ‘In¬ 
dian  corn  parched  in  the  hot  ashes, 
.  .  .  afterwards  beat  to  powder’, 
‘parched  meal,  which  they  eat  with  a 
little  water,  hot  or  cold’,  R.  W.; 
from  noohki,  it  is  soft;  noohkik  (suppos. ) , 
when  it  is  softened,  pishqukhick,  un¬ 
parched  meal,  R.  W. ;  from  pashquag, 
that  which  is  fine  or  in  powder,  whence 
caus.  pashquehheau,  he  makes  it  fine; 
suppos.  pashquehhik  (Abn.  peskesS,  ‘  ll 
est  fleure’;  pi.  -s8ak,  Rasies).  np.s fr¬ 
ump,  “a  kind  of  meal  pottage,  un¬ 
parched  .  .  .  From  this  the  English 


238 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


c  or  n — cont  inued. 

call  their  samp,  which  is  the  Indian 
corn  beaten  and  boiled”,  R.  \Y.;  nupu- 
rn.ineanawsd.ump,  ‘their  parched  meal 
boiled  with  water’,  ibid.;  from  sau- 
pde,  sabae,  softened  by  water,  macer¬ 
ated  (whence  sdbaheg,  pottage;  wus- 
sabpe,  thin):  ne  saupAe  ( nawsaump , 
R.  W. ),  that  which  is  boiled  soft  or 
macerated  in  water;  hence,  sappaen 
[sauppae-un,  pass.  part,  form],  ‘the 
crushed  corn  boiled  to  a  pap’,  Monta- 
nus,  Descr.  X.  Xetherland,  1671,=  the 
suppawn,  sepawn,  of  the  Dutch  (and 
pone  of  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland?). 
in’ sickquatash,  ‘boiled  corn  whole’,  R. 
W.,=  mod.  succotash  [sohquttahha.sk, 
inan.  pi.  from  sohquttahham,  he  breaks 
it  to  pieces,  or,  as  applied  to  an  ear  of 
corn,  he  shells  it;  m' sohquttahhash  (sc. 
minneash),  the  shelled  corn  boiled,  in¬ 
stead  of  boiled  ears]. 

corner,  naiyag,  nayag,  nahnaiyag,  the 
external  point  where  two  lines  meet,  a 
corner  or  angle  externally,  a  point  [nai, 
squared,  angled;  naihaue  ( noeu ),  in  the 
middle  or  between  two]:  adt  naiyag, 
to  or  at  the  corner;  yaue  naiyag  (or 
naee)  wetu,  the  four  comers  of  the 
house;  freq.  adt  nahnAiyag,  at  the  four 
comers,  i.  e.  at  all  the  comers,  nashik, 
=naiyag  [from  nashaue,  between]: 
yau-ut  nashik  olike,  at  the  four  comers 
of  the  earth;  adj.  nashinne,  of  or  at  a 
corner;  nashinne  qussuk,  a  corner-stone. 
pmchekelieg,  pcotsai,  poochAag,  paoehag, 
a  retired  place,  out  of  the  way,  a 
recess,  a  corner:  ut  poochoag,  adt  pa>- 
chag,  in  a  corner,  Prov.  21,  9;  25,  24; 
aush  pootsawt,  go  into  the  closet,  Matt. 
6,  6  [from  pahchau,  pauchau,  he  turns 
aside,  deviates;  or  from  pohchean,  it 
divides,  separates]. 

corpse,  ahchunk,  oftener  napuk  (when 
he  is  dead),  mauchauhom,  ‘the  dead 
man’,  ‘the  deceased’,  R.  W.,  lit.  he  has 
gone  away.  See  dead;  death;  die. 

corrupt,  anunnoo,  it  is  corrupt,  tainted, 
putrid,  rotten;  anunwog,  aninwog  [anin- 
nooog ],  they  are  corrupt;  suppos.  an'it, 
(when  it  is)  corrupt  (‘it  is  putrefied ’ , 
R.  W. );  n.  concrete  aneuk,  a  corrupt 
tiling  (when  it  is  corrupt),  a  rotten 
thing;  act.  vbl.  aninnobank,  corruption 


corrupt — continued. 

( weyausae  aninnobonk,  ‘corruption  of 
the  flesh’,  C. );  adj.  annittue,  corrupted; 
an.  act.  anussu,  lie  causes  <>r  produces 
corruption;  he  is  corrupt,  rotten,  or  pu¬ 
trefied.  From  Anue  (?),  more,  beyond, 
further,  too  much,  pussoqua,  rotten,  C. : 
pussoqua  weyaus,  ‘corrupted  flesh,  or 
rotten’,  ibid.  Cf.  pissagq,  dirt,  mire 
( pissugk ,  C.). 

counsel,  n.  agent,  kenaninaen,  pi. 
-aenuog,  counselors,  and  kenoosannunin 
( kenoosooaenin ,  C. ),  pi.  -aeninnuog  [ken- 
oonau,  he  speaks  to  with  authority,  as 
a  superior  to  an  inferior  or  an  elder  to 
a  younger].  See  advice;  advise, 
count,  ogketam,  he  counts,  takes  the 
number  of  (inan.  objects);  ogkemau,  he 
counts  (an.  objects);  ogkeiash  (akitash, 
R.  W. ),  count  thou  or  reckon;  ogketaj 
ne  adtahshik,  let  him  count  the  number 
or  the  sum  of;  an.  obj.  ogkesu,  he  is 
making  a  count,  engaged  in  counting; 
hence,  akesuug,  ‘they  are  telling  of 
rushes’  (i.  e.  gambling),  R.  W.  145 
‘for  their  play  is  a  kind  of  arithmetic’; 
nashpe  ogketamunat  (infinit.  as  noun), 
‘  by  count  ’ .  From  ogque,  like  to,  in  the 
same  manner  as  (?).  See  read, 
couple,  infinit.  neesinat,  to  couple,  to 
lie  two  together;  neesin,  he  lay  with 
(her),  she  lay  with  (him);  neesintuh, 
lie  thou  with  me;  suppos.  part,  neesuk, 
when  he  or  she  lies  with  (Abn. 
niss88ak,  ils  sont  maries;  neki  t8de  (ait 
vir),  nSssi  (ait  mulier),  je  suis  mari£). 
From  neese,  two.  See  copulate, 
cousin,  adtonkqs  (consanguineus,  or  afli- 
nis?);  kadtonkqs,  thy  cousin,  Luke  1, 
36;  ivadtunkqtisoh,  her  cousins  { iraidncks , 
R.  W.,  wodtonkqsin,  C.,  a  cousin;  nat- 
uneks,  my  cousin;  wattonksittuog,  they 
are  cousins,  R.  W. );  nuttonkqsog,  ‘sirs’, 
Acts  27,  25  (for  Gr.  arSpes). 
cove,  auciip,  ‘a  little  cove  or  creek’; 
aucppdwese,  ‘a  very  little  one’ [=<uicuj>- 
aese,  dimin.  ] ,  R.  W.  From  kuppi,  closed, 
shut  in.  Cf.  kobpog,  a  haven, 
covenant,  agreement,  w  u  nnco  irAonk 
[ imnne-narwAonk ,  good  talk];  u'unnco- 
wau,  he  covenants,  makes  a  league  or 
agrees  with  (him). 

cover,  onkhum,  he  covers  over,  hides 
(it) ;  nut-onkkum  nuskesuk,  I  hide  (cover) 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


239 


cover — continued. 

my  face;  vbl.  n.  onkwhonk,  a  covering, 
a  screen;  n.  concrete  onkwheg,  that 
which  covers  (as  the  cover  to  a  dish  or 
box) ;  hence  onkqueekhoo  [=s onkwliegoo ], 
a  hat.  Cf.  ogqunneaf,  to  wear  clothes,  to 
becovered;  ogkco,  he  is  clothed;  ogkome, 
ongkoue,  beyond,  on  the  other  side  of 
(covered),  puttagham,  puttughum,  he 
covers  up,  he  hides  (it):  puttogluimundt 
poshkissuonk,  to  cover  one’s  nakedness, 
C. ;  n.  concrete,  puttagwheg,  a  covering 
[puttogueu,  he  hides  himself] .  wuttunk- 
humun  [ wut-onkhum-un]  monak,  she 
covered  it  with  a  cloth.  Cf.  Wautacone, 
pi.  Wautaeondaog,  R.  W.  ( ivatdhkmgno , 
C. ),  ‘coat  men’,  ‘such  as  wear  coats ’ , 
a  name  given  to  the  English,  nuhkuh- 
korri,  it  covers  over,  overwhelms,  puts 
under  (as  a  flood);  an.  nuhkuhkauau,  it 
overwhelms,  covers  over  (him);  from 
nookeu,  it  descends,  comes  down,  with 
k’  progressive,  natippau,  nehtippau,  it 
is  covered  with  water,  Gen.  7, 19,  20. 
covering,  onkicheg  (see  cover),  uppdh- 
quo-s,  obbohquos,  a  covering  (awning, 
screen,  or  the  like) ,  something  put  over 
or  above;  ne  dbuhquosik,  its  covering 
(of  a  chariot,  Cant.  3,  10)  (abockquo- 
sinash,  pi.,  the  mats  used  for  covering 
the  wigwams,  R.  W. ). 
covet,  ahchewontam  (he  thinks  very 
much  of,  desires  exceedingly),  he  cov¬ 
ets  (it);  pi.  suppos.  ahchewontegig,  the 
covetous. 

coward,  soliquompcoo,  C. ;  sohquompooonk, 
cowardice,  ibid.  (?);  soliqutteahhaue, 
faint-hearted,  ibid.  (?). 
crafty,  wunnompewessu,  icunnompuimissu, 
nehtompuwissu,  (he  is)  crafty,  ‘subtile’ 
‘with  guile’,  ( vmnnupn'ou-ae  kenosco- 
waonk,  crafty  counsel,  C. ) ;  wunnom- 
peuhkau,  he  beguiles,  deceives  by  craft 
(him).  Cf.  nompatauunat,  to  substitute 
one  thing  for  another, 
crane,  tannag  (tatinek,  R.W. ),  from  tanne, 
hoarse  (?).  sassadt;  cf.  Abn.  sassaghi-8i, 
il  est  droit. 

crash,  toshkeonk,  a  crashing  (noise?), 
Zeph.  1,  10. 

crawling,  creeping,  pamompagit, 
(when)  it  creeps;  noli  pamompag,  that 
which  creeps;  pi.  pamompakecheg;  an. 


crawling,  creeping — continued. 
pamompagin  dctas,  ‘creeping  thing’  (nup- 
pummcotashom,  1  creep,  C. );  freq.  and 
habit,  papdmompag,  pi.  -pakecheg,  and 
pdpdmcotcheg,  creeping  things, 
create.  See  make, 
creature.  See  animal, 
creeping.  See  crawling, 
crooked,  iroonki  (wdnki,  R.  W. ;  wonkoi, 
C. ),  crooked  (lit.  it  bends);  ne  woon- 
kag,  that  which  is  crooked  or  bent; 
adj.  an.  woonkesu  ( iconkkendsu ,  C. ),  he  is 
bent  or  crooked;  uvunkagk,  (when  it  is 
crooked)  error,  transgression,  wdnkin- 
num,  he  bends  (it);  woonkitteau,  he 
makes  (it)  bent  or  crooked  [related 
to  waeenu ,  round  about,  bent  or  curved 
around?],  pendyi,  crooked,  RAV.  [ pan - 
neau,  he  goes  out  of  the  way,  turns 
aside,  errs],  pemisqudi,  ‘crooked  or 
winding’,  R.  W. ;  freq.  pepemsque, 
crooked,  tortuous;  cf.  peimquoh  [ 
queu,  it  whirls  or  twists],  a  whirl¬ 
wind. 

cross  over,  qushkodteau  seip,  he  crossed 
over  the  river;  seip  ne  woh  mo  qush- 
kodteomuk  (pass,  particip. ),  a  river  that 
could  not  be  crossed  over  or  passed, 
crossway,  pummeeche  may,  Obad.  14. 
crow,  n.  konkoniu  ( kaukont ,  pi.  -\-uog, 
R.  W. ;  kongkont,  C.);  kutchikkonkont 
[ keliehe  konkont ],  ‘raven’;  elsewhere 
konkoniu  and  weenont.  Onomatopoetic. 
cruel,  onkapunnde,  dwakompande  (tor¬ 
menting,  torturing),  cruel,  severe  (of 
pain  or  torture);  onkqueneunkque,  C., 
unkqueneunkque,  El.,  grievous,  terrible, 
extreme  [from  unkque  or  uhqueu,  at  the 
extremity,  extreme] . 
crust  (of  bread),  koshklttake,  C.  From 
kdshki,  rough  (?),  or  kishke-ohtag,  that 
which  is  at  the  side  of  (?). 
cry  (weep),  mau  ( mou ,  C. ):  nummcocheke 
mob,  I  weep  much;  nuihmauop,  mum- 
mop,  ( nummoup ,  C. )  I  did  weep;  mauug, 
mauuk,  when  he  weeps  or  cries;  sup¬ 
pos.  pi.  neg  mdugig  they  who  weep; 
adj.  maue,  rnauwe,  weeping  ( mduo , 
‘to  cry  and  bewail’,  R.  W.);  freq. 
mauemau,  he  cries  or  mourns.  See 
mourn. 

cry  aloud,  cry  out,  mishontoowau,  he 
cries  out,  shouts  (roars,  C. );  imperat. 
sing,  mishontooivash  ( mishadntowash ,  R. 


240 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BCLLETIN  25 


cry  aloud,  cry  out — continued.  curse — continued. 

W. ),  cry  out;  vbl.  n.  act.  mishontcmca-  nau,  he  curses  (him)  [intens.  from 
onk,  a  crying  out,  outcry,  shouting.  maichenau], 

cuckoo,  kiyunk,  Lev.  11,  16;  but  in  custom,  uhshudonk,  ughuaonk,  a  custom 
Deut.  14,  15,  kukkow  is  transferred.  It  ( ushitwaonk ,  i unseonk,  an  example,  C. ; 

is  not  certain  to  what  species  of  bird  uhshmcaonk,  example,  Danf.),  = '(.wri¬ 
the  name  used  by  Eliot  belonged.  onk,  doing  (?).  See  action, 

cunner,  chogset,  or  burgall  (Labrus  cut,  tummwmun,  tummehtam,  he  cuts 


chogset,  Mitch.;  Crenilabrus  burgall, 
Storer),  cachauxet,  Stiles  (Peq. )  [ehoh- 
chohkesit,  spotted?]. 

cure,  heal,  neetskehheau,  he  cures  or 
heals  (him)  (causat.,  makes  him  well) ; 
neetxkehteau,  he  cures  or  heals  (it,  as  a 
fever,  a  wound);  neetskesu,  (he  is)  cured 
or  restored  to  health  ( nun-iueUkeh ,  I 
heal,  C. );  neetskehhuwaonk  (a  making 
well),  a  cure. 

current,  kussiichuwan  (it  flows  swiftly 
onward);  uk-kissitehuanncoonk  (vbl.  n. 
act.,  a  flowing  onward,  a  continuous 
flowing).  See  flow. 

curse,  mattdnumau,  he  curses  (him); 
matdmtmcok,  curse  ye  (him) ;  mattantam, 
mattanitam,  he  cursed  (it)  ( num-mattan - 
nltteam,  v.  i.  (?),  I  curse,  C. ;  mattannisk- 
5nat,  v.  t.  an.  (?),  to  curse,  ibid. ) ;  mata- 
nittuonk  ( mattannutiuonk ,  C.),  a  curse 
( pass. ) ;  matunum&onk,  a  curse  (act.) ;  cf. 
mattannit,  devil,  matchenaneteau,  v.  i. 
he  curses;  matchenantam  (he  thinks 
evil,  is  evil-minded),  he  curses  (it); 
matehenanetedonk,  cursing;  mamatche- 


(it)  off:  tummehtamwog  uppuhknk,  tum- 
mustumwog  uppuhknk,  they  cut  off  his 
head,  1  Sam.  31,  9;  2  Sam.  20,  22  (nui- 
tummlssum,  I  cut,  C. ;  tummethamunate 
mehtug,  ‘to  hew  down  a  tree’,  Ind. 
Laws);  suppos.  pass.  part,  ne  voh  tdme- 
tahhamuk,  that  which  must  be  cut  off; 
tummehtamun,  (it  is)  cut  off.  tummeh- 
tamau  wuhtauog,  he  cut  off  from  (him) 
his  ear;  with  suffix  iruttu  rn  melt  In  man.  - 
oh,  he  cut  (it)  off  from  him.  tummig- 
quohwou,  he  beheaded  (him),  =tum - 
mehtamau  nppnhkuk  ( timequassin ,  to  cut 
off  or  behead,  R.  W. ).  nehneMkkom,  he 
tears,  claws,  rends,  cuts  in  pieces  (as  by 
the  teeth  or  claws);  with  an.  obj.  neh- 
nekukkau ;  intrans.  nehnekikkism,  he 
tears,  rends,  or  cuts  (particip.  nenehkis- 
s6su,  cutting,  C. );  neekussosn,  neegqsosn, 
he  cuts  himself,  mmsum  ummeesunk,  he 
cuts  or  shaves  his  hair  [lit.  he  smoothes 
it;  from  mwsi,  smooth]  ( moosomunat , 
to  shear  (sheep),  C mooswiitinneat,  to 
be  shaved,  ibid. ;  petghumunat,  to  shave, 
ibid.;  nuppeegham,  I  shave,  ibid.). 


D 

dance,  pumnkau,  he  dances;  pmnmukonat 
( pumukkonat ,  C.),  to  dance;  pummuka- 
onk,  a  dancing  ( pauochaitog ,  ‘they  are 
playing  or  dancing’,  R.  W. ; ahque  mat- 
ndkesh,  do  not  dance,  C'. ;  mattwakkdonk, 
dancing,  ibid.  This  was  probably  the 
war  dance.  Cf.  matwau,  an  enemy; 
matwa&onck,  a  battle,  R.  IV.). 
dangerous,  n&nukquok  (when  there  is 
need  to  beware),  from  nunnukqusm,  he 
takes  heed,  is  cautious  ( nen  nummkqus, 

I  beware,  C. ),  which  is  from  nnh- 
qnaeu  (?),  he  looks  for,  looks  out,  uses 
his  eyes:  nnnnukque  aquompiyeuash, 
perilous  times;  nannukquappn,  nnk- 
quappu,  he  is  in  danger, 
dark,  pohkendi  (paukiinnum,  dark,  R.W.; 
]iohkunni,  C-),  when  it  is  dark;  as  n. 


dark — continued. 

darkness;  pohkeni  (?),  it  is  dark;  poh - 
kenahtu,  in  darkness;  pohkenittipukook, 
‘in  the  dark  night’,  night-darkness; 
adx.jMhkende,  darkly,  obscurely ; causat. 
pohkenumwde  [= pohkenumuhhde],  mak¬ 
ing  dark,  made  dark,  blind.  Prob¬ 
ably  from  pogkenau,  he  puts  away,  a 
putting  away  light  or  the  sun.  Cf. 
vayont,  (going  away)  sunset.  But  how 
related  to  pohki,  pahke,  clear,  plain, 
transparent?  See  day. 

Roger  Williams  states  that  the  In¬ 
dians  called  the  constellation  Ursa 
major  (“the  great  Beare,  or  Charles 
Waine”)  mosk  or  paukunna  mra  w, 
“which  .  .  .  signifies  a  Beare”,  and 
Stiles  (Narr.  Yoc. )  has  konooh,  a  !>ear. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


241 


dark — continued. 

The  name,  as  applied  to  the  constella¬ 
tion  and  the  animal,  was  probably  de¬ 
rived  from  pohkenai)  signifying  ‘he 
goes  when  it  is  dark  ’ ,  or  by  night, 
daughter,  wut-taun-oh,  his  daughter,  the 
daughter  of;  pi.  wut-taun-og,  the  daugh¬ 
ters  of,  his  daughters;  indef.  vmt-taun-in, 
the  daughter  of  anyone,  any  daughter, 
a  daughter  ( wuttonin ,  C.);  nut-taunes 
( nittatinnis ,  R.  W. ;  nuttdnnees,  C.),  my 
daughter;  collect,  wuttauneunk,  all  the 
daughters,  all  who  are  daughters,  the 
daughterhood;  wuttoneu,  wuttauniyeu, 
he  begets  or  has  a  daughter,  she  bears 
or  has  a  daughter. 

Mr  Duponceau,  in  his  Notes  on  Eliot’s 
Grammar  (pp.  xiii,  xiv),  expressed  his 
surprise,  ‘  ‘  after  the  positive  statement 
of  our  author  that  substantives  are  not 
distinguished  by  cases  (except  [ani¬ 
mates  when  governed  by  a  verb  transi¬ 
tive]  as  above  mentioned),  to  find  differ¬ 
ent  terminations  of  the  same  word  in 
various  parts  of  his  translation  of  the 
Bible,  of  which  he  makes  no  mention 
and  gives  no  explanation  in  his  Gram¬ 
mar.”  He  instances  wuttaunoh  Zion, 
‘daughter  of  Zion’,  Lam.  2,  8;  woi 
Jerusalemme  wuttaunin,  ‘O  daughter  of 
Jerusalem !  ’  woipenomp  Zione  wuttaunin, 
‘0  virgin  daughter  of  Zion!’  Lam.  2, 
13;  wutdssuneutunk  umttanoh  Zion,  ‘the 
wall  of  the  daughter  of  Zion’,  Lam. 
2,  8;  woi  kenaau  Jerusalemme  wuttau¬ 
neunk,  ‘0  ye  daughters  of  Jerusalem!’ 
Cant.  2,  7;  kah  ompetak  wuttoneu  (mis¬ 
printed  for  wuttoneu),  ‘and  she  bare 
a  daughter’,  Gen.  30,  21.  “The  first 
of  these  terminations  is  correct”,  Mr 
Duponceau  informs  us,  nuttanoh,  kut- 
tanoh,  wuttanoh  being  “the  proper 
nominatives  of  this  word”,  but  the 
others  “can  not  be  accounted  for” 
otherwise  than  by  the  conjecture  that 
Eliot  “had  recourse  to  different  Indian 
dialects.  ’  ’  A  very  moderate  proficiency 
in  the  study  of  the  language  would 
have  enabled  Mr  Duponceau  to  recon¬ 
cile  the  seeming  incongruity  in  a  man¬ 
ner  more  creditable  to  Eliot  as  a  trans¬ 
lator  and  to  his  own  critical  sagacity. 
Thus,  wuttaunoh,  his  or  her  daughter,  or 
the  daughter  of  (corresponding  in  form 
B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 16 


daughter — continued, 
with  the  3d  pers.  sing,  of  the  transi¬ 
tional  or  suffix  verb),  is  really  the  pos¬ 
sessive  or  genitive-construct  form,  the 
termination  -oh  indicating  its  govern¬ 
ment  by  or  dependence  on  the  noun 
following.  In  Jerusalemme  wuttaunin, 
lit.  ‘any  Jerusalem  daughter  ’ ,  the  first 
word  has  the  form  of  an  adjective,  and 
the  termination  -in  (any)  indicates  the 
indefinite  use  of  the  word  ‘daughter’; 
wuttauneunk,  in  Jerusalemme  uuttaun- 
eunk,  is  the  collective,  and  signifies  the 
Jerusalem  daughterhood,  all  the  daugh¬ 
ters  of  Jerusalem;  and  in  ompetak  wutto¬ 
neu,  ‘afterwards  she  bare  a  daughter’, 
wutt6neu,  instead  of  being,  as  Mr  Du¬ 
ponceau  supposed,  “in  the  accusative 
governed  by  an  active  verb”,  is  itself 
the  verb,  ompetak  representing  the  ad¬ 
verb  ‘  afterwards  ’ .  See  younger  son  or 
daughter. 

daughter-in-law  (son’s  wife),  wushim- 
oh,  his  or  her  son’s  wife,  the  daughter- 
in-law  of;  kushim,  thy  daughter-in-law; 
indef.  ivushim-in,  a  daughter-in-law. 

dawn,  mohtompan  ( mautabon ,  ‘it  is  day’ 
R.  W. ) ;  mohtompog,  when  it  is  morning 
(used  with  reference  to  a  past  or  future 
morning) ;  en  mohtompanit,  until  morn¬ 
ing.  See  day. 

day,  kesuk  (primarily  the  sun,  the  sun 
as  the  source  of  heat  and  light;  also  the 
sky  or  visible  heavens,  coelum),  day, 
sunlight:  pasuk  kesuk,  in  one  and  the 
same  day,  Gen.  27,  45;  1  Sam.  2,  34;  pi. 

quash,  Is.  24,  22,  {anamakiesuck,  this 
day,  R.  IV.).  Rarely  used;  see  sun. 
kesukod  ( keesakat ,  R.  IV. ;  kesukod,  C. ),  a 
day,  the  space  of  a  day;  suppos.  kesukok, 
when  it  is  day;  a  day  past,  future,  or 
contingent:  ne  kesukok,  on  that  day 
when,  or  while  it  was  that  day;  yen 
kesukok,  (on  or  within)  this  day;  ne- 
gonne  kesukod,  the  first  day;  kesukod  kah 
nuhkon,  day  and  night;  pi.  kesukodtash, 
days;  adv.  and  adj.  kesukoddeu,  -dae, 
by  day,  in  the  daytime  ( kesukkdttae , 
C. ;  keesqush,  keesuckqudi,  by  day,  R.  IV. ) . 
After  a  numeral  adjective  or  the  ad¬ 
jectives  ‘few’,  ‘many’,  or  the  like, 

‘  days  ’  was  more  commonly  expressed 
by  -quinnu  or  -quinne,  a  day  (or  when 
it  was  the  day),  or  by  the  suppos.  form 


242 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


day — continued. 

qu  inogok  or  quinukok:  pcmik  kesuk,  amxh 
neesuk  kemkquae  .  .  .  asuh  piogkuk- 
quinne,  ‘one  day  or  two  days  ...  or 
ten  days’,  Num.  11,  19;  nequtte  kesuk 
asuh  neesequinnu,  ‘a  day  or  two’,  Ex. 
21,  21;  ogguhse-quinne,  few  days;  moo- 
chetikquinne,  for  many  days.  The  sup- 
pos.  form  is  used  after  an  ordinal,  as 
nishikquinogok,  on  the  third  day  ( shack - 
qundckat,  ‘three  days’,  R.  W. ;  nishik- 
qunnohquod,  three  days  hence  or  ago, 
C.) ;  yauquinogkok,  on  the  fourth  day 
( yowunndckat ,  ‘  four  days’,  R.  W.).  So, 
mahche  moochetik-quinogok,  ‘after  many 
days’  ( nesukquinogkod ,  two  days  ago, 
C. ;  mamusse  quinne  kesukod,  all  the  day 
long,  ibid.,  which  last  phrase  points  to 
the  etymology,  from  quinne ,  long,  the 
measure  of  duration). 

‘  ‘  They  are  punctual  in  measuring  their 
day  by  the  sun,  and  their  night  by  the 
moon  and  the  stars”,  R.  AY.  67.  Be¬ 
sides  the  more  obvious  mode  of  indi¬ 
cating  time  of  day  or  night,  by  saying 
that  the  sun  or  moon  was  ‘so  high’ 
( yo  tdunt  nipeean,  ‘the  sun  thus  high,  I 
will  come’,  R.  W. ),  the  seasons  of 
light  and  darkness  were  subdivided, 
under  significant  names,  to  a  degree 
that  admitted  of  considerable  accuracy 
in  expressing  time.  The  principal  of 
these  subdivisions  or  hours  were  as  fol¬ 
lows:  adchuiv&mpag,  (when  it  is)  morn¬ 
ing  watch,  just  before  daylight  [ ahchu 
wompag,  he  looks  earnestly  for  day¬ 
light];  ketompog,  (when  it  is)  daybreak 
[ keht-wompag  (?),  the  beginning  of  day¬ 
light]  ( kitompanisha,  break  of  day,  R. 
W. ;  pootouwdshd,  G. );  choudeatch,  about 
cock-crowing,  R.  W. ;  wompag  (bright 
light),  full  daylight  (vompan,  mautabon, 
chichduquat,  it  is  day;  ampatdnban,  it  is 
broad  day,  R.  W.;  Cree  wdpun,  Howse 
77);  mohtompan,  it  is  morning  {mautd- 
bon,  R.  W. );  mohtompog,  when  it  is  (or 
was,  or  will  be)  morning,  in  the  morn¬ 
ing;  nompodeu,  early  in  the  morning; 
nompuhkeik,  ‘on  the  morrow’,  i.  e. 
when  it  was  (next)  morning;  pdsh- 
pishont  ( up-poshpishaonk  nepaz,  C. ;  pa- 
shisha,  ‘it  is  sunrise’,  R.  W. ),  sunrise 
[when  he  springs  forth,  suppos.  from 
pishpeshau  (freq.  of  peshau ) ,  he  springs 


day — continued. 

forth,  it  blossoms;  cf.  uppeshau,  a  flow¬ 
er]  ;  pohshequdeu  ( halfway ) ,  noon  ( pdwe - 
shaquaw,  paushaqdaw,  R.TY. ;  yahenpaw- 
shaquair,  almost  noon,  ibid.;  pohshe- 
quae,  C.);  panicdmpaiv,  navrwduu'qaw, 
quttukquaquav,  R.  W.,  quAttuhqdohqud, 
C.,  afternoon  [ pdnikompau ,  he  stands  at 
one  side  or  sidelong;  nadwot-uhquaeu, 
he  looks  afar  or  from  a  distance;  qut- 
taueu,  he  is  sinking,  going  downward]; 
wayont,  vaont  [suppos.  from  wauonu, 
he  goes  astray,  goes  out  of  the  way, 
is  lost],  sunsetting;  wayau  ( icayadwi , 
R.  W. ),  it  is  sunset  ( mwaya/mk  nepaz, 
C. ) ;  ash.  uaaongkup,  before  sunset 
(past  time);  paiipakinasik,  Prov.  7,  9, 
papesukaeu,  Ezek.  12,  7,  in  the  twi¬ 
light;  wunnonkquAe,  at  evening;  wdnon- 
kcouk,  vannonkmmk,  (when  it  was) 
evening  ( unmnduquit ,  R.  W. ) ;  tuppaeo, 
otematippocat,  toward  night,  R.  \Y. ; 
nukon,  nuhkon  ( nukkon ,  C.),  pi.  -f -ash, 
night  [from  nukkonau,  he  leaves  or  for¬ 
sakes?]  ;  past  or  future  suppos.  nohkog, 
when  it  was  night;  nukkondeu  ( n&ukocks , 
nokann&wi,  R.  W. ),  by  night;  pohkenit- 
tipukcuk,  in  the  darkness  of  night  (pdp- 
pakunnetch,  auchaugotch,  dark  night, 
R.  W. ;  pohkiniippdhkod,  C.)  [from  pog- 
keni,  it  is  dark,  and  tippaeo  ( tuppaeo , 
R.  W. ),  of  doubtful  meaning;  cf.  A  bn. 
iahni  ed8tsi  tebi  katf  quel  temps  de  la  nuit? 
etc. ,  Rasies  494] ;  noetipukoddeu,  at  mid¬ 
night;  pajeh  ndetipukkok,  till  midnight 
( nouttippbhkod ,  ‘late at  night’,  C. ;  nana- 
shouxitippoeat,  midnight,  R.  TV.  [from 
n6eu ,  in  the  middle;  nashaue,  between 
or  midway,  and  tippaeo  ?]  ) ;  wampan- 
ne,  wompanne,  all  night, 
day  by  day,  daily,  dsekesukokish. 
day’s  journey,  nequtte  kemkquashdnat 
(infin. ),  to  go  one  day’s  journey;  n’quit- 
takeesiqudekat,  n’  qutttakees-pumnmhen, 
‘one  day’s  walk’,  R.  TV. 
dead,  nuppuk,  pi.  nupukeg  [suppos.  part, 
from  nuppay,  he  dies].  Though  Eliot 
employs  this  word  exclusively,  it  was 
more  customary  with  the  Indians  to 
substitute  some  euphemistic  equivalent, 
“because  they  abhorre  to  mention  the 
dead  by  name”,  (R.  TV.  161),  as  chi- 
peck  [from  rhippeu,  he  separates  himself 
or  is  separated;  suppos.  part.,  ‘the 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


243 


dead — continued . 

separated’];  mauchauhom,  pi.  -(- wock, 
the  dead  man,  the  dead  (he  has 
passed  away);  michemeshdm,  ‘he  is 
gone  forever  ’ ;  kitonckquei,  ‘he  is  dead’, 
R.  W.  160;  maw,  ‘he  is  gone’,  ibid, 
[for  amaeu,  he  is  gone  ?].  See  die. 
deaf,  kokopsan,  (he is)  deaf;  suppos.  part. 
kokobsont,  pi.  -oncheg,  the  deaf,  he  or 
they  when  deaf  (kogkopsae  mehtduog, 
a  deaf  ear,  C. ).  The  radical  is  kuppi,. 
closed,  shut  up. 

deal  with.  See  conduct  one’s  self, 
death,  nuppcoonk  (El.  and  C. ),  participial 
from  nuppao,  he  dies.  Sometimes  the 
intin.  nuppundte  was  used  for  the  noun 
abstract. 

debt,  unnontuhquohicut,  -ichont,  a  debt,  re¬ 
ferring  to  the  debtor  (when  he  owes); 
vbl.  n.  pass,  unnontuhquohwhuttuonk,  a 
being  owed.  Elsewhere,  ne  anontuk- 
quulurhont  (what  he  owes);  dacltuhkau 
nconamantvhquohukquean,  ‘  pay  thy  debt  ’ 
(what  thou  owest),  2  K.  4,  7  (nuttin- 
ohtukquawhut,  I  am  in  debt,  C. ;  nohtuh- 
qualnvhittuonk,  debt  (pass.),  ibid.;  no- 
saumautackqudwhe,  I  am  much  in  debt, 
R.  W.  134;  nonamautuckquaheginash, 
debts;  kunnoonaviautu.ckquaush,  I  will 
owe  it  you,  ibid.) .  See  owe. 
decay,  mahtsheau,  he  or  it  fails,  passes 
away,  decays.  From  mnhche.  See  fade, 
deceive,  assaokekomau,  he  deceives, 
cheats  (him);  v.  i.  assookekodteam,  he 
deceives  or  cheats  ( mitt  asscokekodteam ,  I  - 
cheat,  C. ) ;  suppos.  part,  noh  asookekod- 
teamwit,  he  who  deceives,  ‘  the  deceiver  ’ ; 
noh  asookekomit,  he  who  is  deceived,  the 
deceived,  ivunnompeuhkonau,  he  de¬ 
ceives  by  craft,  beguiles  (him) ;  wunnom- 
puwrnsu,  he  is  crafty,  deceives  by  craft. 
See  lie. 

decrepit,  mohtantam,  (he  is)  decayed, 
infirm  by  reason  of  age,  failing;  sup¬ 
pos.  part,  noh  malitauntog,  he  who  is 
decrepit:  kehchis  asuh  noh  mattauntog, 
‘old  man  or  him  that  stooped  for  age’, 

2  Chr.  36, 17.  See  fade;  pass  away, 
deep,  mconaeu,  moonoi,  (it  is)  deep:  mamoe 
nippeash,  deep  waters;  wuttahhamunk 

moonoi,  the  well  is  deep;  moondionk - , 

it  is  deeper  than - ;  mamoonoagish, 

‘[very]  deep  places’,  Ps.  135,  6.  In 
compound  words,  condi,  without  the  in¬ 


deep — continued. 

definite  particle,  which  serves  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  it,  when  standing  alone,  from 
condi,  blue  (the  color  of  deep  water?); 
as,  conduohkdi,  a  valley  ( aonouwohkoai , 
C. ).  Adj.  an.  conouiuussu,  (he is)  lean, 
low  in  flesh;  oondi-weyaus,  etc.  Roger 
Williams  has  ivame  nadmakiauog ,  they 
go  to  hell  or  to  the  deep  (page  117). 
deer,  uhtuk,  ahtuhq  ((Muck,  R.  W. ;  attuk, 
C. ),  a  deer;  pi.  a htuhquog,  adtunkquog 
( attuckquog ,  R.W.).  This  word  is  used 
by  Eliot  for  ‘  roe  ’ ,  ‘  roebuck  ’ ,  and  some¬ 
times  ‘hart’;  but  in  Deut.  12,  15,  nuk- 
koncihtuk  (old  deer)  for  ‘hart’, and  else¬ 
where  aiyump,  ‘ hart  ’  and  ‘  young  hart’ 
(ndonatch,  pi.  -pang,  R.  W. ;  paucottaii- 
imt,  paucottduwaw,  a  buck,  a  great 
buck,  ibid.;  wainvunnes,  a  young  buck, 
ibid.;  Peep  noughitch,  nogh-ich,  deer, 
Stiles;  waughtuggachy ,  ‘deer,  i.  e.  wet- 
nose’,  ibid.;  cunggachie  maukijase,  a 
great  deer;  mausshcikeet  maukkyhazse, 
the  biggest  deer,  ibid.),  qunnegk,  a 
hind  or  female  deer;  pi.  qunnegqudog 
(aundn,  qunneke,  a  doe,  R.  W. ;  qunne- 
qudivese,  a  little  vouug  doe,  ibid.). 
aiyump,  ayimp,  eiyomp,  a  ‘hart’,  ‘young 
hart’,  ‘roe’;  eiyompaemesog,  ‘young 
harts’,  ‘young  roes’  ( kuttiomp  [ keht - 
eiyomp'],  a  great  buck,  R.  W. ).  moos, 
pi.  moosdog,  ‘fallow  deer’,  1  K.  4,  23 
( modssoog  (pi.),  ‘the  great  ox,  or 
rather,  a  red  deer’,  R.  W.;  moose,  ‘the 
skin  of  a  great  beast  as  big  as  an  ox, 
some  call  it  a  red  deer  ’ ,  ibid. ;  moosquin, 
a  fawn,  ibid.;  moos,  ‘a  beast  bigger  than 
a  stag’,  Capt.  John  Smith, 1616).  Was 
it  so  called  from  its  skin,  which  was 
dressed  smooth,  moosi ? 
deformed,  noh  uvskesit,  he  who  hath  (he 
having)  a  blemish  or  deformity, 
delicate,  waashpu,  woicushpu,  tender, 
delicate,  effeminate;  suppos.  part,  noh 
icaashpit. 

deliver,  pohquohivhussau,  he  delivers 
(him),  frees,  or  releases  from  con¬ 
straint  ( nup-pohquohuhussuwam ,  nup- 
pohquohwhuttwm,  I  deliver,  C. );  from 
pohquohham,  he  escapes,  goes  free  (i.  e. 
pohquodchit,  out  of  doors,  where  it  is 
open);  caus.  an.  pohquohheau,  he 
causes  (another)  to  go  free;  pohquoh- 
heau-ussu,  he  acts  or  does  that  which 


244 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


deliver — continued, 
causes  (another)  to  go  free.  So,  poh- 
quawhus  kuhhog  and  pohquohush,  ‘  escape 
thou’,  ‘save  thyself’,  tomheau,  he  de¬ 
livers,  rescues,  saves  (him),  makes  him 
safe;  caus.  from  tomeu,  he  saves  himself, 
escapes;  inan.  tomwehteau  keitotanash, 
‘he  recovered  the  cities’,  2  K.  13,  25. 
See  loose. 

deliverance,  pohquohwhunnittuonk,  tom- 
hettuonk  (pass.  vbls. ),  the  being  saved, 
being  delivered, 
den.  See  cave;  hole;  pit. 
dense.  See  close;  thick, 
deny,  qumcowcmtam,  he  denies  (it) ;  with 
affix  uk-qu-enanvantam-un,  he  denied  it 
(' nuk-quenanvam ,  I  deny,  C. ) ;  quenoowau, 
kohkonooau,  he  denies,  makes  denial  (to 
another) ;  suppos.  3d  pers.  pi.  kohkdnco- 
wahettit,  when  they  denied,  gave  denial; 
suppos.  part.  pi.  neg  kohkoncowacheg, 
they  who  deny,  they  (when)  denying, 
depart,  amaeu,  he  departs,  goes  away; 
amaish  ( amaish  and  amaehtash,  C. ), 
depart  thou,  go  away;  amaehtauau,  he 
departs  from  (him);  with  affix  vmt- 
amaehtau-oh,  he  departed  from  him; 
suppos.  amahtauont,  when  he  departs 
(or  when  departing)  from;  amayeuonk, 
departure,  going  away,  sohham  [soh- 
com],  he  departs,  goes  forth,  sets  out 
(on  a  journey  or  the  like) ;  sohhash 
(s&vnvhush,  R.  W. ;  sohhash,  C.) ,  go  thou 
forth  ( sawheke ,  go  ye  forth,  R.  W.) ; 
sohhamooonk,  departure,  going  forth, 
descend.  See  go. 

descent,  woomsuonk  [act.  vbl.  from  woom- 
su,  he  descends,  goes  downward],  a  de¬ 
scending  or  going  down,  hence  a  ravine, 
a  steep  descent  (waumsu,  ‘down  hill’, 
R. W. ).  Elsew 'here neahhut wdmwsimnk 
(suppos.  part,  inan.,  when  it  descends), 
a  descent,  declivity,  downward  slope 
(of  a  mountain,  etc.) .  vmtontseonk,  de¬ 
scent,  lineage  (a  proceeding  from:  wut- 
ontseu,  he  proceeds,  or  descends  from), 
desert.  See  forest. 

deserted,  toueu,  touvmi,  deserted,  soli¬ 
tary,  desolate;  hence,  touappu  [ toueu - 
appu ],  he  is  deserted  or  desolate;  touoh- 
komuk,  a  solitary  or  desert  place,  the 
wilderness;  touwies,  touies  [toueu-usm~\ , 
a  fatherless  child,  an  orphan;  pi.  touie- 
sog  ( towiiiwock,  R.  W.).  See  solitary. 


deserve,  nuttdpp&hkdm,  I  deserve;  tdpeh- 
ko muriate,  to  deserve,  C. 
desire,  kodtantam,  he  desires,  longs  for, 
has  an  inclination  to  (it) ;  nuk-kodtantam 
( neattatintum  or  ncattiteam,  R.  W. ),  I 
long  for,  I  desire  (it);  an.  obj.  kodta- 
num-au,  I  long  for  (him);  suffix  kuk- 
kodtantam-omh,  I  desire  (it)  from  thee 
[ kod-antam ;  kod  is  often  used  with 
other  verbs  to  express  purpose,  inten¬ 
tion,  determination,  or  desire;  some¬ 
times  it  denotes  activity  in  the  im¬ 
mediate  future,  ‘about  to’  do  or  to  be 
done;  as,  uttoh  kod  usseit,  what  he  may 
be  about  to  do  or  is  about  doing,  Gen. 
41,  28.  See  intend.  Cf.  kodtuppoo, 
he  is  hungry  (desires  to  eat)],  ahche- 
wontam  [ ahchu-antam ,  he  thinks  very 
much  of,  is  exceedingly  minded],  he 
desires  exceedingly,  covets, 
desist,  ahque,  he  desists,  leaves  off,  Gen. 

17,  22;  Ruth  2,20. 
desolate.  See  deserted;  solitary, 
despise,  jishantam,  jishontam,  he  de¬ 
spises,  he  hates  (it);  nut- jishantam  (El. 
and  C. ),  I  despise,  I  hate;  an.  jisha- 
numau,  he  despises  or  hates  (him). 
sekeneneam  (he  refuses,  rejects),  he  de¬ 
spises,  hates  (it),  mishantam,  he  de¬ 
spises,  contemns  (it) ;  an.  mishanumau, 
he  despises  or  contemns  (him), 
destitute  of,  wanne,  not  having,  being 
without :  wanne  ivahtede,  without  knowl¬ 
edge;  wanne  wutcoshe,  without  a  father; 
wanne  nippeno,  there  is  no  water  in  it, 
it  is  destitute  of  water;  caus.  wanneh- 
heau,  wannehteau,  he  is  deprived  of 
(made  to  be  without),  he  loses.  See 
without. 

destroy,  paguanan,  pagwanau,  he  de¬ 
stroys  (them);  inan.  paguateav,  pag- 
vjohteau,  he  destroys  (it)  or  (v.  i.)  he 
destroys;  paguatoog,  they  destroy;  sup¬ 
pos.  paguatunk-otanash,  when  he  de¬ 
stroyed  the  cities;  an.  suffix  up-paguan- 
uh,  he  destroyed  them;  paguanuonk 
(vbl.  n.  act.,  a  destroying),  destruction; 
pagwahteaen,  a  destroyer, 
determine,  jxikodtantarn,  he  purposes, 
intends,  is  determined  [ pakodche-antam , 
he  is  thoroughly  minded  or  clear 
minded];  vbl.  n.  act. pakodtantamaronk, 
determination,  purpose. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


245 


devil,  mattanit,  pi.  mattannitoog ,  -coog 
[ mat-anitto  or  matehe-anitto,  the.  negative 
or  opposite  of  m’anitto,  god,  the  not- 
god  or  evil  god]  (Muh.  mtandou  or  man- 
nito,  devil.  “The  last  of  these  words 
properly  signifies  a  specter  or  anything 
frightful”,  Edwards,  2  Mass.  H.  C.  x, 
88.  Del.  machtando  or  matshimanitto, 
devil,  evil  spirit,  Hkw.) .  It  is  probable 
that  this  word  was  formed  by  Eliot  or  by 
his  Indian  converts.  The  devil  or  evil 
spirit  of  Indian  mythology  was  called 
Habamouk,  Hohbamoco,  Abbamocho,  or 
Chepie  (Smith’s  Descr.  of  N.  E. ;  Jos- 
selyn;  Lechford).  “ Abbamocho  or  Chee- 
pie  many  times  smites  them  with  in¬ 
curable  diseases,  scares  them  with  his 
apparitions  and  panic  terrors,  by  reason 
of  which  they  live  in  a  wretched  con¬ 
sternation,  worshipping  the  Devil  for 
fear”,  Josselyn,  3  Mass.  H.  C.  in,  300. 
“Another  power  they  worship,  whom 
they  call  Hobbamock,  and  to  the  north¬ 
ward  of  us,  Hobbamoqui.  This,  as  far 
as  we  can  conceive,  is  the  Devil  ’  ’ ,  Wins¬ 
low’s  Relation  ( 1624) .  The  etymology 
of  this  name  is  not  apparent;  but  che¬ 
pie  (Peq.  cheeby,  chepy,  Stiles) ,  is  a  form 
of  cheppe  or  chippe,  separated,  apart, 
that  which  is  distinct  or  separated  from 
us,  that  is,  from  the  body  or  life. 
Heckewelder  explains  the  Delaware 
“tschipey  or  tschitschank”  (sometimes 
wrongly  used  for  ‘ ‘  the  soul  or  spirit  of 
man”)  as  signifying  a  specter,  spirit, 
or  ghost,  and  having  “something  ter¬ 
rifying  about  it.  ”  “  Thejr  call  the  place 

or  world  they  are  to  go  to  after  death 
Tschi-pey-ach-gink  or  Tschipey  hacking, 
the  world  of  spirits,  specters,  or  ghosts, 
where  theyimagine  are  various  frightful 
figures”,  Hkw.,  2  Mass.  H.  C.  x,  147. 
Eliot  has  chepi-ohke  and  chepioh-komuk 
for  hades,  hell  (the  place  of  separation 
or  the  land  of  spirits).  So,  chepeck, 
‘the  dead’,  R.  W.  [chippeog,  they  are 
separated  or  apart];  tsee-e-p,  ‘ghost, 
dead  man’,  Nanticoke  Voc.  in  2  Mass. 
II.  C.  x,  139.  Squantum,  another  name 
for  the  evil  spirit  (Josselyn ;  Higginson ) , 
is  clearly  a  contraction  of  musquantam., 
‘he  is  angry’.  Roger  Williams  says 
(109),  “if  it  be  but  an  ordinary  acci¬ 
dent,  a  fall,  etc.,  they  will  say,  ‘God 


devil — continued. 

was  angry  and  did  it ;  m  usquantam  manit, 
God  is  angry.’  ”  See  spirit;  God. 
devise.  See  consider, 
devote.  See  offer, 
devour.  See  eat. 

dew,  neechippog  ( neechipog ,  R.  W.) ;  nee- 
chipagwi  pattippeshineash,  dew-drops 
[neechau,  it  gives  birth  to  or  (pass.) 
is  born  of,  -pog,  water] . 
dice,  vmnnaugonh ommin,  “to  play  at  dice 
in  their  tray”  { wunnonk ,  a  dish,  El.; 
wunnaug,  a  tray,  R.  W. );  amuanmh, 
“the  painted  plum  stones,  which  they 
throw”,  “a  kind  of  dice,  which  they 
cast  in  a  tray  with  a  mighty  noise  and 
sweating”,  R.  W.,  145,  146. 
die,  nuppo),  nup,  he  dies  or  is  dead; 
suppos.  part,  nupuk,  when  he  dies, 
he  dying;  pi.  nupukeg,  the  dead;  pish 
kenup,  thou  shalt  die  ( kitonckquei ,  he  is 
dead,  R.  W.;  nipin,  radio  [=  amaeu  ?], 
he  is  gone,  ibid. ;  nippitch  eivo,  let  him 
die,  ibid. ;  niphettitch,  let  them  die,  ibid. ; 
pish  nunnup,  I  shall  die,  C.)  [related  to 
neepau,  he  rises  up,  and  nuppoh,  a  wing? 
or  to  ahpcoteau,  uppcoteau,  lit.  ‘with¬ 
ers?’].  See  dead. 

difference,  penaowomdi,  a  difference  or 
unlikeness.  See  contend, 
different,  penooioe,  strange,  foreign,  dif¬ 
ferent,  or  unlike  [related  to  pianne,  out 
of  the  way;  panneu,  he  goes  out  of  the 
way,  errs,  is  astray];  penancei/eum,  it 
is  strange,  different,  or  unlike.  See 
foreign;  strange;  stranger, 
difficult,  siogke  (siokke,  C.;  sitickat,  hard, 
R.  W. ) ;  suppos.  siogkod,  siogkok,  when 
or  if  it  is  hard  or  difficult;  ne  siogkok, 
that  which  is  difficult,  a  difficult  mat¬ 
ter.  From  see,  seog,  sour,  bitter.  See 
hard. 

difficulty,  siogkeyeuonk  (vbl.  n.  act. ),  a 
hard  matter,  hard  case,  difficulty;  in- 
tens.  sasiogok,  pi.  -j-  ish,  difficult  matters, 
dig,  kuttahhum,  he  digs  into  or  through, 
or,  he  digs  for  or  digs  up  (anything): 
kuttahhamwog  wetuomash,  ‘they  dig 
through  houses’,  Job  24,  16;  v.  i. 
uk-kuthamuneau,  they  digged  it  (as,  a 
well;  cf.  widtahhamunk,  a  well).  w6n- 
teaa,  he  digs  a  hole;  ncoiconteam,  I 
have  diggeil  a  hole  ( nco-uvnuhkontam ,  I 
make  progress  by  digging,  or  go  on  dig- 


BUREAG  OF  AMREICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


24H 


[BI  I.I.KTIN  i") 


dig- — continued. 

ging;  cf.  2  K.  19,  24;  Is.  37.  25):  v:6n- 
teauh  kah  uk-hitham-uu ,  ‘he  made  a 
pit  and  digged  it',  Ps.  7,  15;  wdnteaog, 
they  dig  holes;  icdnuhkoniamme  wuttah- 
hamougash,  wells  i  which  are)  digged 
[from  wonogq,  a  hole],  passdhtham, 
pdssohtham,  he  digs  a  pit  [from  pas- 
sahhteg,  passohtheg,  a  pit] .  qunnupohta- 
rnun,  he  digs  around  or  about  it  (as  a 
tree). 

dip,  quogkirmum,  puogkinnum  (?),  he  dips 
(it)  in  or  into;  pu-ogkeu,  pvogkeu,  he 
dips  or  immerses  himself  ( pnogkinno - 
note  howan,  to  dip  or  immerse  anyone, 
Wun.  Samp.  eh.  xxix,  33).  quompham 
nippe,  he  dips  up  water;  v.  i.  quomphip- 
paog,  ‘they  drew  water’  (qu&mphmh, 
quamp  homtinea,  ‘take  up  for  me  out  of 
the  pot’,  R.  W.). 

dirty,  nishkeneunkque ,  unclean,  filthy, 
impure  (inherently  or  by  nature);  sup- 
pos.  nishkeneunkqv.odtae,  (when  it  is) 
dirty  or  unclean  (as,  a  garment);  adj. 
an.  nish keneunkqusm ,  (he  is)  unclean, 
dirty. 

dish,  vurmonk,  a  dish  or  tray  (wunnaug, 
pi.  -r -anosh,  a  tray,  R.  W.;  vrurmonk, 
mccmaeech,  dish  or  tray,  G. );  xrunnon- 
ganit,  in  the  dish  ( mmnauganbnese ,  a 
little  trav,  R.  W.).  From  wonogq,  a 
hole  (?),  vxmogkeu,  it  has  a  hollow,  is 
dug  out.  Cf.  mmnogkus,  the  belly.  See 
bottle;  kettle;  vessel, 
disperse.  See  scatter, 
dissolve,  melt,  mohtupohteau,  it  melts, 
is  dissolved  (passes  away);  nummoh- 
tupaeem,  I  consume,  I  am  sick,  C. 
From  moht  ( =maut ,  inahche),  -ohteau, 
signifying  completed  and  passing-away 
existence.  See  consume, 
distant.  See  far. 
distress.  See  pain;  want, 
disturb.  See  hinder;  trouble, 
divide,  polish  i  mini  (paushinum,  R.  \V. ), 
he  divides  (it)  in  two,  halves  it;  pish 
pohshinurmrog,  they  shall  halve  (it); 
v.  t.  an.  pohshinau,  he  halves  or  divides 
(an  animal  or  animate  object) ;  v.  i.  poh- 
sheau,  poksheav,  it  divides  itself,  cleaves 
asunder.  From  pohshe,  palish?,  half; 
cf.  pohqunnum,  he  breaks  (it)  asunder; 
pokshau,  it  breaks,  chippimnn,  he  di¬ 
vides  or  separates  (it)  from,  he  makes 


divide — continued. 

a  division  or  partition  of  (it);  an.  obj. 
ehippinau,  he  divides  or  makes  divi¬ 
sion  of;  chippinnumaok  ompeteaonk,  di¬ 
vide  ye  the  tribute;  chippinnmk  neg  toh- 
qunogeg,  divide  ye  the  prey  (animals 
taken,  or  prisoners);  v.  i.  chippeu,  it 
separates  itself,  is  separate  or  divided 
{chippachAusin,  it  divides,  as  a  path, 
a  stream,  R.  W. ) ;  chippancoonk  (vbl. 
n.  act.,  a  dividing  or  division),  a  tribe; 
pi.  chippmu-og,  they  who  are  divided  or 
separate,  a  people  or  tribe,  chadchau- 
benum,  he  divides,  keeps  apart,  causes  to 
be  separate  ( nut-chadchapunum ,  I  divide, 
C. );  with  inan.  subj.  chadchaubemco, 
ehadchapema),  it  divides;  chadchapemoo- 
udj,  ‘let  it  divide’,  or  cause  to  be  sep¬ 
arate  (one  thing  from  another,  Gen. 
1,  6);  vbl.  n.  act.  chaehabenumdonk,  a 
division  or  separation,  a  bound  mark 
[freq.  from  chippinum ] . 
diviner.  See  priest, 
divorce,  pogkenau,  he  casts  (her)  away, 
divorces  her  ( npakHam ,  I  put  her  away, 
R.  W. ).  See  cast  away, 
do,  age  re,  ussendt,  to  do,  act,  perform, 
accomplish,  execute;  usm,  usseu,  he 
does  (it);  v.  i.  umt-ussen,  he  does  (so) 
( nuttissem  machuk,  I  commit  evil,  C. ); 
suppos.  noh  asit,  aseit,  he  who  does  or 
performs,  a  doer;  ussish,  do  thou;  ussek, 
do  ye;  ne  aseinuk,  that  which  is  done, 
a  thing  (when)  performed;  negat.  im- 
perat.  ussektm ,  do  not  do  (it),  Ex.  20, 
10. 

The  compounds  of  this  verb  are  in¬ 
numerable,  for  it  is  not  only  combined 
with  such  words  as  express  the  quality 
of  action,  as  vnmnesu  [wunne-usm'],  he 
does  well;  matchesu  [ matche-ussu ],  he 
does  ill,  etc.,  but  it  serves  to  express 
potential  activity,  as  well  as  action  per¬ 
formed;  that  is,  the  idea  of  activity  in¬ 
separable  from  that  of  an  animate  being. 
Thus,  with  an  animate  subject  it  was 
sometimes  used  as  a  verb  of  existence, 
and  in  composition  it  denotes  an  ani¬ 
mate  subject  (as  ohteau  does  an  inani¬ 
mate  subject)  of  the  compound  verb, 
dog,  aniim  {a%  %um,  C.),  pi.  -\-wog. 
Eliot,  in  noticing  the  changes  which 
some  of  the  consonants  undergo  in 
passing  from  one  dialect  to  another, 


TRl'MBULL]" 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


247 


dog — continued. 

instances  this  word,  as  Roger  Williams 
had  before  done,  as  pronounced  by  the 
Indians  of  Massachusetts,  anfun,  with 
“um  produced”;  by  the  Nipmucks, 
alum;  by  the  Northern  (and  the  Quin- 
nipiac)  Indians,  arum,  and,  as  Roger 
Williams  states,  by  the  Narragansetts, 
aylm  (El.  Gr.  2;  R.  W.,  Key,  96). 
Stiles  gives  ayimp,  aujimp  (Narr. ),  and 
n’ahteah  (Peq. ) .  “  The  Delawares  say  al- 
lum,  the  Algonkins  alim,  the  Etchemins 
or  Abenakis  allomoos  [allum-6aas]  ”, 
Barton’s  Compar.  Voc.  From  a  root 
signifying  to  take  hold  of  or  to  hold 
fast,  to  hold  on  to.  The  animate  form 
occurs  not  rarely  in  Eliot’s  translation; 
as,  noh  anum-woh  anunont  wehtauog-ut, 
‘one  that  taketh  [suppos.]  a  dog  by  the 
ears’,  Prov.  26, 17;  nut-annun  oo-weeshit- 
toon-it,  I  caught  him  by  his  beard,  1  ; 
Sam.  17,  35. 

doing,  action,  usseonk  [vbl.  n.  act.  from 

usseu]. 

do  not!  ahque  ( aquie ,  leave  off,  do  not! 
R.  W. ),  desist  or  refrain  from,  followed 
by  a  verb  in  the  imperative;  ahque 
wabesish,  fear  not,  do  not  fear;  more 
emphatically  and  authoritatively  in  the 
imperative  of  the  negative  form,  wabe- 
sehkon  ( aquie  assdkish,  be  not  foolish, 
R.  W. ;  ahque  amaish,  don’t  depart,  C.) ; 
ahqueh,  ‘have  patience  with  me’  (Matt. 
18,  26),  where  it  is  used  as  a  verb  in 
the  an.  suffix  form.  Eliot  calls  it  an 
‘adverb  of  forbidding’,  ‘beware,  do 
not’  (Gr.  21).  He  uses  it  as  a  verb  in 
the  indicative  in  Gen.  17,  22;  Ruth  2, 
20,  for  ‘he  desists,  leaves  off’.  When 
compounded  with  the  verb  to  form  the 
imperative  negative  it  has  the  form 
-dhkon,  -uhkon,  or  -kon,  as  kummoot- 
uhkon,  thou  shalt  not  steal  (steal  not); 
ahchewanumuhkon,  thou  shalt.  not  covet; 
nusheteohkon,  thou  shalt  not  kill,  etc. 
The  vowel  sound  variously  written  dh, 
-uh,  -oh,  -eh  was  probably  nearly  like 
the  German  o. 

door,  squ&ntam,  squont,  squoant  ( usquont , 
C. ),  pi.  -arnash,  door  or  gateway;  appu 
vmsquontam-ut  ut  wek-it,  he  sat  in  the 
door  of  his  tent  ( sqUauntdu muck,  at  the  j 
door,  R.  W. );  c.f.  asequam,  lie  sews  (it.) 
up;  usquontdsu,  he  is  sewing,  kuppuh- 


door — continued. 

hou,  a  door  [inan.  caus.  from  kuppi, 
close:  that  which  makes  close], 
do  to,  act  or  behave  toward,  unne- 
heau,  he  does  to  (him),  conducts  him¬ 
self  toward  (another) ;  ne  unnehe,  so 
deal  thou  with  me,  do  this  to  me; 
unnehuk  nanuk  nay,  so  do  ye  to  them; 
toh  kittinheshf  what  have  I  done  (what 
do  I)  unto  thee? ;  wunnenelieau,  he  does 
good  to  (him)  or  treats  (him)  well; 
wunneneheontuh  wame,  let  us  do  good 
to  all  men,  Gal.  6,  10. 
double,  papiske,  papaxku ,  papskeu,  papske, 
piskeu:  papske  ahtdonk,  a  double  portion; 
kup-papasku  onkquatonsh,  I  will  render 
to  thee  double,  Zech.  9,  12;  pish  neesit 
piskeu  dadtehteau,  he  shall  pay  double, 
Ex.  22,  4,  7.  Related  to  piuhsuke,  pa- 
piuhsuke,  over  against  or  (reciprocally) 
opposite;  or  from  pasuk-co,  it  is  one, 
by  reduplication  pa-pasuk-oo. 
doubt,  be  doubtful,  chanantam,  he 
doubts;  chanantamwoy,  they  doubted 
( nut-chdndntam ,  I  doubt,  C. ;  ahque  cha- 
nantah  (do  not  doubt  me),  ‘you  may 
take  it  for  granted’,  ibid.), 
doubtless,  matta  kdhche,  ‘no  doubt’ 
( matta  kuhche,  Danf. ). 
dove,  wuskuh'whan  (?).  See  pigeon, 
down.  See  cast  down;  downward;  go;  let 
down. 

downward,  ohkeiyeu  (ohkeieu,  below,  C. ), 
toward  the  earth,  downward  (aukee- 
aseiu,  downward,  R.  W. )  [from  ohke, 
earth],  woomiyeu,  downward;  woomiyeu 
woomiyeu,  ‘  very  low’,  Deut.  28,  43.  noo- 
keu,  he  descends,  goes  or  comes  down 
[n’ ohke-yeu],  woomussu,  uwmsu,  he  goes 
downward;  noowomussin  ivadchuut,  I 
came  down  from  the  mountain;  sup¬ 
pos.  noh  woomsit,  he  who  goeth  down¬ 
ward;  vbl.  n.  act.  iroomsuonk ,  a  going 
down,  a  declivity  or  descent, 
draw  out,  kodtinnum,  he  draws  or  pulls 
(it)  out;  an.  kodtinnau,  kodnau,  he  draws 
(him)  out;  kodnmk  uaitch  ncotautut,  draw 
(him)  out  of  the  fire;  suffix  nuk-kodtin- 
uk  wutch  nippekontu,  he  drew  me  out  of 
the  water;  kodtinnum  ivuttoykodtey,  he 
drew  his  sword,  kuhpinau  ( =kodtinau' ?) 
hashabpoh,  he  drew  the  net. 
draw  water,  uwttuhuppau,  wwtuhpau,  he 
draws  water;  vmttuhuppaog ,  they  drew 


248 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


draw  water — continued. 

water  ( = quomph ippaog,  1  Chr.  11,  18);  J 
ncothupau,  naotuhupau,  I  drew  water  for 
(him).  See  dip. 

dream,  unnukquom,  he  dreams;  v.  t. 
nuttinnugquomun  unnugquomcoonk,  I  ! 
dreamed  a  dream. 

dress,  Jwgkooonk  ( aukcoonk ,  C.) ,  agarment 
or  covering  of  skin  ( acdh ,  ‘their  deer  j 
skin’,  R.  W.);  monak,  cloth  (mSnak, 
C. ;  maunek,  ‘  an  English  coat  or  man¬ 
tle,’  R.W. ),  a  garment,  cloak,  coat,  etc. 

( wdwdmek ,  a  dress,  G. );  petashqush&onk, 
petaoshqushaonk,  a  cloak,  outer  garment. 
See  clothe;  clothing. 

drink  (n.),  onkuppe,  onkup,  menuhke 
imttattamdonk,  strong  drink. 

drink  (v.),  wutt&ttcim,  he  drinks;  wuttal- 
tash,  drink  thou  ( ahque  umimatous  (= 
uumeattash) ,  do  not  drink  all,  R.  W. ; 
pdutouf i  notatdm,  give  me  drink,  ibid.; 
nootdMam,  I  drink,  C. ) ;  vbl.  n.  act,  wviiai- 
tamcDonk,  drink ;  mtatta  mmonk,  his  drink. 
There  was  another  word,  meaning  to 
drink,  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  Eliot 
except  in  compounds.  Its  radical  was 
.rip-  or  sup-  (perhaps  related  to  sabae, 
saupae,  soft,  thin,  macerated;  cf.  A‘S. 
sipan,  Engl,  sup,  sip,  soup,  etc. ),  thus, 
td psuppamwehhittit  (Mass.  Ps. ),  tapsip- 
pdmhettit  (El. ),  ‘when  they  have  well 
drunk’,  John  2,  10  [ tdpi-sippam-hettit , 
when  they  have  drunk  enough] ;  kogkeis- 
sipp'waen,  a  drunkard  [ ko gkeae- sippa m , 
he  drinks  madly  or  to  madness] ;  ohksip-  ! 
pamwean  \_=ahque-sippamwean\,  ‘if  you 
leave  off  drinking  ’ ,  C. ;  wussau rmippa m- 
inneat  [ = wussau  me-sippam  in  neat,  to 
drink  too  much],  to  be  drunk,  ibid.; 
vmssomsippamde,  drunken,  ibid.;  ahque 
kogkesupamwish,  don’t  be  drunk,  ibid. 

drive  away,  amacohkauuu,  he  drove 
(him)  away  or  out  [arnaeu,  k’  progress- 
ive,  and  an,  he  goes] ;  suffix  mit-amaooh- 
kaouh,  they  drove  them  away;  inan. 
nanumit  amawhkom  sokanon,  ‘the  north 
wind  drives  away  the  rain’,  Prov. 
25,  23. 

driven  by  the  wind,  nish  toohanash, 
tmunash,  things  which  are  driven  or  fly 
before  the  wind;  suppos.  ne  Ummnoniog 
ivaban,  that  which  is  driven  by  the 
wind,  flies  before  the  wind;  elsewhere,  j 
tamnmntog,  tohtcoanontog,  ptcoanurdog;  I 


driven  by  the  wind — continued, 
from  ptooeu,  it  flies;  ptmeuunne,  it 
moves  in  the  manner  of  flight;  cf.  Gree 
thdotin,  it  blows,  Howse  130.  mishoon 
nomshaeu,  the  boat  is  driven  or  drives 
before  the  wind  or  current;  nunnormhd- 
mun,  ‘we  let  the  boat  drive’,  Acts  27, 
15;  nomshrtog,  they  ‘  were  driven ’v.  17. 
drop,  padtippdshin,  padtapdshin  (v.  im- 
pers.,  there  is  a  dropping,  it  drops),  a 
dropping,  a  drop;  pi.  padtippdshineash, 
drops;  n.  freq.  and  collect,  pdipddtinunk 
(repeated  or  continued  dropping), 
showers  of  rain :  papeetedu  pattippashine 
nippeash,  ‘he  maketh  small  the  drops 
of  water’,  Job  36,  27. 
drought,  kohnkan,  kunkan  (when  there 
is  dryness),  dryness,  drought:  en  vee- 
punne  kunkanit,  ‘into  the  drought  of 
summer’,  Ps.  32,  4;  also,  kunkehteadtau 
(it  is  dry),  nunohteau  (it  is  dry),  a 
drought  [from  nunae,  dry,  and  ohteau], 
drunkard,  kogkemippamvjabi;  indef. 
-ivaenin  ( koghesippamvjaenin ,  C. );  kake- 
suppadt  [suppos.  part,  from  kogkeissip- 
pam ],  when  he  is  drunk,  a  drunken 
man  ( ahque  kogkesupamwish,  don’t  be 
drunk,  C.);  vbl.  n.  act.  kogkeissippam- 
coonk,  drunkenness  [from  kogke,  madly, 
frantically,  and  -sippam,  he  drinks] ; 
wussaumsippaminneat,  kogkehodponal,  to 
be  drunk,  C.;  ivussomsippammonk, 
drunkenness,  ibid,  [from  ivussaume-sip- 
pam,  he  drinks  too  much] . 
dry,  nunabpeu,  nunobpe,  nanabpi  [for  nun- 
appu ],  it  is  dry  ( nndppi ,  dry;  nnappa- 
quat ,  dry  weather,  R.  W. ;  nunndpi,  dry, 
C. ),  i.  e.  permanently  dry,  as  the  ‘dry 
land’  (Gen.  1,  9,  10),  as  distinguished 
from  the  water  or  marshy  land,  -appu 
in  composition  signifying  to  be  and 
remain.  Otherwise,  nunnobiyeu:  ayim 
ketoh  nunnobiyeuut,  ‘he  made  the  sea 
dryland’,  Ex.  14,21.  nunohtde,  dry, 
that'which  has  become  dry  [nun-ohteau, 
it  becomes  dry,  dries  up]:  nunohtde 
mehtug,  a  dry  tree,  nunnobohke  [nun- 
appu-ohke'],  the  earth,  dry  land,  nun- 
nobohtede,  nabohteai  \nunappu-ohteau'\ , 
dry  ground,  earth  which  becomes  dry 
(comparatively);  nunnobohte&duut,  na- 
bohteaduut,  on  dry  ground;  vrntch  nun- 
nobohteaduut,  ‘from  the  dust  of  the 
earth’,  Gen.  2,  7.  The  radical,  ndn-, 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


249 


dry — continued. 

is  not  found  except  in  composition. 
kunkohteddtede,  dry,  implied  a  lack  or 
deficiency  of  moisture:  kunkohteddtede 
alike,  dry  land,  i.  e.  parched  by  drought,  j 
From  kunkan,  kdhnkan,  there  is  dry¬ 
ness  or  drought.  The  same  word,  com¬ 
pounded  with  ’toon,  mouth,  kohkuttam, 
kuhkuttcon,  signifies  thirsty,  lit.  ‘he  is 
dry-mouthed’,  mussco,  (it  is)  dry,  said 
only  of  a  tree  or  plant,  grain,  fruit,  etc. , 
and  then  only  in  compound  words: 
mus&counk,  a  dry  tree;  pi.  mussohquamin- 
necish  ( mussunkq -,  missunkq-),  dry  ears 
of  corn  [perhaps,  as  originally  applied 
to  a  tree,  from  mcosi,  bare,  stripped  of 
its  leaves] .  See  drought. 

duck,  quequecum.  pi.  -\-mduog,  R.  W. ; 
Narr.  quequeekum,  Stiles;  sesep,  qun- 
iisseps,  G. ;  Peq.  guagueekum,  quau- 
quaumps,  black  duck;  pawquumps,  ‘flat 
hills’;  a’kotoshah,  ‘dipper’  (Fuligula 
albeola,  Bonap.,  spirit-duck);  a'pi- 
shaug,  ‘widgeons’;  m’shizzeege,  ‘shel¬ 
drake’;  a’kobyeeze,  ‘brants’;  ungowd- 
urns,  ‘old  wives’  (Anas  glacialis,  Fuli¬ 
gula  glacialis,  Bonap. ),  Stiles;  menuks, 
pi.  -\-og,  brant,  C. 

The  names  quequecum  (‘he  quack- 
quacks’)  and  ungowdum  (whose  call 
Nuttall  endeavors  to  express  by  “the 
guttural  syllables  ’ogh  ough  egh  ”)  are 
clearly  onomatopoetic.  The  others  I 
have  not  analyzed. 

dugs,  sogkodtungash  (pi.),  teats,  dugs; 
in  the  singular,  sogkodtunk,  milk.  From 
soh-kodtinnum,  he  draws  forth  from ;  soh- 
kodtunk  (suppos.  part.  inan.  concrete), 
that  which  is  drawn  forth  from. 

dumb,  kupputtoon,  (he  is)  dumb,  a  dumb 
person  [lcuppi-tam,  closed  mouth],  mo- 
kakuttco  [mo,  negat.,  and  kakuttoo,  he 
talks],  a  mute,  one  who  can  not  speak; 
suppos.  part,  mokakuttoog,  mat  kakuttcog, 
(when  he  is)  dumb. 

dung,  anohke,  annoke  ( annohke ,  C.):  u'ut- 
anohke-im,  his  ordure  [en  ohke  ?]. 
rnaiee,  moyeu,  man,  dung  [rruoeu,  it  is 
black], 

dust,  puppissi  ( puppissi ,  C. )  [= papeissi, 
it  is  very  small  (?);  but  cf.  pusseog,  pin- 


dust — continued. 

sagk  ( pissugk ,  C. ),  dirt;  -  p/isseagquane, 
miry;  pissogqsheau,  it  stieketh,  cleav- 
eth  to,  is  sticky;  pussoqua,  rotten,  de¬ 
cayed], 

dwarf,  noh  chenesit,  Lev.  21,  20. 

dwell,  ayeu,  he  is  here  or  there,  he  is 
in  this  or  that  place,  denoting  location, 
temporary  or  permanent,  though  in 
the  latter  sense  appu  (he  remains)  was 
more  commonly  used:  noh  ayeu  kah 
appu,  ‘shedwelleth  and  abideth’,  Job 
39,  28.  Cotton  gives  aiinneat  (infinit, ) 
as  the  translation  of  ‘to  be’,  and  Eliot 
often  employs  this  verb  as  a  substitute 
for  the  verb  of  existence;  but  it  can  not 
properly  be  used  to  express  existence 
independent  of  place.  The  radical  is 
yen,  this  (an.  yeuoh,  this  person),  or, 
as  an  adverb,  here,  itself  originally  an 
imperfect  verb,  which  may  be  termed 
a  verb  demonstrative,  nuttai,  nuttaih, 
(I  am  in  this  or  that  place),  I  dwell  (in 
or  at);  pish  kuttai,  thou  shalt  dwell; 
nuttai-up  otanat  Joppa,  ‘I  was  in  the 
city  of  Joppa’,  Acts  11,  5;  ne  aiyit,  ne 
ayit,  where  he  might  dwell  or  be;  noh 
ayit,  he  who  dwelleth,  Is.  8, 8;  57, 15;  na 
ayish,  there  dwell  thou;  ayitcheg  (pi.), 
the  dwellers  there,  the  inhabitants  ( yo 
ntiin,  I  live  here;  tou  wuttlin?  where  keep 
you?  tuckuttiin  [toh  kuttai-in\?  where 
lives  he?  R.  W. ;  Moh.  oieet,  he  ‘who 
lives  or  dwells  in  a  place’,  Edw.). 
wutohkeu,  wadohkeu,  he  dwells  in  or  in¬ 
habits  (a  place  or  country);  yeunaitoh- 
kin,  here  I  dwell,  i.  e.  am  of  the  land 
or  country;  wutohkish  en  ohkit,  dwell 
thou  in  the  land;  suppos.  part,  noh  icad- 
ohkit,  he  who  dwells  or  is  an  inhabit¬ 
ant;  pi.  neg  wadohkitcheg,  the  dwellers 
or  inhabitants;  uttiyeu  kutohkf  what  is 
thy  country?  Jonah  1,  8  [wui-ohke-u, 
he  is  of  the  land  or  place],  weetomau, 
he  dwells  with  (him);  suffix  anree- 
tornouh,  they  dwelt  with  them;  na/iree- 
tom,  I  dwell  with  [from  we  tv. ,  house: 
weetomau,  he  is  of  the  house  of] . 

dwelling  place,  ayeuonk  [vbl.  n.  act. 
from  ayeu],  a  dwelling  in  this  place. 
See  house. 


250 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


E 


each,  an  and  inan.  nishnoh,  each,  every, 
eagle,  wompsikuk,  womsikid ;,  wompum- 
kook  (wdmpissacuk,  pi.  A-quduog,  R.  W. ; 
wompmkook,  C. )  [wompi-psuk,  white 
great  bird].  The  name  is  more  appro¬ 
priately  given  to  the  fishhawk  or 
osprey  (Pandion  haliartus)  than  to  the 
bald  eagle  (Haliaetus  leucocephalus), 
but  was  possibly  applied  to  both  birds 
by  the  Indians  of  the  coast, 
ear,  mehtduog,  pi.  ■nehtauog,  my 

ear;  kehtauog,  thy  ear;  wehtauog,  his 
ear  ( vmttduwog,  pi.  -Squash,  R.  W. ;  Peq. 
Jcuttuwannege,  (your)  ‘ear,  or  what 
you  hear  by’,  Stiles.)  Prom  wah- 
teau,  he  knows,  understands,  perceives 
(vdteo,  0. ) ;  suppos.  particip.  wahteunk, 
knowing,  with  termination  marking 
inan.  agent,  and  to’  indefinite  prefixed. 
Cf.  Gr.  aieiv  (dt©),  to  feel,  to  perceive, 
to  hear;  Lat.  audire;  Fr.  entendre,  to 
hear,  to  understand. 

early,  nompodeu,  nompode,  early  (next) 
morning.  See  day. 

earn,  tummuhhouau  onkquatunk,  he  earns 
(and  obtains)  wages;  suppos.  noh  tam- 
houadt,  he  who  earns  (it), 
earring,  sogkussohou,  pi.  -\-nash. 
earth,  ohke  (a/Cike,  R.  W. ;  ohke,  C.),  the 
earth,  land,  place,  country  (Abn.  ki, 
‘terre’,  Rasies;  Gr.  yip,  Lat.  terra). 
The  primary  meaning  appears  to  be 
‘that  which  produces  or  brings  forth’, 
corresponding  to  the  an.  ohkas  [ =ohke - 
<5das],  the  bringer  forth,  the  mother. 
nunabpi,  nunobpe,  earth,  dry  land  (as 
distinguished  from  water) .  See  dry. 
earthquake,  quequan  (there  is  a  shaking 
or  trembling),  a  shaking;  pi.  quequan- 
ash:  ohke  nukkeemo  kah  quequan,  ‘the 
earth  shook  and  trembled’,  Ps.  18,  7. 
east,  imtchepw&iyeu,  vmtchepiooayeu,  east¬ 
ward,  on  or  to  the  east;  wutche  wutchep- 
woiyeu,  from  the  east;  viutchepwosh,  ( wut - 
chepwoshe  witlvri,  C.),  the  east  wind. 
For  vmtchepw&iyeu  the  Massachusetts 
Psalter  substitutes  wompanniyeu,  and 
Roger  Williams  has  Wompanand,  ‘the 
Eastern  God  ’  (i.  e.  god  of  the  dawn  or 
morning  light),  but  nopdtin,  the  east 


east — continued . 

wind,  and  chepewessin  ( =imt-ehepv-osh 
of  Eliot),  the  northeast  wind  (p.  83) 
[  wui  -  chepioh-yev.,  belonging  to  Chepy, 
or  the  bad  spirit,  to  whom  the  north¬ 
east  region  appears  to  have  been 
appropriated,  as  the  west  or  northwest 
was  to  Chekesmcand  or  Kesukquand 
and  the  southwest  to  Kautdntowit  or 
the  good  god],  wompanniyeu  (where 
the  daylight  is)  appears  to  have  been 
the  more  generally  received  word  for 
‘east’  or  ‘to  the  east’.  Its  radical, 
wompan,  wdpi  (white,  light,  bright,  of 
the  dawn) ,  enters  into  the  composition 
of  the  names  of  places  and  people,  as 
Abenaki  ( Wapanachki)  and  Wampan- 
oags  (  Wampan-ohke) .  See  north, 
easy,  nikkumme  ( nickummat ,  R.  W. ;  nik- 
kumme,  nukkumme,  nukkumat,  C. ),  it  is 
easy,  not  difficult  or  hard;  suppos. 
nickummat,  when  it  is  easy, 
eat,  meetm,  he  eats  (v.  i. ),  he  takes 
food;  infin.  meteinate,  meeteinneate  (me- 
tesimmin,  R.  W. ;  Del.,  mitzin  Hkw. ), 
to  eat;  meet-dsh,  eat  thou;  meetmog,  they 
eat  ( ascumetesimmis  kum-meetmn- 

as],  ‘have  you  not  yet  eaten?’  R.  W. ; 
Del.  k’dapi  mitzi,  have  you  eaten? 
Hkw.;  n’ mitzi,  I  eat,  ibid.;  n'dappi 
mitzi,  I  am  returned  from  eating,  ibid. ; 
Muh.  meetsoo,  he  eateth,  Edw. );  vbl.n. 
act.  meetmonk,  eating,  taking  food 
[meech-usm')-,  v.  t.  meech,  he  eats  (in¬ 
animate  food);  num-meech,  I  eat  (Del. 
n’ mitzi,  Hkw.;  num-mechin,  C. ):  v'oh 
kummeech  weyaus,  thou  mayest  eat  flesh, 
Deut.  12,  20  (keen  mkitch,  ‘I  pray,  eat’, 
i.  e.  eat  thou,  R.  W. ).  ma)ivhau,  moh- 
whou,  he  eats  (him,  or  animate  object): 
puppinashim  um-mohwho-uh,  the  beast 
devoured  him,  Gen.  37,  20;  qunnonou 
matta  mmwhoou,  the  lion  had  not  eaten 
(him),  1  K.  13,  28  (cum-mdhucquock, 
they  will  eat  you;  Mohoivaugsuck  or 
Mauquduog,  from  moho,  to  eat,  ‘the  can¬ 
nibals  or  men-eaters  up  in  the  west 
[i.  e.  Mohawks]’,  R.  W.).  Heckewel- 
der  says,  “ mitzin  signifies  to  eat,  and 
so  does  mohoan”,  the  latter  being  used, 
in  the  language  of  the  Delawares,  when 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


251 


eat — continued. 

what  is  eaten  ‘ 1  required  the  use  of  the 
teeth”,  and  guntammen  when  that 
which  was  eaten  “needed  no  chewing, 
as  pottage,  mush,  or  the  like.”  “If  he 
has  eaten  of  both  kinds  of  provisions  at 
his  meal  he  will  then  use  the  generic 
term  [intransitive  verb?]  and  say  n’ dap- 
pi  mitzi,  I  have  eaten”  (correspondence 
with  Duponceau).  The  distinction  be¬ 
tween  the  verbs  maybe  more  correctly 
expressed,  at  least  so  far  as  the  lan¬ 
guage  of  Massachusetts  is  concerned, 
by  stating  that  the  intransitive  verb 
‘he  eats’  is  expressed  by  metzu,  the 
transitive  inanimate  by  meech,  he  eats 
vegetable  food  (whence  weatchiminne- 
ash ,  each imminneash  [ —m’  eechum-minne- 
ash,  eatable  grain],  corn,  and  meechum- 
uonk,  fruit,  vegetable  food),  and  the 
transitive  animate  by  mcowhau,  he  eats  ; 
that  which  has  life,  or  an  animate  ob¬ 
ject;  perhaps,  primarily,  he  bites  or  tears 
with  the  teeth:  mcohoouvmoo  [ mowhau - 
mco ]  ogque  askcok-ut,  ‘it  biteth  like  a 
serpent’,  Prow  23,  32;  suppos.  noli  \ 
mcohhukque,  ‘he  who  eateth  me’,  John 
6, 57 ;  cohquaog  ummcohwhouh,  the  worms 
ate  him,  ‘  he  was  eaten  of  worms  ’ ,  Acts 
12,  23;  mcowhau  locusts,  ‘he  did  eat 
locusts’,  Mark  1,  6;  but  num-meech  u-ey- 
aus,  I  eat  meat,  flesh  (as  Deut.  12,  20), 
etc.  These  three  verbs — metzu,  meech, 
mcowhau — denote  the  act  of  eating 
or  taking  food.  There  was  another 
and  older  verb,  not  found  in  Eliot  ex¬ 
cept  in  compound  words,  which  signi¬ 
fied  to  feed  or  to  satisfy  the  appetite, 
namely  uppco  or  upivou,  (cf.  Sansk.  pd, 
‘nourrir,  soutenir’,  ‘sustentare’ ,  Bopp. ; 
Gr.  7tccG0‘,  Lat.  pd,  in pd-vi,  pd-bulum.) 
Its  compounds  and  derivatives  are 
numerous,  as,  natuppco,  nadtuppm,  it 
(an  animal  other  than  man)  feeds  or 
grazes:  pigs-og  ncduppuog,  the  swine 
feed  or  were  feeding,  Luke  8,  32;  nee- 
tassuog  pish  nadtuppcoog  (natupwock, 
R.  IV.),  the  cattle  shall  feed,  Is.  30, 
23;  v.  t.  inan.  nadtuppancontam ,  he  feeds 
upon;  kodtuppm  [ kod-uppco ,  he  desires 
to  feed],  he  is  hungry;  icamepco  [icame- 
fippm,  he  feeds  wholly  or  entirely] ,  he 
is  satisfied  or  fills  himself;  tapuppao 
[ tdpi-uppao ,  he  feeds  sufficiently],  he  ! 


eat — continued. 

has  eaten  enough,  has  sufficient;  wus- 
saumepco  [ wussaume-uppco ,  he  eats  too 
much],  he  is  gluttonous;  mishadtuppm 
[ mish-adt-uppoo ,  he  eats  when  there  is 
much],  he  feasts,  partakes  of  a  feast; 
weetadtuppc o  [ wetu-adt-uppoo ,  he  eats  in 
company  with],  he  feeds  with  others; 
sogkepco  [ sogk-uppco ],  he  bites;  mah- 
chippco  [mahche-uppco,  he  has  com¬ 
pletely  fed],  he  has  done  eating  (maii- 
chepvrut,  when  he  hath  eaten ;  mauchep- 
imcks,  after  meals,  R.  W.),  hence,  he 
eats'  up,  devours,  wholly  consumes 
( nummahchip ,  I  devour,  C. ).  welipittit- 
tuk,  let  us  eat  together,  Exp.  Mayhew. 
Cf.  mepit,  tooth. 

ebb  tide,  mauchetan,  R.  IV.  See  tide, 
edge,  kenag  (that  which  is  sharp),  ne  en 
kenag.  wus,  the  edge,  border,  brim,  etc. 
(wtiss,  the  edge  or  list  of  cloth,  R.  V'. ) ; 
pi.  vmssash,  the  borders  of;  ut  wussadt, 
on  the  edge  (of  a  garment,  etc. ),  on  the 
brim  ( of  a  cup  or  vessel,  etc. ) . 
eels,  neeshauog,  sassammauquock,  nquitte- 
connauog,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  neesh,neeshuaugx, 
Stiles;  Narr.  neshuongok,  eels,  Stiles; 
nequttika,  an  eel,  C.  Two  of  these 
names,  nquitteconnatiog  and  neeshauog, 
are  evidently  compounded  with  the 
numerals  nequtta,  one,  and  neese,  two, 
as  descriptive  of  two  varieties  or  spe¬ 
cies  of  the  eel.  The  former  signifies  he 
is  alone,  one  by  himself  ( nukquttegheu , 
‘onlyson’,  as  in  Luke  7, 12;  9,  38;  Gen. 
22,  2) ,  and  the  latter,  neeshauog,  they 
couple,  go  in  pairs  ( neesuog ,  ‘two  of  a 
sort’,  a  pair,  Gen.  6, 19, 20).  The  origin 
of  these  names  may  be  found,  perhaps, 
in  the  popular  belief  that  the  common 
eel  was  hermaphrodite,  or  rather,  epi¬ 
cene.  See  Smith’s  Nat.  Hist,  of  Fishes 
of  Mass. ,  236.  The  name  ‘ 1  nesha w  eel  ’  ’ 
is  still  retained  by  the  fishermen  of 
Marthas  Vineyard,  at  Holmes  Hole, 
and  perhaps  elsewhere,  for  the  silver 
eel  (Murtena  argent ea  of  Le  Sueur) 
(Storer’s  Report  on  Fishes  of  Mass. ). 
effeminate.  See  delicate, 
egg,  w6u,  vj66u;  pi.  vvcmash;  coummash, 
her  eggs;  ne  v'ampag  wooii,  the  white  of 
an  egg,  Job  6,  6  (wou,  pi.  wdnash,  C. ). 
Cf.  odas,  animal;  weyaus,  flesh;  cosh, 
he  proceeds  from;  com,  iccom,  he  goes 


252 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


'BULLETIN  25 


egg — continued. 

from;  ohke,  earth;  ohkas  [ =ohk-6das~\ , 
mother;  6onL6muk  ( 6t6muk ,  E.  M.),  the 
womb;  Gr.  chov  (aoi'ov)  ,egg;  (o oy 
jiroduced  from  the  egg;  cooroxos,  that 
lays  eggs,  etc. ;  Lat.  oi'um. 

eight,  shwosuk  tahshe  (shwosuck,  R.  IV. ; 
shwosuk  or  nishwd,  C. ;  Peq.  shwausk, 
Stiles;  Del.  chaasch,  chasch,  Hkw. ); 
shwosuk  tahmcjg,  eight  (persons  or  ani¬ 
mate  objects) ;  shwornk  tahshe  kodtum- 
wae,  eight  years;  inan.  pi.  shwornk  tah- 
shinash  missunkqua  mi nneash ,  eight  ears 
of  com  ( shoamck  tashlnash,  R.  W.) ;  ut 
nishwosuk  tahshe  kodtummco-ut,  in  the 
eighth  year;  shwornk  tahshe  nepduz,  the 
eighth  month.  From  n’shive,  three  (and 
n’ese,  two?),  with  termination  of  the 
euppositive:  the  second  counting  or 
“holding  up”  (tahshe)  of  the  third 
finger,  that  is,  5+3. 

eighteen,  naho  shwornk:  nabo  shwosuk 
tahsh-isquanogkod,  eighteen  cubits  (long, 
high,  etc.)  ( piucknabna  shwosuck,  eight¬ 
een,  R.W. ;  Peq.  piugg  naubut  shwausk, 
Stiles.). 

eight  hundred,  an.  shwosuk  tahshe  pasuk- 
kcoog;  inan.  -kcoash  (shoasucktashe  pdw- 
suck,  R.  W.). 

eighty,  shwosuk  tahshinchag  (swoasuck 
tashincheck,  R.  W.;  nishwotashinnechak, 
C.) ;  with  an.  noun  shwosuk  tahshinchag- 
kodtog;  inan.  shwosuk  tahshinchage  or 
tahshinchagkodtash . 

either,  nanwe,  C. (?).  namve,  any,  may 
have  been  used  in  the  sense  of  either, 
but  this  is  not  probable. 

elbow,  meesk,  C. 

elder,  eldest,  kehchiog,  kutchiog,  keh- 
ehisog,  the  old  men,  the  elders;  kehchis- 
squaog,  the  elder  women,  mohtomegit, 
firstborn  of  sons  or  daughters,  eldest 
child,  eldest  brother  or  sister.  Muh. 
netohcon,  elder  brother;  n’mase,  elder 
sister,  Edw. 

embrace,  nuk-kehehlkquan,  I  embrace, 
I  hold  by  the  neck,  C. ;  nukkehchquan- 
nuwamun,  we  embrace,  ibid.  But 
Eliot  has  uk-kechukquan-uh,  ‘he  took 
him  by  the  throat’  in  no  friendly  em¬ 
brace,  Matt.  18,  28.  moshogqunnittuog, 
they  cling  together,  embrace  each  other 
[reciprocal  from  mosogqueog,  moshog- 
queog,  they  join,  adhere],  wonkomuu, 


embrace — continued. 

he  embraces  (him)  in  taking  leave; 
c owonkomuh ,  he  embraced  in  taking 
leave  of  them,  Acts  20,  1;  suppos.  icon- 
kuttehhettlt,  when  we  took  leave  of  each 
other,  Acts  21,  6  [an.  form  of  wonkin- 
num,  he  bends  down,  bows  down], 
empty,  mohchiyeu  ,  (mohchiyeue,  C. );  meh- 
cheu,  mehcheyeu,  it  is  empty,  barren, 
waste  [for  matche-yeu,  good  for  nought, 
bad] ;  v.  caus.  mohchiehheau,  he  empties, 
i.  e.  makes  (it)  empty, 
encamp.  See  camp, 
enclose.  See  close. 

enclosure,  enclosed  place,  komuk;  kup- 
pohkomuk,  a  place  closely  shut  in;  meh- 
tugque  kuppohkomuk,  ‘a  grove’,  Deut. 
16,  21;  a  harbor  or  haven,  Acts.  27,  40. 
See  building. 

end  (n.),  uhquaeu,  uhqu&e,  ohqude,  (it  is) 
at  the  extremity  or  point  of,  at  the  end: 
uhquae  wutanwohhou,  the  end  or  point 
of  his  staff;  uhquae  wut-ogkmun-it,  ‘to 
the  skirts  [extremity]  of  his  garments’ ; 
qut  asquam  mhquaeu,  ‘but  the  end  is 
not  yet’,  Mark  13,  7  (ohqude,  on  the 
other  end,  C.).  Cf.  uhkos,  m’uhkos,  a 
nail,  talon,  or  claw;  uhquon,  a  hook; 
wut-uhquab,  the  skin;  wussuhqun,  the 
tail;  unkque,  uhkque,  sore,  extreme;  w6h- 
koeu,  on  (its)  sides  or  ends;  wehque,  as 
far  as,  i.  e.  ending  at;  noohqueu,  so  far, 
at  such  a  distance,  etc.  u-ehqshik,  week- 
,  shik  [when  it  is  at  the  extremity  or 
limit,  suppos.  from  wehquoshau,  it  goes 
as  far  as,  ending  at],  when  it  ends,  the 
end  of,  the  utmost  limit:  wehqshik  ohke 
or  weehqshinne  ohke,  ‘the  ends  of  the 
earth’,  ‘the  uttermost  parts ’ ;  ne  wehshik 
waeenu,  ‘its  [the  altar’s]  edge  round 
about’,  Ezek.  43,  13.  wdhkukqushik, 
wohkukfjuoshlk  [when  it  reaches  or  at¬ 
tains  its  utmost  limit,  suppos.  from  woh- 
kukquoshin,  it  comes  to  an  end],  when 
it  ends  (in  time  or  action):  ut  irOhkuk- 
qushik,  to  the  end,  —en  wohkukquashinit. 
wunnashque,  wanashque,  at  the  end  of, 
i.  e.  the  upper  end  or  termination 
(Abn.  8anask8i8i,  le  bout,  au  bout; 
8anask8ittan,  le  bout  du  nez,  Rasies) . 
end  (v.  i.),  wohkukquoshin,  it  comes  to  an 
e;id,  is  ended;  wohkukquosliik,  when  it 
reaches  the  end;  inan.  sub]. pish  wohkuk- 
quoshin-ash,  they  shall  be  ended.  From 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


253 


end  (v.  i.) — continued. 
wehquoshau,  with  k’  progressive,  it 
moves  onward  to  its  limit. 

end  (v.  t. ).  See  finish. 

enemy,  matwau,  (he  is)  an  enemy;  num- 
matwom,  my  enemy;  kummalwomog,  thy 
enemies;  n.  agent,  rnatwaen,  an  enemy, 
one  who  acts  as  an  enemy;  nummat- 
waenu  ut  kummatwomut,  I  am  an  enemy 
to  thy  enemies,  Ex.  23,  22.  Elsewhere, 
matwau,  ‘a  soldier’,  i.  e.  an  armed 
enemy.  See  soldier;  war. 

Englishman,  Wautacone,  pi.  1  Vautaconix- 
aog,  ‘coat-men’  or  clothed,  R.  IV.  (wat- 
dhkdmog,  ‘such  as  wear  coats’,  C. ). 
Morton,  in  his  N.  E.  Canaan  (book  3, 
chapter  v),  says,  “the  Salvages  of  the 
Massachussets  .  .  .  did  call  the  English 
planters  Wotawquenange  [for  -auge  ?] , 
which  in  their  language  signifieth  stab- 
bers  or  cut-throates  ...  a  southerly 
Indian  that  understood  English  well 
.  .  .  calling  us  by  the  name  of  IToto- 
quansawge;  what  that  doth  signifie, 
hee  said  hee  was  not  able  by  any  dem¬ 
onstration  to  expresse.”  The  writer 
confounded  Wautaconuaog,  coat  men, 
■with.Chauquaquock(aee  below).  Wauta- 
conisk,  an  English  woman,  R.  W. ;  dim. 
Wautaconemese,  an  English  youth,  ibid. 
Awaunagessuck,  pi.  English  men,  “as 
much  as  to  say,  these  strangers”,  ibid.; 
avanagus-dntmvash,  speak  (thou)  Eng¬ 
lish,  ibid.  [ aiudun ,  R.  IV.  ( hcnvan ,  El.), 
somebody,  anybody;  awanick,  ‘some 
come’,  ibid.;  awaun  ewo,  who  is  that? 
ibid.]  (Peq.  Waunnuxuk,  Englishmen, 
Stiles).  Chauquaquock ,  ‘that  is,  Knive- 
men  ’ ,  R.  IV.  ( Chokquog,  Chogqussuog,  C. ; 
Englishmansog  or  Chohkquog,  title  to 
Indian  Laws,  1705)  [ chohqudg  ( chau - 
quock,  R.  W.),  a  knife].  Englishm&n- 
nuck  (ph),  R.  W. 

enmity,  sekeneddtuonk,  enmity,  mutual 
hatred  [vbl.  n.  from  sekeneam,  he 
hates] . 

enough,  tdpi,  taupi,  (it  is)  sufficient, 
enough  ( taubi ,  R.  W. ;  tdpi,  C. );  nul- 
tapet  (?),  I  have  enough,  Gen.  33,  9; 
imperat.  3d  pers.  sing,  tapach,  let  it 
suffice,  let  it  be  enough.  Perhaps  from 
ut-appu,  he  rests  at,  sits  down  at.  So,  the 
English  ‘enough’  has  been  referred 
to  the  Heb.,  Chald.,  Syr.,  and  Ethiop. 


enough — continued, 
to  rest,  to  be  quiet,  wamut,  (there  is) 
enough;  inan.  pi.  wamutash,  enough, 
sufficient  (things) :  olike  wamut,  there  is 
land  enough;  noowameit,  I  have  enough, 
there  is  enough  for  me;  wamach,  let  it 
suffice;  toomolik,  wamok,  when  or  if  it 
is  enough;  wamenau,  he  has  enough 
( watxmet ,  tatibi,  it  is  enough,  R.  W. ); 
from  wame-ut,  to  the  whole,  at  the 
whole. 

ensnare.  See  catch, 
enter,  petutteau  wetuomut,  he  entered 
the  house  or  tent,  he  went  in;  petut- 
teaog,  they  entered  in;  petutteash  ( peel'd - 
teasli,  C. ;  petitees,  R.  W. ),  come  thou 
in,  enter  in;  petutteadt,  when  he  enters 
( tawhitch  mat  petiteayean,  why  come  you 
not  in?  R.  IV.) ;  cf.  petau,  he  puts  (it) 
into,  petukau,  he  goes  in  or  into,  he  is 
entering  or  going  to  enter  [from  pet-a-u, 
with  k’  progressive] .  See  go. 
entreat.  See  supplicate, 
envy,  ishkouanatuonk  (cf.  sekeneadtuonk, 
hatred)  ( ishkauaussue ,  envious;  iskou- 
oussue,  enviously,  C.). 
equal,  tatuppe,  alike,  equally;  netatup, 
ne  tatuppe,  ‘like,  so’,  El.  Gr.  22  ( netd - 
tup,  ‘  it  is  all  one  ’ ,  R.  W. ) ;  tatupypeyeuco, 
it  is  equal  to,  like  to  ( t.atuppiyeu ,  ‘just 
so’;  iattuppeySue,  ‘equally’,  C.) ;  tatup- 
jxyeumog,  they  are  like,  equal;  inan. 
subj.  tatuppeyeuooa.sh;  suppos.  tatuppe - 
yeuok-ish,  when  (things)  are  equal. 
From  tdpi,  enough,  by  reduplication  (?). 
erect  (adj.) .  See  right;  stand  erect;  man. 
erect,  set  upright,  wunnashau  nepat- 
tuhquonkoh,  he  set  up  an  image,  1  K. 
7,  21  ( urunnash  ohkuk,  ‘set  on  the  pot’, 
Ezek.  24,  3;  i.  e.  stand  it  over  the  fire). 
Inan.  obj.  vmnnohteau,  he  set  (it)  up¬ 
right,  erected  (it),  as  a  tower,  a  post, 
etc.  (cf.  wannashque,  on  the  top  of; 
v  annaehikomuk,  a  chimney) .  neepattam, 
he  erects  or  stands  (it)  up  [v.'  t.  inan. 
from  neepau,  he  stands  up], 
err,  panneu,  he  goes  astray.  See  astray, 
escape,  pohquohham,  he  escapes,  goes 
clear;  pohquohush,  pohquawhus  kuh- 
hog,  escape  thou,  save  thyself,  tomeu, 
he  escapes,  saves  himself;  caus.  tom- 
heau,  he  saves  or  causes  to  escape 
[related  to  tooeu,  ptooeu,  he  flies,  and  to 
tomogkon,  it  flows].  See  deliver. 


254 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


especially,  ncinpehyeu,  C.  See  very, 
evening,  wunnonkooook,  (when  it  is)  even¬ 
ing;  u'unnonkou,  (it  is)  evening;  adj. 
imnnonkquae,  in  the  evening,  at  even¬ 
ing.  See  day. 

ever,  forever,  micheme  {micheme,  R.  W.; 
mich erne,  C. ;  michemeshdici ,  he  is  gone 
forever,  R.  W.);  inan.  michemohtae, 
everlasting;  michemappu,  (he  is)  ever¬ 
lasting. 

every,  nishnoh,  each,  every:  nishnoh  md- 
tinnanmonk,  (his)  every  word;  nishnoh 
wosketomp,  every  man  ( nishnoh  teag , 
everything,  C. ). 

everywhere,  quinmipohke  [ quinnuppe 
ohke,  about  the  land];  quinnuppu  mvi- 
taok,  about  the  world,  in  every  place; 
nishnoh  id,  at  every  place, 
evidence.  See  witness, 
evil.  See  bad. 

exalt,  misheheau,  he  exalts  (him)  [makes 
him  great,  caus.  an.  from  mishe-u;  cf. 
mishcoumi,  he  ‘brags  or  swaggers’,  C., 
i.  e.  makes  himself  great];  mishehteau, 
he  exalts,  increases,  makes  (it)  great 
[caus.  inan.  from  mishe-u]. 
example  (pattern),  us-huwaonk,  C. ;  uh- 
shuwaonk,  Danf.  See  custom, 
exceedingly,  cthche,  very  much,  very; 
muttae  ( moocheke ,  much;  mcochekeybmk, 
excessively,  G. );  umssaume,  too  much; 


exceedingly — continued. 

muttae  moocheke,  ‘exceeding  much’,  2 
Sam.  8,  8.  See  very, 
except.  See  besides, 
excite,  stir  up,  wogkouunau  missinnin- 
nuog,  he  stirs  up,  excites  the  people; 
u-ogkoueonk  (vbl.  n.  act.,  a  stirring  up), 
excitement,  commotion, 
exert  one’s  self.  See  strive  after, 
extinguish,  ontham  nootau,  he  extin¬ 
guishes  or  puts  out  the  fire;  nootau  pish 
onthamun,  the  fire  shall  be  put  out; 
onthamwog  mohkussaash,  they  extinguish 
the  coals  [trans.  inan.  form,  from  oh- 
taco,  uhtea,  it  goes  out,  as  fire  or  a  light]. 
See  quench. 

extreme,  uhqu&e,  at  the  point  or  extrem¬ 
ity  of;  hence,  at  extremity,  extreme, 
grievous,  cruel,  severe,  etc.  In  the 
latter  sense  Eliot  usually  writes  unkque, 
but  sometimes  uhque,  uhqueu,  etc. 
From  uhk  or  uhq,  a  point  or  sharp  ex¬ 
tremity.  See  end. 

eye,  muskesuk,  the  eye  or  the  face;  pi. 
muskesukquash:  nnskesuk,  my  eye;  wus- 
kesuk,  his  eye.  (wuskeesuck,  R.  )V. ; 
Peq.  skeezucks,  eyes,  Stiles;  Xarr.  iris- 
kezuesqush,  eyes,  Stiles;  Muh.  hkeesque, 
eye,  Edw. ;  muskesuk,  the  eye,  the 
face,  C.) 

eyebrows,  monumnog  (pi.). 


K 


face,  muskesuk,  the  eye,  the  face  (Narr. 

skeezup,  face,  Stiles).  See  eye. 
fade,  fail,  mahtsheau ,  mahsheau,  it  fails, 
fades,  decays,  passes  away,  comes  to  an 
end;  inan.  pi.  mahtshaash,  they  (inan.) 
pass  away;  said  of  the  loss  of  strength 
and  health,  the  decay  incident  to 
sickness  or  old  age,  etc.;  nippe  maht- 
shunk,  when  the  water  fails;  ne  maht- 
shunk,  that  which  is  past  (suppos.  when 
'  it  shall  be  passed);  so,  of  the  flight  of 
time,  mahtshunk  kesukodtash,  ‘at  the 
end  of  the  days’,  i.  e.  when  they  shall 
have  passed  away;  pass,  nippe  maht- 
shimoo  (mahchimoo),  the  water  shall  be 
wasted,  made  to  fail.  Cf.  mahchinau, 
he  is  sick,  from  mahche  or  maid-  ( maid, 
R.  W. ),  expressing  completed  action  or 
past  existence,  the  auxiliary  of  the  per¬ 
fect  tense.  See  old  (mohtantam). 


faint,  be  exhausted,  kodtinneau,  he 
faints;  kodtinneaog,  they  faint, 
faint-hearted,  sohqutteahau,  he  is  faint¬ 
hearted;  suppos.  noh  sohqutteahont,  he 
who  is  faint-hearted  ( sohquttealihaue , 
faint-hearted,  C. ).  Causat.  from  soh- 
quttahham,  he  breaks  in  pieces  or  beats 
to  powder  (?).  But  ‘sequttai,  he  is  in 
black,  i.  e.  he  hath  some  one  dead  in 
his  house’,  R.  W.,  apparently  from 
sucki,  black  or  dark  colored, 
fair  wind,  wunnagehan  or  icunnegin 
waupi,  fair  wind;  wunnegitch  vmttin, 
when  the  wind  is  fair,  R.  W. 
faithful,  pdbahtanumwde,  -mint,  faithful, 
trusty  (jidbahtantamwe,  honestly,  C. ). 
From  pdbahtanumau,  he  trusts  (him). 
See  trust. 

fall,  punneu,  he  falls  down,  prostrates 
himself  (Luke  8,  41;  30,  47;  rarely 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


255 


fall — continued. 

used),  penushau,  he  or  it  falls  (acci¬ 
dentally  or  by  mischance)  ( nup-pinls - 
shorn,  I  fall,  C.) ;  penushaog,  they  fall; 
penusheau,  it  fadeth  (as  a  flower,  Is.  40, 
7,  8) ;  penushunk,  when  it  falls;  vbl.  act. 
penushaonk,  pinshaonk,  a  falling,  a  fall 
(El.  and  C.) ;  from  punneu,  which  is 
nearly  related  to,  perhaps  identical 
with,  panneu,  he  goes  wrong,  errs,  goes 
out  of  the  way.  petshau,  he  falls  (acci¬ 
dentally  or  by  mischance)  into,  as  pet¬ 
shau  wonogkut,  he  falls  into  a  hole; 
petshaog  dpehhanit,  they  fall  into  the 
snare;  suppos.  petshonit,  petshunt,  if  he 
fall,  •when  he  falls;  from  petutteau,  he 
goes  into,  kepshau,  he  falls  (by  mis¬ 
chance)  ,  strictly  he  stumbles  and  falls, 
falls  by  an  obstruction  in  the  way,  etc. : 
kepshau  ohkeit,  he  fell  on  the  earth; 
kepsh&og,  they  fall;  suppos.  part,  kep- 
shont,  when  or  if  (he)  fall,  when  falling; 
kepshunk,  when  or  if  (it)  fall;  vbl.  act. 
kepshaonk,  a  falling,  a  fall,  pogkishau,  he 
or  it  falls,  inanimately,  drops  down  (as 
fruit  from  a  tree) ;  inan.  pi.  pogkishin- 
neash,  they  shall  fall;  pogshunk,  when 
it  falls,  kodslieau,  it  falls  out  of,  as  tog- 
kodteg  kodslieau,  the  sword  fell  out  of 
(its  sheath) ;  from  kodtinnum,  he  draws 
(it)  out.  chauopshau,  he  falls  into  the 
water  ( chauwopliash ,  cast  (it)  overboard, 
R.  IV.) ;  from  chauopham,  he  puts  it  in 
water,  hence  he  seethes  or  boils  (it) . 
kitehisahshau,  he  falls  into  the  fire  (?), 
Matt.  17,  15.  naoksheau,  it  falls,  drops, 
comes  down;  meesunk  naokshunk,  when 
the  hair  falls  off  (from  the  head) ;  from 
ncokeu,  it  comes  down,  descends,  on- 
toonsliau,  he  falls  backward.  See 
waterfall. 

false,  panncowde  (falsely,  C. ),  panncowau 
( panncoau ,  C.),  he  speaks  falsely,  he 
lies;  ahque  pancowah ,  do  not  speak 
falsely  to  me,  do  not  lie  to  me;  vbl.  n. 
act.  panncowaonk,  a  speaking  falsely 
or  wrong  speaking,  a  lie.  From  panne, 
out  of  the  way,  wrongly,  and  ncowau, 
he  speaks. 

family,  iveechinnineummoncheg  (pi.,  they 
who  go  with  him),  his  family,  teashi- 
yeuonk,  teashiyeuooonk,  tateashiyeuonk 
( chashiyeuonk ,  C. ;  nutteashinninneonk, 
my  family,  ibid.);  nut-teatteashiyeuonk, 


family — continued, 
my  family;  pi.  -ongash.  wek,  his  house¬ 
hold  (?) ,  EL:  neh  wek-it  (those  in  his 
house),  his  household,  family. 

famine,  mahshagquodl,  (when  there  is) 
famine  or  dearth;  vnahshogque  kesukod- 
tut,  in  days  of  famine.  Related  to  maht- 
sheau,  it  fails,  perishes,  is  gone;  mehclieu 
( mohchiyeue ,  C.),  empty,  barren,  etc. 
From  mahche,  denoting  past  existence 
or  completed  action. 

far,  n6,  no,  far  off,  to  a  distance,  associ¬ 
ated  with  the  idea  of  motion.  The 
primary  signification  is  ‘to  that  place’, 
as  distinguished  from  yeu,  ‘here’,  ‘at 
this  place’.  Thus,  yeu  uhquaeu  .  .  . 
no  uhquaeu,  ‘on  the  end  on  this  side 
...  on  the  end  on  that  side  ’,  Ex.  37,  8. 
no  pajeh,  until,  noadt,  nooadt,  (suppos. 
when  it  is)  far  off,  at  a  distance,  in 
space  or  time,  in  old  (far  off)  times; 
locat.  noadt-it,  at  a  distance  ( naliwot ,  a 
great  way;  naurwatick,  far  off  at  sea, 
R.  W. ;  naumit,,  noadt,  far;  noadtit,  a 
great  way  off,  C.) ;  noadtuck,  a  long 
time;  noohteau,  it  is  far  off;  ndappu,  he 
is  far  off;  suppos.  ndappit,  noahpit,  he 
who  is  far  off.  ndaosukau,  he  is  far  from 
(it,  i.  e.  from  the  place  to  which  he  is 
going  or  from  the  thing  of  which  he  is 
in  quest) ;  nooosukonqueog,  (it)  isfarfrom 
us;  kenaaosukom,  thou  art  far  from  (it); 
ndoosukook,  ‘get  ye  far  from’  (him). 
tounuckqua que?  how  far?  yd  anuckqua- 
que,  so  far,  R.  W. ;  uttoh  unnuhktihquat? 
hoM'  far?  C.  ncohqueu,  noohque,  unncoh- 
queu,  (it  is)  so  far  as;  na  noohque,  so  far 
distant  \n6  uhquaeu;  see  above,  no], 
wehque,  as  far  as,  even  unto  (yd  weque, 
thus  far,  R.  IV.);  cf.  u'dhkoeu,  at  the 
end  of;  see  end.  yean,  yarn,  to,  as  far 
as;  wuteh  .  .  .  yean,  from  ...  to  [yd  en, 
to  yonder,  thither], 

farewell,  nahonnushagk,  nohnushagk  ( ap¬ 
parently  a  verb,  imperat.  2d  pers.  pi., 
equivalent  to  ‘fare  you  well’),  Luke 
9,  61;  Acts  18,  18  (hauHnshech,  fare 
(thou)  well,  R.  W.;  nehunushshash  or 
wunnlish,  C. ). 

farther,  ongkoue,  aongkoue,  farther,  be¬ 
yond  ( onkkdue ,  C. );  en  ongkoue,  to  the 
utmost,  farthest  ( dwwusse ,  farther, 
R.  W:,  and  nneickomdsu).  onkaeese 
(dimin.  of  ongkoue),  a  little  farther 


256 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


farther — continued. 

(amcassese,  R.  W. ).  ama  ( enkick  and 
Atowusse,  R.  W.). 
fast.  See  fasten;  swift;  hasten, 
fasten,  make  fast,  menv.hketeau,  he 
fastens,  makes  (it)  fast  ( num-mfnehkee - 
teo,  I  fasten,  C. ;  menukohtae,  firmly, 
ibid.);  maumbnikish,  ‘tie  it  hard’,  R.W. 
[from  menuhkeu,  it  is  strong  or  firm], 
uk-keneepun-un  nashpe  kenontugwfiegash, 
‘he  fastened  it  with  nails’,  Is.  41,  7. 
kishpinvm,  he  binds,  ties,  makes  (it) 
fast  (fastens  one  thing  to  another); 
kmpinush,  Jcishpinush,  make  thou  (it) 
fast  ( kspunsh ,  pi.  kspunemoke,  ‘tie  it 
fast’,  R.  W.;  nuk-kishplnnd,  I  bind,  C.; 
k ishpinnoonk,  binding,  ibid. ) ;  kishpissu, 
pi.  kishpwsuog,  fastened,  bound,  tied  j 
(an.  obj.),  and  v.  i.  act.  he  fastens,  ties; 
togkuppinau,  he  binds  (him)  fast,  makes 
(him)  fast,  by  bonds:  freq.  or  intens. 
tahtogkuppinau,  tattagkuppinau ;  suffix 
wutohtogkuppinouh,  they  bind  him  fast, 
fat,  trees,  weis:  ooweis,  its  fat,  the  fat  of 
an  animal  (cf.  weyaus,  flesh;  wehsue 
treyaus,  fat  meat),  vmnnogqum,  wunog- 
km,  he  is  fat  ( ivauwunockoo ,  it  (a  deer) 
is  fat,  R.  W. ;  wunnogque  netassuog,  fat  | 
cattle,  C.)  [ wunne-hogkco ,  he  is  well  : 
covered  or  of  good  body] .  yo  cimpau-  \ 
gon, ‘thus  thick  of  fat’,  R.  W. 
father,  coshoh  (lit.  he  comes  from  him), 
his  father,  the  father  of  ( osh ,  a  father, 
R.  W. ) ;  ncosh  (nosh,  R.  W. ;  noosh,  ncoshi, 
C. ;  Muh.,  nogh  Edw.;  Del.,  nooch 
Hkw. );  kcosh,  thy  father  (cOsh,  R.W.), 
keoshco,  your  father;  vrutooshim.au  (he 
who  is  a  father),  the  Father  ( “ wetooch - 
wink  and  u’etoochemuxit  both  mean  the 
Father”,  Hkw.). 

Edwards,  in  his  Observations  on  the 
Language  of  the  Muhhekaneew  In¬ 
dians  (page  13),  remarks  that  “a  con¬ 
siderable  part  of  the  appellatives  are 
never  used  without  a  pronoun  affixed. 
The  Mohegans  can  say  ‘my  father’ 
(nogh),  ‘thy  father’  (kogh),  etc.,  but 
they  can  not  say  absolutely  ‘father’; 
there  is  no  such  word  in  all  their  lan-  ! 
guage.  If  you  were  to  say  ogli,  which 
the  word  would  be  if  stripped  of  all 
affixes,  you  would  make  a  Mohegan  , 
both  stare  and  smile.”  Mr  Heckewel- 
der,  “notwithstanding  Mr  Edwards’s  ! 


father — continued. 

observation”,  “could  not  help  being 
of  opinion  that  the  monosyllable  ooch  is 
the  proper  word  for  ‘father’,  abstract¬ 
edly  [?]  considered”  (correspondence 
with  Duponceau,  page  411).  Rev  Mr 
Daggett  assured  Mr  Pickering  that 
“there  is  no  word  in  any  of  the  Indian 
languages  used  in  the  Foreign  Mis¬ 
sionary  School  [at Cornwall, Conn.]  by 
which  to  express  in  the  abstract  the  re¬ 
lation  of  ‘father’  anil  most  of  the  other 
social  relations”  (2  Mass.  Hist.  Coll., 
x,  112).  More  recent  writers  adopt 
the  statement  of  Edwards — as  Bancroft 
(iii,  257),  who  cites  Brebeuf  (81) — and 
Palfrey  (Hist.  New  Engl.,  i,  42) :  “The 
most  common  relations  they  had  no 
means  of  expressing  abstractedly.” 
This  is,  in  one  aspect,  correct,  for  the 
Indian  languages  did  not  admit  of  the 
expression  of  a  correlative  name  ab¬ 
stracted  from  its  relation,  nor  does  the 
English.  But  they  could  approximate 
as  nearly  to  the  expression  as  does  the 
English  word  ‘father’  by  vrutaoshimau 
(Eliot;  wetaochudnk,  Hkw.),  ‘he  is  a 
father’,  lit.  he  is  proceeded  from,  is  a 
source.  It  is  surprising — and  the  fact 
shows  how  superficial  has  been  the 
study  of  the  group  of  languages  about 
which  so  much  has  been  written— that 
the  radical  significance  of  the  word  by 
which  the  Indian  expressed  relation 
to  a  father  has  escaped  observation. 
noosh,  kcosh,  cosh-oli  represent  the  1st,  2d, 
and  3d  persons  singular  (indie,  pres.) 
of  a  suffix  animate  verb,  and  signify 
‘I  proceed  or  originate  from  (him)’, 
‘  thou  originatest  from  ( him )  ’ ,  ‘he  origi¬ 
nates  from  (him)’;  intrans. my ( an. ) ori¬ 
gin  or  source,  thy  origin  or  source,  etc. 
Thus  the  Indian  reversed  the  expres¬ 
sion  of  relationship  which  we  employ 
in  the  word  ‘father’;  instead  of  ‘he  is 
my  father’,  they  said  ‘I  am  his  off¬ 
spring’  (cf.  wutch  negonne  ncoshik,  ‘from 
my  forefathers  ’ ,  from  where  first  I  came 
from  (suppos. ),  2  Tim.  1,3).  The  inani¬ 
mate  form  of  the  same  verb  is  often  to 
be  met  with  in  Eliot,  as  ootshoh,  vmtji- 
shau,  vmtehn,  he  proceeds  or  originates 
from  or  at  (a  place  or  inanimate  source), 
and  in  Roger  Williams’s  Key,  as  oteshem 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


257 


father — continued. 

and  wutshau  ( acdwmuck  nbteshem,  ‘I 
came  [from]  over  the  water’;  tunna 
wutshattockf  whence  come  they?).  The 
animate  form  is  frequently  employed 
in  its  primary  signification — that  is, 
without  including  the  idea  of  paternity, 
or  rather  of  the  filial  relation,  as  nco- 
chcti  wohkumaieu,  ‘I  am  from  above’; 
kenaau  kcochaiimxcco  wutchagvm,  ‘  ye  are 
from  below’,  John  8,  23;  noli  wutchu 
.  .  .  nish  wame,  ‘  of  him  [as  original  or 
source]  are  all  things’,  Rom.  11,  36; 
noli  wujhet  mittamwossissit,  ‘he  who  is 
[suppos.]  born  of  a  woman’,  Gal.  4,  4; 
causat.  suppos.  noh  wajehayeuut  Godut, 

‘  he  who  is  of  God  ’ ,  i.  e.  is  caused  to  pro¬ 
ceed  from  or  to  have  his  origin  in,  John 
6,  46;  and  in  this  form  it  is  hardly  sepa¬ 
rable  from  the  so-called  preposiiion, 
which  is  in  fact  the  primitive  impersonal 
verb,  wutche,  watch,  catch  (wuche^R.  W. ), 
from,  because  of,  etc.  See  begin;  come 
or  proceed  from ;  from. 

[Marginal  note. — “Since  writing  the  above 
I  see  in  Maillard’s  Gram.  Mikmaque  (page  17) 
that  he  has  translated  n'Stch,  moil  p&re,  as 
derived  from  iSschimk,  etre  tils’’.] 

fathers  (n.  collect. ),  vnitmshinneunk,  the 
fathers,  collectively  or  as  a  class,  the 
fatherhood. 

fear,  qushau,  he  fears,  is  afraid  of 
(him);  qush,  fear  thou  (him) ;  qusheuk, 
qushook,  fear  ye;  vbl.  n.  act.  qushaonk, 
fear  (reverence,  C. );  pass,  qushitteaonk, 
fear  (referred  to  the  subject),  wabequ- 
shau  [wdbe-qushau\,  he  stands  in  fear 
or  awe  of,  greatly  fears  (him).  V.  i. 
wabesu,  he  fears,  is  afraid;  u-absek,  fear 
ye;  ahque  wabsek,  fear  ye  not,  do  not 
be  afraid  ( nco-wabes ,  I  am  afraid,  I  fear, 
C. );  vbl.  n.  act.  wcibesuonk,  fear  ( wap - 
suontarnooonk,  ‘afraid ’,  C. ).  wabesuon- 
tam,  he  fears  or  is  afraid  of  (it),  quelx- 
tam  ( quittam ,  C. ),  he  fears  (it);  kuk- 
quehtamumwco  togkodteg,  you  fear  the 
sword;  .suppos.  noh  quolitog,  he  who  fears 
(it).  See  affrighted;  afraid;  honor. 

feast,  mishadtuppco,  he  feasts  [mishe- 
adt-uppco,  he  eats  where  there  is  much] ; 
causat.  mishadtupweheau,  he  makes  a 
feast;  mishadtupwutteuli,  let  us  keep 
a  feast;  vbl.  n.  act.  mishadtuppooonk 
( mishodtuppcoonk ,  C. ),  a  feasting,  nick- 
B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 17 


feast — continued. 

6mmo,  ‘a  feast  or  dance’,  R.  W. :  “Of 
this  feast  they  have  public  and  private, 
and  that  of  two  sorts:  first,  in  sickness, 
or  drought,  or  war,  or  famine;  secondly, 
after  harvest,  after  hunting,”  etc. 
feather,  mequn  (penna),  a  feather,  and 
(2)  a  pen;  meqvnne,  ummequnne,  feath¬ 
ered;  nicochekequnau,  mishequnau,  (it  is) 
full  of  feathers  (meek,  a  pen,  C. ). 
feeble.  See  weak, 
feed  (v.  i.);  See  eat. 
feed  (v.  t. ),  assamau,  he  feedeth,  giveth 
food  to  (him);  assambuh  moskehtuash, 
he  feeds  him  with  grass;  assamook  flock, 
feed  ye  the  flock,  Zech.  11,  4;  assameh 
(assamme,  R.  W.),  give  me  to  eat,  feed 
me  (see  Howse  83).  sohkomau,  he 
feeds,  nourishes,  continues  to  feed  or 
provide  food  for,  sustains  (him);  kus- 
solikomamuk,  he  fed  thee;  nussohkomon 
flock,  I  feed  the  flock,  Zech.  11,7;  soh- 
kommoouneh  meet-hum  ve  tapeneunkquok, 
feed  thou  me  with  food  which  is  suita¬ 
ble  (‘convenient’,  Prov.  30,  8);  sohkorn- 
moos  nvt-sliepsemes-og,  feed  thou  my 
lambs,  John  21, 15.  unnanumeh  quompa- 
tash  ne  sobalieg,  ‘feed  me  with  that 
pottage’,  Gen.  25,  30,  lit.  give  to  me 
(dipup)  that  pottage,  meetseheaog  wah- 
liogkuh,  they  feed  themselves  [caus. 
from  metsu,  he  eats], 
feel.  See  touch. 

female,  squ&as,  squas,  squaus,  of  woman¬ 
kind,  female;  squaiyeuco  ( =squaieu,  she 
is  female,  Gen.  6,  19).  See  woman. 
squoshirn  ( squashim ,  R.  IV.),  a  female 
quadruped;  adj.  squoshimwe.  In  the 
Del.  “the  males  of  quadrupeds  are 
called  lenno  u-echum,  by  contraction  len- 
nochum;  the  females  ochque  u-eclium,  by 
contraction  ochquechum ’ ’ ,  Hkw. 
fence,  wonkonous,  wonkoncos  ( wdkconcos , 
C.),  a  fence  (also,  a  fort,  q.  v. );  from 
wonki,  wconki,  it  bends  around,  is 
crooked,  qussukquaneulunk  ( quissuk - 
quannutonk,  C. ),  a  stone  fence,  a  wall. 
pummeneutunk,  a  wall  or  fence, 
fetch,  nun-neenskom  (nun-nemskom,  C. ), 
I  will  fetch,  1  fetch  (it);  neemsko- 
mah  nippemes,  fetch  me  a  little  water; 
neemskomunach  petukqunneg,  let  bread 
be  fetched;  neemskomuttuh,  let  us  fetch 
(it).  See  bring. 


258 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[Bru.ETiN  25- 


fever,  ueesanshdonk,  wesdshdonk  (a  pesti-  I 
lential  or  infectious  disease),  a  fever,  , 
John  4, 52  ( wesauashau onck,  the  plague,  [ 
R.  \V.) ;  weesdshau,  wesohshaa,  he  has  a  [ 
fever  (but  wesauashadi,  he  hath  the 
plague,  R.  tV.).  This  name  is  appar¬ 
ently  derived  from  i veesde  { wesaui , 
RAY.),  yellow,  with  the  affix  denoting 
bad  or  evil,  -ish,  and  describes  “the 
disease  which  they  call  the  yellow 
vomit,  which”,  as  Heckewelder  states, 
“at  times  carries  off  many  of  them” 
(Hist.  Account  216).  Eliot  also  trans¬ 
lates  ‘fever’  by  kussopitae  ague 
(Deut.  28,  2)  [. kussopitae ,  very  hot]. 
kmsinohshau,  he  has  a  fever  ( wamekus- 
sopitanohock,  my  body  burns,  R.  W., 
i.  e.  warne  kussopitae  nolwck;  n’nandtissv, 

1  have  a  fever,  ibid.,  i.  e.  nenndte-esu, 

I  am  on  fire).  See  pestilence. 

few,  ogguhsuog  (an.pl.),  few  ( ogkosswog , 
C. );  inan.  ogguhsinash,  few  things; 
dim.  ogguhsesinash,  very  few;  ogguhse- 
quinogok,  in  (at  the  end  of)  a  few  days, 
pi.  of  ogguhse  ( ogkosse ,  C. ),  small  in 
quantity  or  amount. 

field,  oliteuk,  ohteak  (ahteuh,  soil,  a  field, 
C.),  pi.  -\-onash  (lit.  that  which  is 
owned  or  appropriated,  to  which  the 
idea  of  individual  ownership  attaches; 
suppos.  inan.  part,  from  ohteau,  when 
possessed);  ut  oliteakonit,  in  the  field; 
wut-ohteakonit,  in  his  field. 

fierce,  chachepissu,  R.  W. ;  chatchepissu ,  1 
chachepissu,  wild,  C.  nishqdetu,  fierce,  | 
R.  W. ;  taichitch  nishquehettit,  why  are  1 
they  fierce?  ibid. 

fight,  mekonau ,  he  quarrels,  contends, 
fights  with  (him);  suppos.  noli  me- 
konont,  he  Avho  fights,  when  fighting; 
pi.  neg  mekononcheg;  recip.  mekdnittuog, 
they  quarrel  or  fight,  one  with  the 
other  ( mecaunteass ,  fight  (thou)  with  ! 
him;  mecduntitea,  let  us  fight,  R.  W. ;  | 
v.  i.  num-mekuhteam,  I  fight,  C. ;  rnecau- 
tea,  a  fighter,  R.  W. ;  cum-mecautch, 
you  are  a  quarreller,  ibid.),  ayeuuhko- 
nau,  he  fights  with,  in  battle,  prose¬ 
cutes  Avar  against  (him).  V.  i.  ayeuweh- 
tean,  ayeuhteahhuau,  he  makes  Avar,  does 
battle,  fights  ( jdhetteke ,  fight  ye;  juhet- 
tittea,  let  us  fight,  R.  W. ;  ayeuuttuonk, 
‘fighting’,  C.).  Vbl.  n.  act.  ayeu- 


fight — continued. 

teaonk,  ayeumittiionk,  fighting,  a  fight, 
Avar,  a  battle.  N.  agent,  ayeuteaen,  indef. 
-min,  one  who  fights,  a  fighter,  a  Avar- 
rior;  pi.  -enninnuog;  neg  ayeuhteaenuut - 
cheg  (and  ayeuwthteaenuitcheg) ,  war- 
riors  (habitual  fighters)  (Muh.  oioteet 
(particip. ),  he  Avho  fights,  Edw.). 

fill,  numu'ohteau ,  it  fills,  it  is  filled 
(inan.  subj. ),  he  fills  or  makes  (it)  full; 
numxcohtoush  kenutcheganit,  fill  thou  thy 
hand  ( numwohtaj ,  let  it  be  filled,  C. ); 
from  numwaeu  (it  is  full)  and  ohteau. 
numuvppuog  icetu,  they  (an.  subj.)  fill 
the  house,  i.  e.  the  house  is  full  of 
them,  numwapanum  wutaskon  pummee, 
he  fills  his  horn  Avith  oil;  numwapanum- 
cok,  fill  ye  (one  thing  with  another,  as 
barrels  with  Avater,  1  K.  18,  33).  num- 
wameechum  [numu'ae-meechuni] ,  he  is 
full  of  food,  has  filled  himself  ( nurn - 
wamechimehteam,  I  fill,  C.,  i.  e.  make 
myself  full). 

filth,  filthiness,  nishkeneunkquok  (sup¬ 
pos.  part,  concrete,  Avhen  it  is  filthy), 
filth,  dirt;  nishkeneunkqussuonk,  the  do¬ 
ing  of  uncleanness,  filthiness  in  action. 

filthy,  nishkeneun kque,  unclean,  filthy 
(inherently  or  by  nature);  nislikeneunk- 
quodt,  when  unclean  or  filthy  (as  a  gar¬ 
ment,  etc.);  adj.  an.  nish keneunkqpssu , 
(he  is)  filthy. 

fin  (of  a  fish),  wapicekan  (?);  neg  wapice- 
kanitcheg,  they  which  have  fins,  Lev. 
11,  9;  Deut.  4,  9. 

find,  nameheau,  he  finds  (him);  na- 
mcheog,  if  I  find  them;  ke-nameh,  thou 
hast  found  me;  kenamhesh,  I  have  found 
thee;  narnehteau,  he  finds  (it);  suppos. 
part,  namehteunk,  when  finding  (it), 
Avhen  he  finds  ( nun-ndineehteo ,  I  find, 
C. ).  Causat.  from  naiXm,  he  sees:  he 
causes  to  be  seen  (?). 

fine  (in  particles  or  powder),  pasquag, 
that  Avhich  is  fine  or  like  dust  ( pup - 
pissi,  dust;  pishquehick,  unparched  meal, 
R.  W. )  [from  peasik,  that  Avhich  is 
small  ?];  pi.  inan.  pishquehthaumash, 
‘beaten  small’,  powdered,  Lev.  16,  13 
(causat.  inan.,  made  fine),  sohquag, 
that  Avhich  is  fine  or  powdered,  fine- 
dust:  sohquag  kali puppissi,  ‘powder  and 
dust’,  Deut. 28, 24;  sohque puppissi,  fine- 


trumbull] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


259 


fine — continued. 

dust,  Is.  29,  5.  sukpuiyeue,  in  fine  pow¬ 
der,  finely  powdered ;  cf.  sukquttahham, 
be  beats  it  to  powder,  grinds  it  small  or 
fine. 

finger,  pohclianutcheg,  pohchanitch,  pi. 
-egash;  kuppohchanutch,  thy  finger;  ne- 
qutta-tahshe,  pahchanitchav ,  he  had  six 
fingers,  2  Sam.  21,  20.  From  pohsheau 
(it  divides  or  is  divided)  and  nutcheg 
( hand).  iniittinwJmnitcheg,  u uttimchun- 
itch,  my  finger;  'imttimchunitch,  his  fin¬ 
ger;  muttnsonitch,  the  little  finger;  keli- 
tnoquanitcli,  keituhquanitch  (the  great 
finger),  the  thumb;  muppuhkukquan- 
itch  [<?£/] ,  the  tip  of  the  finger  [muppulik- 
ukque-nutcheg,  the  head  of  the  finger] 

( muppuhkqucmitch ,  pi.  fingers, 

C.;  nuppoohkiikquanitchega[sh\,m.y  fin¬ 
gers,  ibid.). 

finish,  make  an  end,  complete,  pa- 

kodchteau  ( pakodjtectu ,  pogkodcheteau ) 
anakausuonk,  he  finished  the  work; 
nwppogkodchehteoh  mqo-pummayeuonk,  I 
have  finished  my  course,  2  Tim.  4,  7; 
pakodjteciu-nn,  it  is  finished  [cars.  inan. 
from  pakodclie,  thoroughly,  complete¬ 
ly]  .  pakodclie  ussu,  he  performs  (it)  com¬ 
pletely,  finishes  or  accomplishes  (it); 
v.  i.  nuppakodche  ussem,  I  make  an  end 
of  it,  complete  it.  kesteau  wut-anakausu- 
onk,  he  has  finished  his  work  ( kestou - 
■unat,  to  finish,  to  leave  off,  C. ) ;  anakau¬ 
suonk  kesleiuun,  the  work  is  finished. 
mahtco,  rnahtoau,  he  made  an  end  of 
speaking;  matoadt,  when  he  had  done 
speaking  ( num-mahteaim ,  I  cease;  mini- 
viohtanuhkus,  1  conclude  or  finish,  i.  e. 
I  go  on  to  conclude,  0.). 

fire,  ncotau,  ncoteau  {note,  gate,  cluckot, 
squtta,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  yeict,  Stiles;  chikkoht 
or  ncotau,  C. ).  nashquttag  (=sqtitta,  R. 
IV. ),  a  violent  or  destructive  fire;  inan. 
concrete  from  nashquneau,  it  burns,  con¬ 
sumes,  rages;  cf.  nashquttin,  a  tempest 
or  destructive  storm,  ncotau  is  of  uncer¬ 
tain  etymology.  Its  use  seeins  to  have 
been  restricted  to  fire  used  for  domestic 
purposes,  chickoht  [ chikohteau ,  it  burns; 
chtke-ohteau,  it  is  fierce  or  violent]  was 
a  more  general  name  of  fire  as  an  ele¬ 
ment,  or  rather  as  a  power,  and  nash¬ 
quttag  or  squtta  was  nearly  equivalent 


fire — continued. 

to  the  expression  ‘the  devouring  ele¬ 
ment’ — fire  as  an  enemy  or  object  of 
dread. 

firm,  menuhki,  menuhkeu,  (it  is)  hard, 
strong,  firm  ( menuhkohtae ,  firmly,  C. ). 
See  hard ;  strong. 

first,  uegonne  ( necdwmi ,  (for  vecciwni )? 
R.  W. ),  first.  This  word,  though 
differently  written,  is  identical  with 
nukkune,  old  (original,  old,  C. ),  and 
like  nequt  (one),  of  which  it  is  the 
ordinal,  is  related  to  nukkodtam  ( nickcit - 
taw,  R.  W.),  he  leaves  behind,  aban¬ 
dons,  etc. :  ayimup  negonne  uukkone- 
yeuut,  he  hath  made  the  first  old,  Heb. 
8,  13;  ne  negonneyeucoh,  ‘that  which 
waxeth  old  ’,  ibid,  nukkomau,  he  came 
(or  went)  first,  was  in  advance,  negon- 
shaen  (indef.  negonshaenin) ,  a  leader, 
one  who  goes  first.  See  one;  old. 

fish  (n. ) ,  namohs  ( nammauus ,  pi.  -\-suck,  R. 
W.;  ndmds,  pi.  ncimasscoog,  C. ;  Del. 
namcos,  in  composition;  -ameek,  Hkw.); 
dimin.  namohsemes  (pi.  +017),  little 
fish.  The  root  is  apparently  -aumau  or 
-dmuu,  from  which  namohs  is  formed  by 
prefixing  the  demonstrative  or  deter¬ 
minative  n’  and  adding  the  animate 
termination  as  [for  6aas,  animal].  In 
compound  words  this  radical,  with  the 
suppositive  or  participial  termination, 
-aumaug  or  dmciugq,  appears  as  the 
representative  of  namohs.  pi.  mogkom- 
mdquog  [ mogke-dmciugq-uog ],  great 
fishes,  John  21,  11;  kehlahhanndma- 
quog,  fishes  of  the  sea,  Hum.  11,  22; 
liowamagqut  \howan-um,augq-ut\,  to  any 
fish,  Deut.  4,  18  ( aumatii ,  he  is  gone  to 
fish,  i.  e.  he  fishes;  aumduog,  they  are 
fishing;  n’taumen,  I  am  fishing;  kuttau- 
rnen,  do  you  fish?  nnattuckqunnuwem 
{—ncotamugquam,  John  21,  3),  I  go  a 
fishing,  R.  W.).  The  modem  0 jib wa 
(Chippewa)  restricts  this  name  to  the 
sturgeon,  adopting  another  (kego,  ke- 
gde)  for  the  class.  In  the  Ojibwa  vo¬ 
cabularies  in  Schoolcraft’s  Indian 
Tribes,  11,  466,  we  have  for  sturgeon 
nani  aV  (St  Marys);  nuh  ma  (Gr. 
Trav.) ;  naw  neigh  (Saginaw) ;  naugh 
may  (Mackinaw) .  So,  in  the  Old  Algon- 
kin,  lamek,  ‘sturgeon’,  fish,  Lah.  ncota- 


260 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


fish  (n.) — continued. 
mogquaen-in,  nootam&gwaen-in  ( nattcoh - 
quinnuaenin,  C. ),  a  fisherman,  omden 
(pi.  omaenuog),  one  who  is  fishing;  sup- 
pos.  pi.  neg  om&cheg  ( aumdchick ,  R. 
W.),  fishermen,  i.  e.  they  who  fish 
habitually  ( aumanej >,  a  fishing  line, 
R.  W.). 

fish  (v. ),  (with  hook  and  line)  6>naeu 
(aumadi,  R.W.,  he  fishes);  (with  nets) 
n.  agent,  ponashabpaen,  one  who  fishes 
with  nets  or  sets  nets;  ncotamogquaonk, 
a  draft  of  fish,  Luke  5,  9. 
fisher  (Mustela  canadensis),  pekane, 
Rasies;  pelcan;  wullaneag ,  wallaneg 
(mod.  icoollaneag,  Judd,  in  Gen.  Regis¬ 
ter,  xi,  219). 

fist,  puttukqunnutclieg,  puttukqunitch 
\_puttu kqui-nutcheg,  round  hand], 
five,  napanna  tahshe  (naqy&nnct,  R.  W. ;  na- 
panna,  C. ;  Peq.  nuppau,  Stiles;  Muh. 
nunon,  Edw. ;  Del.  (Minsi)  nalan, 
(Unami)  palanach ,  Hkw.);  an.  pi.  na- 
p>anna  tahsuog,  five  (men  or  animate 
objects)  ( napannetamog  skeetompadog, 
five  men,  R.  Wi);  inan.  pi.  napanna 
tahshinash,  five  things  (in  Gram.  14, 
tohsuash;  napannatasMnash  wauch6ash, 
five  hills,  R.  W. ) ;  nabo  napanna  ( pluck - 
nab  napanna,  R.  W.),  fifteen;  napanna 
tahshinchag  ( napannetashincheck ,  R.W. ), 
fifty. 

flags  or  rushes,  mishashq,  misasq  [mishe- 
askeht,  great  grass]  (Narr.  muskeech- 
cige,  rushes,  Stiles),  wekinasq  (wekin- 
ash,  pi.  -{-quash,  reeds,  R.  W.)  [ icekin - 
askehl,  house  grass,  or  grass  for  making 
houses  (? ) .  “  Their  houses  are  .  .  .  cov¬ 
ered  on  the  roof  with  sedge  and  old 
mats”,  Higginson,  N.  E.  Plantation,  ch. 
xii.  “The  meaner  sort  of  wigwams  are 
covered  with  mats  they  make  of  a  kind 
of  bulrush”,  Gookin].  wusshashquo- 
bok,  flag,  Job.  S,  11.  uppeanashkinonog 
(pi.),  flags,  Is.  19,  6. 

flame,  nconamau,  nooncouneau  [ =nconu - 
nau,  it  sucks  ?] :  en  nconondut,  into  the 
flame;  nmnconde,  noonaoun&e,  flaming, 
flat,  suppos.  partic.  nummekitchdnont, 
having  a  flat  nose  ( neneque  mutchan, 
flat  nose,  C. ).  puck  is  the  radical  for 
thin  and  flat.  See  Rasies,  s.  v.  mince; 
Howse  27,  35. 


flatter,  v.  i.  papanam,  he  flatters;  an. 
papanooau,  lie  flatters  (him);  supphs. 
part,  noli  papanamonl,  he  who  is  a 
flatterer;  suppos.  part.  an.  noh  ]>aj>a- 
nauadt,  he  who  flatters  anyone;  adj. 
papanae,  flattering  [freq.  from  pannco- 
wau,  panncoau,  he  speaks  falsely],  wae- 
enomau,  he  praises  or  flatters  (him); 
freq.  wowaeenau  [from  waeenu-au,  lie 
goes  round  about].  From  this  comes 
another  form  by  the  insertion  of  k’ 
progressive:  wdunonuhkcoa u,  he  flatters, 

1.  e.  keeps  praising,  goes  on  praising 
(waunonuhkcowonat,  to  flatter;  nco-jcau- 
wunonukoowam,  I  flatter,  C. );  vbl.  n. 
act.  waunnonuhkmwaonk  ( wouwekoowH- 
onk,  C.),  flattery,  nanvmngeumcowog, 
they  flatter  (?),  Ps.  5,  9.  See  praise. 

flax,  liashabp ,  hashap  (ashdppock,  hemp, 
R.  W.)  was  the  generic  name  of  all 
vegetable  fibers  or  fibrous  material  used 
for  strings,  thread,  or  ropes.  Eliot  uses 
it  for  ‘tow’,  ‘flax’,  ‘a  fish  net’  (dshdp, 
pi.  dshdppog,  C. ;  a  shop,  R.  W.),  ‘a 
spider’s  web’,  etc.:  hashabpuhtvgq 
[ hashabp-uhtiigq ,  flax  stick],  a  ‘stalk 
of  flax’,  and  ‘a  distaff’;  hashabpon- 
ak,  ‘  linen  cloth’.  Roger  Williams  gives 
ashdp,  a  net  (or  ‘nets’  ‘made  of  strong 
hemp’),  and  the  plural  ashdppock, 
hemp,  and  masatinock,  ‘flax’. 

flay,  an.  obj.  pissenuman  xcnttuhquabeh, 
he  flays  or  takes  off  the  skin  of. 

flea,  papekq. 

flesh,  weyaus, pl.-)-o<7  ( weeyoiis ,  ‘venison’, 
R.  W. ;  ‘meat’,  ibid. ;  weyaus,  flesh,  C. ; 
cf.  odas,  an  animal);  kcoweyaus,  thy 
flesh;  coweyaus,  his  flesh,  the  flesh  of; 
askeyaus  [ askun-weyaus ],  raw  flesh; 
kesitlde  weyaus,  ‘sodden  flesh’,  1  Sam. 

2,  15. 

flight.  See  prevail  over  (put  to  flight). 

flint,  soggolitunkanompsk,  rock  of  flint, 
Deut.  8,  15;  mdshipsk,  flint,  Is.  50,  7. 

float,  puhpuhkuhhan,  it  floats,  ‘it  did 
swim  ’,  2  K.  6, 6;  lit.  it  is  hollow.  From 
puhpuhki. 

flood,  iomdgkon,  tommogkon  (it  flows),  a 
flood  ( lamoccon ,  flood  title,  R.  W. ; 
iaumacoks,  upon  the  flood  tide,  ibid.). 
See  flow. 

flour.  See  meal;  fine. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


261 


flow,  tomdgkon,  it  flows,  there  is  a  flowing 
or  flood  ( nippe  tdmogkon,  water  flows, 
C. );  tommogkone,  flowing  (abundantly, 
i.  e.  flooding).  Impers.  verb  wuttitch- 
uan,  wadiutchuan  (or  -cowan),  it  flows 
from:  sepupog  imtticliuwan,  ‘rivers  of 
water  run  down’  (from),  Fs.  119,  136; 
nappe  icuttitchuan-up,  ‘the  water  gushed 
out’  (from  the  rock),  Fs.  78,  20. 
sohwutcliuan  [ soh-wutchuan ],  it  flows 
forth,  issues  from  or  out  of;  sohkhetchu- 
an,  it  continues  to  flow  forth  or  issues 
continuously,  Is.  35,  6.  unnitchuan,  it 
flows  to  or  toward;  sepuash  unnitchu-  | 
anash  kehtahhannit,  the  rivers  flow  to 
the  sea,  Eccl.  1,  7.  anitchuan,  anuchu-  \ 
wan,  anuwutchuwan  [from  anue-wutchu- 
an],  it  overflows,  flows  excessively. 
kussitchuan,  it  flows  (as  a  stream  or 
with  a  current)  continuously;  as  a  sub¬ 
stantive  a  current  or  flowing  stream; 
pi.  -j-  ash,  or  in  the  active  verbal  [ 
form  uk-kussitchuanncDonk  sejmwussash, 
‘the  stream  of  the  brooks’,  Num.  21, 
15;  adj.  kussitchuwane  sep,  a  flowing 
river  (Cree  keesitchewun,  it  is  very 
swift  current  [kees  =  keche,  intensive], 
Howse  175.)  Elsewhere,  kussehtanne, 
flowing  as  a  stream:  kussehtanne  sepuese, 
‘the  stream  of  a  brook’,  Job  6, 15;  kusseh- 
tanup,  a  stream,  a  current;  pi.  -\-peash. 
u-oweeyonchuan,  it  flows  circuitously, 
winds  about  [from  umceaushin,  it  winds 
about],  pamitchuan,  pomitchcowan  ! 
( pamutch -,  pumitch-,  etc.),  it  flows, 
moves  by  flowing  (describing  the  kind 
of  motion  without  regard  to  direction, 
source,  or  degree).  It  is  formed  from 
pomushau  (he  walks,  travels,  moves 
along)  by  substituting  the  impersonal 
termination  and  introducing  the  -ch 
guttural,  denoting  involuntary  or  in¬ 
animate  activity.  Cotton  gives,  in  a 
nearly  related  form,  the  verb  nup-pum- 
mechesham,  ‘  I  slide’.  In  all  these  verbs 
the  radical  is  coch  or  mutch,  it  proceeds 
from.  See  father. 

flower,  uppeshau,  peshau  ( uppeshau ,  C. ), 
lit.  ‘it  bursts  forth’,  ‘blossoms’  [from 
pokshau,  it  breaks];  pi.  uppeshadnash. 
See  bloom. 

fly  (n.),  cochaus,  oochaas,  and  rnwsuhq,  pi. 
mcosuhquog,  flies;  dimin.  moosesdhquog . 


fly  (v. ),  ptooeu,  ptcoweu,  tcoweu,  it  (a  bird) 
flies,  moves  through  the  air  ( ptowei ,  it 
is  fled,  R.  IV.;  nut-tcowen,  I  fly,  C. ); 
nag  ptcoweog,  they  fly  away;  suppos. 
part,  noh  tcoweet,  taoeit,  that  which  flies. 
Nearly  related  to  or  identical  with 
pcotauau  or  paotaeu,  he  blows  or  is 
blown.  Adj. ptmweche,  flying,  ptcoemco, 
it  (inan.  obj.)  flies  away  [ptcoeu  with 
the  impersonal  intransitive  particle 
-mo),  tcohan,  ptcohan,  tcoun,  it  flies  oris 
blown  by  the  wind,  as  dust  or  snow; 
nish  tcohanash,  things  driven  away  or 
made  to  fly;  suppos.  ne  ptcoanuntog  tea- 
ban  (or  ne  tcountog,  or  ne  tohtcoanontog) , 
that  which  flies  before  the  wind  or  is 
driven  by  the  wind  [ptmeu-un,  pass, 
part,  oi  ptcoeu).  pummunctu,  it  (a  bird) 
flies,  goes  swiftly  through  the  air  [as  if 
shot  from  a  bow  or  gun ;  prammun,  shot, 
pass.  part,  from  pummu,  he  shoots]; 
suppos.  p&munont,  when  he  flies,  fly¬ 
ing;  neg pdmunenutclieg  or  pdmunoncheg, 
they  (birds,  fowls)  which  fly;  freq. 
pdpumunont,  habitually  flying;  pi.  neg 
papumunoncheg:  pdpumunont  psukses,  a 
flying  bird  (bird  when  flying),  ushpeu, 
ushpushau,  he  or  it  mounts  upward  in 
air,  soars,  flies  up;  with  inan.  subj. 
nshpemo,  ussptemo;  suppos.  onatuh  chik- 
kinasog  ashpshdhettit,  ‘as  sparks  [when 
they]  fly  upward,’  Job  5,  7.  wussemco, 
he  flees  or  flies  (from  an  enemy); 
noosem,  I  flee;  pish  ncosemun,  we  will 
flee  ( wussemo,  he  flies;  wussemowock ,  they 
fly,  R.  IV.;  u-ussemco,  wussemodv'i ,  (he 
is)  flying  away,  fled,  C.);  imperat. 
wussemcok,  flee  ye;  suppos.  uiussemoan, 
when  thou  didst  flee;  v.  t.  an.  wasem- 
umhteauont  mosquoh,  when  he  flees  from 
a  bear,  ussishau,  he  flees  to  (a  place  or 
person)  for  refuge,  he  runs  or  goes 
quickly  to;  ndussishash  or  ushhcish,  flee 
thou  thither  [from  ussu,  by  the  inser¬ 
tion  of  ’sh  to  denote  swift  or  violent  ac¬ 
tion,  he  bestirs  himself,  exerts  himself 
violently,  does  (agit)  with  speed  or  ce¬ 
lerity.  Primarily  ussisshau  means  sim¬ 
ply  he  runs  quickly  or  hastens] .  ushpuli- 
hco  (and  spuhhco ),  he  flies  to  for  refuge; 
nag  spuhhamaog,  they  fled  (for  safety); 
vbl.  n.  act.  ushpuhhooiedonk,  spuhhco- 
wdonk,  a  refuge;  uspuhlicowde  ayeuonk, 
a  refuge  place,  place  of  refuge. 


262 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


foam,  pehtemi  (it  foams),  foam,  froth; 
pchtom,  the  scum  (of  a  pot);  pehtauut- 
tcon.au  [ pehteau-v'uttoon ],  he  foams  atthe 
mouth.  Cf.  petau ,  pehtau,  he  puts  on 
or  into. 

fog,  nishkenon,  (when  there  is)  mist,  fog, 
fine  rain;  cf.  sokenon,  rain,  when  it 
rains;  n.  coll,  nishkenunk,  ‘small  rain’, 
drizzle,  Deut.  32, 2.  ouw&n,  vapor,  mist, 
steam.  See  vapor. 

follow,  asuhkauau,  he  follows,  goes 
after  (him) ;  suppos.  noh  ambit ,  he  who 
follows;  suffix  an.  wut-ashkauoh,  he 
followed  him  ( assuhkoudnat ,  to  follow, 
C. );  asulikaue  (as  adj.  and  adv.),  fol¬ 
lowing,  going  after;  asuhkom,  he  fol¬ 
lows  or  goes  after  (inan.  obj.),  he  pur¬ 
sues  (it)  [asuh-  k-au,  he  continues  to 
go  after  or  behind;  asuh,  the  radical,  is 
related  to  n’eese,  two,  and  to  the  dis¬ 
junctive  or  alternative  asuh,  or], 
noosukauciu,  he  follows  after,  goes 
after,  pursues  (him);  suffix  wuh-naosu- 
kau-oh,  he  followed  him;  ncomkau,  pur¬ 
sue  thou  them;  suppos.  nohnaosukauont, 
he  when  following,  he  who  follows;  so 
n oaswutta hwhaik,  noosuttahhcowau,  he  pur¬ 
sues  (him),  follows  after  (him);  ncosut- 
tahhoowaog,  they  pursue;  n.  agent,  nms- 
uttahhcowaen,  a  pursuer,  one  who  is 
(actually)  pursuing.  Cf.  nmsiuetau,  he 
serves,  obeys,  yields  to. 

food,  meechum  (he  eats  it);  meechum- 
muonk,  fruit,  vegetable  food;  meechu- 
onk,  mameechumuk  ( mechi mucks ,  vict¬ 
uals,  R.  W.);  meetsuonk  [vbl.  n.  from 
metsu,  he  eats] ,  eating,  a  feeding  ( whine 
metsuonk,  comfortable  food  (good 
feeding),  C.;  nompode  metmonk  (morn¬ 
ing  feeding) ,  breakfast,  ibid. ).  See  eat; 
feed. 

foolish,  asaolu,  (he  is)  foolish,  ignorant; 
pi.  -\-og  (assdtu,  ctssdko,  a  fool,  R.  W. ; 
asswtde,  foolish,  C. ) ;  vbl.  n.  act.  asmtu- 
onk,  folly  ( tohncocheyeuonk ,  folly,  C.,  but 
rather  uselessness,  unprofitableness) . 
mattamog,  mattamag,  a  fool;  pi.  matta- 
mogv-og  (mattamagque,  foolishly,  C. ); 
mattamagquesu  or  -qaeussu  [mattamag- 
que-ussu ],  he  does  foolishly,  a  foolish 
doer;  vbl.  n.  act.  mattamagcoonk,  fool¬ 
ishness,  the  being  foolish ;  mattamagque- 
suonk,  mattamag queusseonk,  foolishness 
in  action,  the  doing  foolishly.  asootu- 


foolish — continued. 

onk  is  natural  folly,  simplcity,  ori  ignor¬ 
ance;  mattamagcoonk,  foolishness  with 
reference  to  some  special  matter, 
foot,  unmeet  [»i’as/<],  a  foot;  nusseet,  my 
foot;  kusseet  (Peq.  cuzseet,  Stiles;  Xarr. 
kusseet,  Stiles),  thy  foot;  vusseet,  his 
foot;  pi.  -t-ash  ( vmssctte ,  pi.  -task,  foot, 
feet,  R.  IV.;  mlsseet,  a  foot,  C. ).  From 
ussu,  he  does,  acts  (agit),  suppos.  noh 
asit,  aseet,  he  who  does  or  acts,  thedoer. 
Cf.  uss'ishau,  he  acts  quickly,  runs, 
for,  vmtche  (it  proceeds  from),  f  ir,  on 
account  of;  ne  mitche,  for,  from,  because 
of,  therefore;  ne  vmtche  yen,  for  this 
cause.  Elsewhere  newutche  yen  uvj, 
yen  wajeh ,  etc.  ( imtche ,  for,  prep. ;  newaj, 
for  which  cause,  conj.;  vxtj,  for,  conj., 
C.). 

forbid,  guild  inau,  queildinau,  he  forbids 
(him);  suffix  an.  uk-quihtin-niih,  he 
forbids  him;  ahque  queihtm,  do  not 
(thou)  forbid;  nag  queihtus,  forbid  thou 
them;  suppos.  part,  quohtinont,  forbid¬ 
ding,  when  he  forbids  ( quehtehkoncd ,  to 
forbid,  C. );  ah.  and  inan.  quihtehteau, 
qutihteau,  he  forbids  (it)  to  (him):  voh 
howan  qutehteau  nippe?  can  any  man 
forbid  water?  Acts  10,  47  ( noh  quehteh- 
teau,  he  forbiddeth,  C. )  Perhaps  from 
ahque,  ‘do  not’,  ‘refrain’.  The  pri¬ 
mary  meaning  is,  perhaps,  to  make 
afraid,  to  cause  to  fear  or  to  stand  in 
awe  of.  The  causative  form  of  the  verb 
quehtam  ( quttam ,  C. ),  he  fears,  is  else¬ 
where  used  in  the  sense  of  to  appease, 
to  threaten,  to  make  to  desist, 
force,  chekeheau,  he  uses  force,  forces 
(him);  suffix  an.  wid-chekeheuh,  he 
forced  him,  he  ravished  her  ( nut-cheke - 
yeuwae,  I  compel,  C.).  chetimau,  he 
compels  him.  See  compel, 
ford,  ponquag (?),  a  fording  place  ( =  shal¬ 
low).  tmskeonk,  a  ford  (toceketuck,  let  us 
wade;  wid-tocekemin,  to  wade;  toyinsk, 
a  bridge,  R.  W.). 

forehead,  muskodtuk  ( m’scdttuck ,  R.  IV.; 
misk  \_-odtvk  ?] ,  C. ;  kuskodtuk,  thy  fore¬ 
head;  i cnskodtuk,  his  forehead,  the 
forehead  of;  ut  vruskodtugqut,  on  his 
forehead. 

foreign,  pencowe  [ penoeu ,  it  is  different, 
strange, unlike],  strange,  foreign;  penco- 
woht,  penoowot,  penuwot,  a  foreigner 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


263 


foreign — continued. 

[ pencoire-ohteau ,  one  wlio  is  different]; 
pi.  pencowohtedog,  strangers,  foreigners; 
penoowohkomuk,  a  strange  place,  a  for¬ 
eign  country.  See  different;  strange, 
forest,  touohkomuk  ( touohkomuk ,  C. ;  cf. 
Del.  tckenink,  in  the  woods,  Hkw. ),  lit. 
a  solitary  place  [toueu-komuk],  the  wil¬ 
derness,  the  forest,  pi  -{-quash.  In  the 
index  to  Mr  Pickering’s  edition  of 
Eliot’s  Grammar  (2  M.H.C.,  ix),  among 
the  “select  words  from  the  translation 
of  the  Bible”,  the  editor  gave  ‘ sohsi'i - 
muonk,  forest’.  This  word  (the  active 
verbal  of  sohsumco,  it  shines  forth) 
means  a  shining  forth;  in  Eliot’s  trans¬ 
lation,  ‘glory’.  Mr  Pickering’s  mis¬ 
take  is  traceable,  I  suspect,  to  his  er¬ 
roneous  reading  of  Is.  10,  18:  ‘wuttou- 
ohkomuk-que  sohsumdonk’,  ‘the  glory 
of  his  forest’,  lit.  ‘liis  forest  glory’, 
foretell.  See  predict, 
forever,  micheme.  See  ever, 
forget,  wanantarn,  he  forgets  (it);  wa- 
nanuuiau,  he  forgets  (him);  ahque 
vmnantash,  do  not  thou  forget  (it); 
wanantamwog ,  vsunanatamwog,  they  for¬ 
get  ( nanvdnantam ,  I  forget,  C. );  ncoira- 
ndnumukquog,  they  forget  me,  I  am 
forgot  by  them  [wanne-antam,  he  is 
without  thought  of,  has  not  in  mind]. 
wanantamwaheau,  he  causes  (him)  to 
forget. 

forgive,  ahquoantam,  ahquontam,  he 
forgives  (it);  ahquoantamau,  he  for¬ 
gives  (it)  to  (him);  ahquoantamah 
( ahquontdmah ,  C. ),  forgive  thou  me; 
ahquontamaiinnean  num-matcheseongash, 
forgive  us  our  sins;  num-mahche  ahquon¬ 
tam,  I  have  forgiven;  vbl.  n.  act.  ahquo- 
antamoonk, a  forgiving, forgiveness;  pass. 
ahquoantamoadtmneat,  and  contract 
ahquontamoadtin  (infill.  pass.,  to  be 
forgiven),  a  being  forgiven,  forgiveness 
recei  ved.  ahquoanta  usuon  k,  the  exercise 
of  forgiveness,  the  act  of  forgiving,  par¬ 
don  [active  verbal  from  ahqaoantaussu, 
he  exercises  forgiveness]  ( nut-ahquon - 
tous,  I  pardon,  C. ).  From  cihque-antam, 
he  ceases  or  refrains  from  having  in 
mind,  refrains  from  thinking  of. 
form,  nussu,  (he  is)  shaped  or  formed 
[ne-t<ssu] :  toh unnussu?  what  form  is  he 
of?  1  Sam.  28,  14;  suppos.  ne  anussit,  in 


form — continued. 

the  form  or  likeness  of;  muhhogkat 
nussu,  ‘in  bodily  shape’,  Luke  3,22; 
vbl.  n.  act.  nussuonk,  unnussuonk,  form 
or  shape  (of  an.  obj.);  wuttinnussuonk, 
his  form,  neaunak,  the  form  or  likeness 
(of  inan.  obj.):  nedunag  yeu  muttaok, 
‘the  fash-  ion  of  this  world’,  1  Cor.  7, 
31;  neaunak  menutcheg,  in  the  form  of  a 
hand;  suppos.  form  of  neane  [ne  unne] , 
that  which  is  so  or  is  such  as:  when  it 
is  (or  being)  such  as,  of  that  kind. 
See  shape. 

former.  See  first. 

formerly,  negonne,  negonnae  ( chenohkom - 
mue,  C. ).  See  first. 

fornication,  nanwunncodsqauonk,  nan- 
wunwudtsquauonk,  vbl.  n.  act.  from 
nanwunncodsquaau,  he  fornicates  or  is 
given  to  fornication;  compounded  of 
nanwe,  anybody,  common,  and  nmd- 
squaau,  he  seduces  or  commits  fornica¬ 
tion  with;  nanwunncodsquaosuonk,  the 
commission  of  fornication,  whoring  (by 
either  sex);  namvunncodsquaucien  (indef. 
-squauaenin) ,  a  fornicator  (of  either 
sex),  a  prostitute;  nanwunnoodsquau- 
ausuen  or  -squadsuen  (indef.  -suenin), 
one  who  commits  fornication  or  acts 
the  whore;  nanwuneodsquadsue  mittam- 
wossi.%  a  wborish  woman,  viansquaosu, 
manishquaussu,  manusquaausu,  (she  is) 
a  fornicator  or  commits  fornication: 
mitta mwossissog  m a n u s quaausit c h e g, 
‘women  who  break  wedlock’,  Ezek. 
16,  38;  kumpiansqua6s,  thou  hast  com¬ 
mitted  fornication  with,  hast  played 
the  whore  with  (him).  See  adultery. 

forsake,  ahquoanumau,  ohquanumau,  he 
forsakes  or  abandons  (him);  ahquo- 
anaog,  they  forsake  (him ) ;  inan.  ahquo¬ 
antam,  he  forsakes  (it).  Same  as  for¬ 
give,  q.  v. 

fort,  mansk,  manshk,  a  fort  or  place  of 
defense;  pi.  manskash  ( aurndnsk ,  RAY.). 
wonkondus,  wonkoncos  ( wdkoonoos ,  a 
fence,  C. ;  waukaunosint,  a  fort,  R.  W.), 
a  fort,  i.  e.  a  palisade,  a  crooked  [ iroon - 
Ah]  or  curved  fence;  see  fence,  menuh- 
konogq,  pi.  -ogwash,  -ogquash,  strong¬ 
holds;  from  menuhkenum,  he  holds  it 
fast. 

I  fourteen.  See  four. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


264 


forty.  See  four. 

foundation,  quenohtag,  suppos.  part, 
concrete  from  quenohtau,  he  founds  or 
lays  a  foundation;  lit.  that  which  is 
deep  (?).  Cf.  qunnonteadt,  ‘when  he 
had  digged  deep’,  Luke  6,  48;  quenoh- 
tauun,  he  founded  it;  pass,  it  is 
founded. 

four,  yau,  yauwe  ( ybh ,  R.  W. ;  Peq. 
yauuh,  Stiles;  yau,  C. ;  Muh.  nauwoh, 
Edw. ;  Del.  nemo,  newa,  Hkw.) ;  yau¬ 
ut  nai,  four  square;  pi.  an.  yauog, 
yauooog  ( ydwock ,  R.  W.) ;  inan.  yauuncish 
( yowunnash,'  R.  W. ;  yauunash,  C. ); 
yauut  ( yauwut ,  C. ),  four  times,  nabo  I 
yau  (piuck-nab  ,ydh,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  piugg 
naubut  yau,  Stiles),  fourteen;  nabo 
yawwudt,  nabo  yauut,  fourteen  times; 
so,  nabo  yauwudt  kodtumivae,  for  four¬ 
teen  years,  i.  e.  to  the  fourteenth  year; 

or,  fourteen  times  one  year,  yauunchag  \ 
(yowinicheck,  R.  W. ;  yauwinnechak,  C.) ,  ! 
forty ;  pi.  an .  yauunchdgkodtog,  yauunchd- 
gottog;  inan.  yauunchagkodtash.  yauwudt 
pasukmmog,  four  hundred  (an.). 

fowl,  puppinsliaas.  See  bird, 
fox,  wonkqimis,  wonksis,  pi.  -\-sog;  dim. 
wonkqussissemes,  a  little  fox  ( pequaivus , 
a  gray  fox;  mishqu&shim,  a  red  fox,  , 
R.  W. ;  Peq.  a’waumps,  fox,  Stiles;  ivonk- 
qussis,  C. ). 

fragment,  chogq,  a  hit,  a  morsel;  kod- 
chuki,  a  piece  or  fragment  of  ( cotchekun - 
nemi  weeyous,  cut  me  some  (i.  e.  a  piece 
of)  meat,  R.  W. ).  See  spot;  piece, 
free  (adj.),  chipappu  [chippe-appu,  he 
remains  apart  or  by  himself],  he  is 
free;  suppos.  chipininndm.it,  when  he  is  i 
free,  being  free  ( chippinninnue  netu, 
(he  is)  free  born,  C. );  mnnummatta 
nut-chippinninnumf  am  not  I  free?  om- 
peu,  he  is  free,  unbound.  See  loose; 
man  ( omp ). 

free  (v. ).  See  deliver;  loose, 
freely,  nannowe,  nanouwe,  nancnviyeue, 
freely  ( nanauwe ,  nannduwe,  C. ),  =  nan- 
ice,  common,  anybody’s  (?). 
freeze.  See  frost;  ice. 

Frenchmen,  Punachmonog  (pl.),C. 
friend,  wetomp,  a  favorite  or  dear  friend; 

pi.  ~\-dog;  netomp  (netop,  R.  W. ),  my 
friend,  a  ‘general  salutation’  between 
the  Indians  and  English  (R.  W.  27) 

( peydush  netop,  come  hither,  my  friend, 


friend— continued. 

R.  W. );  ketomp,  thy  friend;  neetompaog 
( netompaCtog ,  R.  IV.),  my  friends  (Del. 
n’tschu,  my  friend;  n'tschutti,  dear,  be¬ 
loved  friend;  nitis,  (my)  confidential 
friend,  Hkw.)  [iretu-omp,  house  man, 
companion,  of  the  same  household  or 
family;  so,  ireetompassu,  wetompas,  a 
brother  or  sister],  tonkqs,  friend,  cousin, 
kinsman  ( natdncks ,  mycousin;  watoncks, 
a  [his]  cousin,  R.  \V. ;  wodtonkqsin,  a 
cousin,  C. ):  nuttonkqsog,  ‘sirs’,  Acts 
27,  25,  i.  e.  friends;  cf.  (fem. )  weetuk- 
fsquoh,  her  sister;  netukkusq,  my  sister 
(weticks,  a  sister,  R.  W.). 

frog,  tindgkukquas,  tmogkequas,  tinogkoo- 
quas,  pi.  -suog  ( tinnogkdhquase ,  pi.  -mog; 
tinnogkohteas,  pi.  -\-suog,  a  toad,  C. ). 
mohmoskuhleam\og'\,  frogs  ( mahmoskoh - 
teaseog,  Mass.  Ps. ),  Ps.  78,  45,  but  not 
elsewhere.  Abn.  moskeki,  a  toad. 
Peq.  kopiauss,  kupyds,  frog,  Stiles. 

from,  wutche,  a>tch,  meh  [wucM,  wutchb, 
R.  W. ;  wutche,  C. ;  Muh.  ocheh,  Edw. 
The  ch  is  guttural,  nearly  equivalent  to- 
the  German  ch  soft) .  Primarily  a  de¬ 
fective  or  impersonal  verb,  wutcheu 
(• wutchu ,  mtchu) ,  it  proceeds  from,  comes 
from,  hence  as  a  preposition  from,  of, 
because  of,  etc.  wutch  .  .  .  yean,  from 
...  to  (after  verbs  of  motion);  noh 
wutchu,  (it  is)  ‘of  him’,  as  a  source  or 
cause,  Rom.  11,  36;  na  ootch  sohhamun, 
‘there  went  forth  from’,  Num.  11,  31; 
na  each  qushken,  he  returned  there  from 
(hence);  yeu  wutche  (yd  wuchb,  R.  W. ) , 
from  hence,  from  this  place;  ne  watcher 
(from  that),  for  that  cause,  therefore. 
This  root  served  to  express  the  origin 
of  motion  or  source  of  being,  and  is  to- 
be  traced  under  various  modifications 
of  form  in  a  great  number  of  compound 
words  denoting  origin,  source,  motion 
(animate  and  inanimate),  progression, 
cause  and  effect,  production,  etc.  See 
come  from;  father;  begin,  mm,  rvmm, 
he  goes  or  departs  from.  See  go 
from. 

frost,  tmhpu,  (there is)  frost  ( toohp ,  Mass. 
Ps. ;  tdpu,  R.  W.;  mmittdpu,  a  great 
frost,  ibid.;  taqudttin,  frost,  ibid,  (it 
is  freezing — the  effect  of  frost);  auke 
taqudtsha,  the  ground  is  frozen,  ibid. ;  mp 
taqudttin,  the  river  is  frozen,  ibid. ;  tog- 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


265 


frost — continued. 

quttinash  nuhtauogash,  I  freeze  my  ears 
(my  ears  are  frozen),  Cl). 

froth.  See  foam. 

fruit,  meecliummuonk  {-muoonk,  C. ),  pi. 
-ongcish  [vbl.  n.  act.  from  meechummco,  it 
is  eaten,  used  as  food,  the  pass.  inan. 
form  of  rneech,  he  eats],  fruit,  perhaps 
all  vegetable  food,  asq,  cishq,  pi .cisquosh, 
ashquash,  green  fruit  or  vegetables,  pri¬ 
marily  anything  green  or  immature  of 
vegetable  growth,  as  ivuskeasq,  pi.  ivus- 
keasquosh,  ‘tender  grass’,  2  Sam.  23,  4; 
Dan.  4, 15;  from  vmske,  new,  young,  and 
asq;  with  the  indef.  particle,  m’askeht 
(or  by  reduplication,  oskosk,  C. ),  grass, 
that  which  is  green.  From  the  same 
root  is  aske,  raw  ( askun ,  it  is  raw,  R.  W. ; 
askin,  C. );  wuske,  new,  young;  asq, 
ashq,  or  asquam,  not  yet,  and  ashkoshqui 
(askosqae,  C. ),  green  in  color.  The 
word  asq  was  used  especially  to  refer 
to  the  fruit  of  the  Cucurbitacete,  mel¬ 
ons,  gourds,  cucumbers,  and  what  are 
now  known  by  their  Indian  name, 
though  the  plural  has  been  transformed 
to  the  singular,  ’squash-es.  askcotasq, 
pi.  askaotasquash,  used  by  Eliot  for  ‘cu¬ 
cumbers’,  Num.  11,  5,  was  “askuta- 
squash,  their  vine  apple,  which  the 
English  from  them  call  squashes” 
(R.  W.),  and  which  Wood  mentioned 
(N.  E.  Prospect),  as  “ isquoterquashes, 
their  best  bread” ;  from  askcok,  a  snake, 
and  asq:  snake-like  or  ‘crook-neck’ 
squash,  quoncoasq,  a  gourd  [from  qunni, 
long];  hence  qudnmivask,  a  bottle,  C. 
monaskmtasq,  a  melon  (but  by  Cotton 
mconosketumuk,  ‘cucumbers’.  So,  qui- 
nosketdmuk,  ‘muskmelon’,  and  ohhos- 
ketdmuk,  ‘watermelon’,  C.,  ‘or  a  raw 
thing’;  from  askehtamun,  he  eats  it 
raw),  minne,  min,  pi.  minneash,  ber¬ 
ries,  nuts,  small  fruit,  grain,  etc.,  that 
which  is  produced  by  and. is  peculiar  to 
each  tree  or  plant  [ m’unni ,  the  kind 
of,  the  species  of].  In  the  singular  in 
compound  words  it  denotes  kind  or 
species,  the  growing  tree  or  plant;  in 
the  plural,  the  fruit,  as  weatchemin,  corn 


fruit — continued. 

in  the  field,  standing  corn;  pi.  -minne¬ 
ash,  corn,  grain;  venominneash ,  grapes 
( weenom ,  a  grape;  weenomis,  a  vine  [from 
waeenu,  it  goes  round] ) ;  wdmpiminegsh, 
chestnuts,  R.  W.  [ wompi-minnecish , 
white-nuts] ;  anduchemineash,  acorns, 
R.  W.  (annahchim ,  a  nut,  pi.  -minash, 
C. ;  Del.  wunachquim,  an  acorn,  which 
Heckewelder  ( correspondence  with  Du- 
ponceau,  p.  407)  derives  from  wunipach 
( wunnepog ,  El.),  a  leaf,  nacli  ( nutch ),  a 
hand,  and  quirn,  a  ‘nut  growing  on  a 
tree’:  ‘the  nut  of  the  tree  the  leaves 
of  which  resemble  a  hand’.  Here  he 
evidently  mistakes  the  radical  force 
of  min,  as  the  examples  which  he 
gives  sufficiently  show.  Seeoak.);  wus- 
swa quatd mineug,  walnuts,  R.  W.  (wus- 
soohquattdmln-ash,  C. ;  mlssoquat,  a 
walnut  tree,  R.  W. ;  Del.  rn’sim,  hick¬ 
ory  nut  [ mcosi-min ,  smooth  nut] ;  ptuc- 
quim,  walnut  [ petukqui-min ,  round  nut], 
Hkw.);  qussuckorninednug,  the  cherry- 
tree,  R.  W.  \qussukquan-min,  stone 
fruit];  ivuttahimneash,  R.  W.,  wattah- 
•minne\_ash~\ ,  C.,  strawberries.  See 
produce. 

full,  numiuae.  See  fill. 

fully,  pakoclche,  completely,  thoroughly; 
wame,  wholly,  entirely;  pohshane  ( pd - 
shanne,  C. ),  fully,  completely,  thor¬ 
oughly.  See  completely;  all. 

future.  “The  time  to  come  is  expressed 
by  a  word  signifying  futurity,  added  to 
the  indicative  mood,  as  mos,pish,  shall 
or  will”,  El.  Gr.  20.  pish  {pitch,  R.  W. ) 
with  the  present  (or  aorist)  indicative 
forms  the  simple  future,  as  pish  .  .  ., 
he  will .  .  .;  pish  .  .  .,  I  will .  .  .  ( pitch 
n’keetam?  shall  I  recover  my  health? 
R.  W.);  mos,  though  sometimes  used 
by  Eliot  as  the  equivalent  of  pish,  de¬ 
notes  the  future  potential  or  conditional 
‘must’  or  ‘shall’:  ne  mos  nnih,  ‘it  must 
needs  be’  so;  mos  nunnup,  I  must  die 
{moce,  R.  W.).  pa-oincbonk,  the  future 
or  to  come,  CL,  vbl.  n.  intrans.  from 
peyomco,  it  is  coming,  ompetak,  in  the 
future,  in  time  to  come  (afterward). 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


■266 


a 


gall,  weeswe;  nmweeswe,  my  gall.  Cf. 
uee$6e  ( wesaui ,  R.  W.),  yellow;  weesog- 
kon,  (when  it  is)  bitter;  so,  AS.  gealla, 
gall;  ge-alewe,  yellow;  Gr.  x°^V,  bile; 
X^ot/,  x^-oa,  greenish  yellow;  Arab. 
murr,  bile,  bitter. 

game  (animals  hunted),  adchauonk,  vbl. 
n.  from  adchau  ( auchatii ,  R.  W.),  he 
hunts.  See  hunt, 
game  (gamble) .  See  play, 
gape,  toanneu,  he  gapes  (tdanenat,  to  gape; 
nut-toiwanneem ,  I  gape,  0. ) ;  v.  an.  tdcin- 
nehtciu,  he  gapes  at  (him), 
garden,  tanohketeaonk,  pi.  tanohketea- 
ongash,  cultivated  plants,  Is.  17,  10;  ut 
noeu  adtanohketeamuk,  in  the  midst  of 
the  garden,  Gen.  2,  9.  Cf.  tannettuog, 
they  grow  as  plants,  are  produced;  dtan- 
negen,  it  yields  or  produces, 
garment,  lwgkcoonk  ( aukcoonk ,  C.),  a 
covering  of  skin;  monak  ( mfrnak ,  C.; 
maunek,  an  English  coat  or  mantle, 
R.  W. ).  See  dress;  clothe;  clothing, 
gate,  squont,  usquont.  See  door, 
gather  (collect),  v.  t.  an.  mianau,  he  as¬ 
sembles  or  gathers  (them)  together, 
he  causes  them  to  collect,  migaeog, 
maiyaeog,  they  gather  or  collect  (them¬ 
selves  together),  they  assemble;  from 
miyae,  mueu  (moywe, C. ),  together;  freq. 
mohmoeog  [i.  e.  m’ miyaeog],  they  gather 
themselves  together  often  or  habitually. 
See  assemble,  mounum,  he  gathers  or 
collects  (it);  kum-mounum,  thou  gather- 
est  ( mowinnee ,  he  gathers  (fruit  or  the 
like);  viowinneeatiog,  they  gather,  R. 
W. ) ;  vbl.  n.  mounumoonk,  a  gathering, 
i.  e.  a  tribute,  custom,  toll, 
general,  nanwe,  common,  q.  v.  ( nanwe 
woskelomp,  any  man,  C.):  nanwe  wut- 
Epistleum  Jude ,  ‘the  general  epistle  of 
Jude’  (=Del.  lenni, which  Heckewelder 
translates  ‘original,  common,  plain, 
pure,  unmixed  ’  (Corresp.  412);  more 
exactly,  common,  general,  normal), 
generation,  pometuonk  (vbl.  n.,  a  living, 
i.  e.  a  lifetime):  up-pummetuongash 
Adam ,  ‘the  generations  of  Adam’,  Gen. 


generation — continued. 

5, 1;  pometuongash,  Is.  41,  4.  See  copu¬ 
late;  couple. 

giant,  magoshketomp,  mogosketomp  [mog- 
ke-wosketomp,  huge  man] . 

gift,  magoadnk,  vbl.  n.  act.  from  magou, 
he  gives,  a  giving  or  offering;  urnmag- 
(i) 6nk  woskelomp,  a  man’s  gift,  Prov.  18, 
16.  See  give. 

girdle,  puttukquobpus,  puttukquobus  ( nup - 
puttukquobbesin,  ‘it  bindeth  me  about’, 
Job  30,  18;  cf.  puttogquegnohhou ,  a  veil; 
puttogwhonk,  a  covering;  pvttogqueu,  he 
hides;  wobpe,  the  thighs);  pi.  puttog- 
quobpissinash. 

girl,  nunksqua,  nunksq  ( nonkishq ,  C. ),  a 
young  woman,  a  girl  (adolescens) 
[nonke-squa,  from  nonkaneu,  he  is  light; 
so,  nunkomp,  a  young  man] ;  dim.  nunk- 
squacs  ( squase.se ,  little  girl,  R.  W. ;  Narr. 
squauhses,  Stiles ;  Del.  ochquetschilsch, 
Hkw. ),  a  young  girl,  pueHa;  double 
dim.  nunksquaemes.  See  virgin ;  woman. 

give,  magou,  magoo,  he  offers,  pre¬ 
sents,  gives,  sells;  magaok  ( maugoke , 
R.W. ),give  ye;  magish  (mduks,  R.W. ), 
give  thou;  magunat  ( mdgunat ,  C. ),  to 
give  or  sell:  magunat  sepha  muon  gash,  to 
offer  sacrifices,  Heb.  8,  3  (opposed  to 
attumunnumunat,  to  receive,  Acts 
20,  35) ;  suppos.  noli  maguk,  he  who 
gives  or  sells,  a  giver,  a  seller;  act.  par- 
ticip.  magunutche,  one  who  gives,  is 
(actually)  giving.  See  gift,  anmnumau, 
he  gives  to  or  bestows  upon  (him  )  -(also 
he  helps  or  assists  (him) :  aninnumeh, 
help  thou  me  ( kuttannummif  will  you 
help  me?  R.W.) );  aninnumok  metsuonk, 
‘give  ye  them  to  eat’,  Matt.  14,  16,  i.  e. 
give  ye  food  to  (them) ;  aninnumah 
(ken  ununumah,  C.),  give  thou  to  me; 
kittinnumoush,  kattinnumoush,  I  give  (it) 
to  thee,  I  will  help  thee. 

glad,  wekontam,  he  is  pleased,  he  is  glad 
[wekon-antam,  he  is  sweet-minded]; 
naowekontam  ( noowekontam ,  C. ;  noive- 
cSntam,  R.  W.),  I  am  glad;  wekontash , 
be  thou  glad,  rejoice;  vbl.  n.  wekontamb- 
onk  (-cbonk,  C.),  gladness,  the  being 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATIC'K  DICTIONARY 


267 


glad — continued. 

glad;  urkontamwe,  -tamwde  (-tam&e,  C. ), 
gladly,  willingly;  muskouantam,  he  is 
very  glad,  he  rejoices,  lit.  he  is  boast¬ 
ful:  wekontamcok  kali  ahche  muskouauta- 
mcok,  rejoice  ye  and  be  exceeding  glad, 
Matt.  5,  12  [missi-wekontam.  ?] . 

glittering,  wohsippde,  wohsippohtae.  See 
bright. 

glory,  sohmmdonk  [ soli- wohsum monk ,  a 
shining  forth;  vbl.  n.  act.  of  sohsumco, 
it  shines  forth.  See  note  on  forest], 

gluttony,  vussaumepcoonk  ( wussomap - 
podonk,  C. ),  vbl.  n.  act.  from  uns- 
saumepoo  [ wussaume-uppon ,  he  eats  too 
much] ,  he  is  gluttonous.  See  eat. 

gnat,  sogkemas.  From  the  same  root  as 
sogkepm,  he  bites. 

go,  com,  dm,  he  goes  from  (a  place 
other  than  that  in  which  the  speaker 
is)  or  proceeds  from;  odiiicdoo,  it  goes 
from;  na  comun,  he  went  thence;  mm- 
wog,  they  went  on,  proceeded  on  their 
journey  (as  in  Gen.  35,  16);  tolinoli 
kaorn?  whence  dost  thou  come?  ( toh - 
hunnm  kcom  kekit?  when  did  you  come 
from  home?  C. ;  turma  cowccCim  ?  whence 
come  you  ?  II.  IV. ) ;  comup,  he  did  go  or 
come  from;  alique  comcogk,  go  ye  not 
from,  Acts  1,4;  suppos.  wag,  when  he 
goes  or  proceeds  from. 

au,  he  goes  to  (a  place  other  than 
that  in  which  the  speaker  is);  auog, 
they  go  to;  aush,  go  thou  to;  ontuh,  let 
us  go  to  (yd  crCintci,  let  us  go  that  way, 
R.  IV.);  kuttuu  toll  kod  6an,  ‘thou 
walkedst  whither  thou  wouldst  [go 
to]’,  John  21,  18;  axiom,  if  I  go.  The 
forms  of  this  verb  are  more  irregular 
than  of  perhaps  any  other  of  the 
primitive  verbs.  It  is  not  always  pos¬ 
sible  to  distinguish  its  suppositive  and 
participial  forms  from  those  of  com 
under  the  disguises  of  Eliot’s  phonog¬ 
raphy.  This  verb  is  often  used  intransi¬ 
tively,  and  its  primary  signification  was, 
probably,  to  go:  noadtit  aui,  ‘he  is 
gone  a  long  journey’  (afar  off),  Prov. 
7,  19;  uttoh  u'amcouk,  uttoh  aomoouk, 
‘whence  it  cometh,  whither  it  goeth’, 
Mass.  Ps.,  John  3,  8;  ne  ayoan,  ‘in  the 
way’  (when  thou  goest),  Ex.  23,  20; 
suppos.  uttoh  U'oh  &6i  or  ciydi,  whither  I 
may  go.  Hence  m’ay,  a  path:  may  toli- 


go — continued. 

woli  aahettit,  ‘the  way  wherein  they 
must  walk’,  Ex.  18,  20;  uttiyeu  may 
ao6g,  by  what  way  ye  should  go,  Deut. 
1,  33.  See  path. 

avideu,  he  goes  away,  he  departs 
(without  reference  to  the  mode  or  act  of 
going,  but  simply  expressing  the  sepa¬ 
ration  or  withdrawal  of  one  person  or 
thing  from  another);  amaish,  go  thou 
away  ( nuttamdeen ,  I  depart;  amaenat, 
to  depart,  C. );  suppos.  amaiit,  amayit 
.  .  .  amayitch,  if  he  depart ...  let  him 
depart,  1  Cor.  7,  15. 

monchu  ( mauchie ,  R.  IV.),  he  goes 
1  from  the  speaker  or  the  place  where 
the  speaker  is  supposed  to  be;  opposed 
to  peyau,  he  comes;  see  come);  num- 
moncliem  (-eem,  C. ),  I  go;  num-monchip, 
I  went;  monchish  ( mauchish ,  R.  IV.),  go 
thou;  suppos.  particip.  noli  monchit,  he 
who  goes;  freq.  momonchu,  he  moves, 
i.  e.  continues  to  go;  nishnoh  oaas  .  .  . 
noh  mamonchit,  every  animal  .  .  .  that 
moveth,  i.  e.  hath  power  of  motion, 
Ezek.  47,  9. 

wadpeu,  mabeu,  he  goes  up  (absolutely 
or  without  regard  to  the  mode  or  act 
of  going),  he  rises;  waapemm,  it  goes 
up,  i.  e.  it  is  raised  up:  nippeash  waa- 
pemooash,  the  waters  rise  up,  Jer.  47,  2 
(nancdheem,  I  arise,  C. ).  From  icacibe, 
impers.  verb,  adv.,  and  prep.,  it  is 
above,  above. 

wcomsu, u'Omussu,  hegoes  down  (abso¬ 
lutely);  comsuog,  they  go  down;  noowo- 
inussin  wadchu-ut,  I  came  down  from 
the  mountain;  suppos.  part,  noh  uv- 
mussit,  nohwcomsit,  he  who  goeth  down; 
neg  uvmussitcheg,  they  who  go  down. 
From  voomeu,  vmmiyeu,  impers.  verb, 
adv.,  and  prep.,  it  is  down  or  beneath. 

kuhkuhqueu,  he  goes  upward,  ascends 
by  progressive  motion.  See  ascend. 

nookeu,  he  goes  downward,  descends 
(from  above  to  or  toward  the  earth 
[n’ ohke-qu] ;  cf.  wcomsu,  he  goes  down 
below  the  earth  or  the  speaker) ; 
nmkcop,  he  descended,  came  down; 
rtCDch  ncokem  kesukqut,  ‘I  came  down 
from  heaven’,  John  6,  38;  suppos. 
noh  ncokit,  he  who  descends,  goes  or 
comes  down;  nookitch,  let  him  come 
down;  inan.  subj.  nookemco,  it  went 


268 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


go — continued. 

down  or  came  down;  v.  t.  inan.  nooki- 
num,  he  puts  (it)  down  or  lets  (it)  down. 

qushkeu,  he  goes  back,  returns.  See 
return. 

cissdushau,  he  goes  backward;  nut- 
asedusham,  I  go  backward. 

kutchittdushau,  he  goes  forward,  pro¬ 
ceeds  onward;  nuk-Jdtchittdusluvm,  I  go 
forward;  inan.  subj.  bitehittumhornm,  it 
goes  forward  [kutche'].  See  begin. 

pascotehau,  hegoes  near  or  comes  near; 
suppos.  noh  pasootshadt,  he  who  goes  or 
comes  near;  pdsamikau,  he  is  going  or 
coming  near,  he  approaches  (imply¬ 
ing,  by  the  incorporation  of  k’  progress¬ 
ive,  continued  motion;  pasootahau  ex¬ 
presses  merely  the  act  of  getting  near 
to,  without  necessarily  including  the 
idea  of  voluntary  motion). 

petukau,  he  goes  in,  enters  (ingredi- 
tur),  i.  e.  he  is  going  in. 

petutteau,  he  goes  into  or  within  (init, 
intrat);  p&tutteash  { peetitteash ,  C.;  phi- 
tees,  R.  W. ),  come  thou  in,  enter,  go  in. 
sohham  [ =soh-aorn\ ,  he  goes  forth. 
negonuhkau  [=negonne-k’ -an],  hegoes 
before,  precedes,  leads;  divested  of  the 
idea  of  progressive  motion  (expressed 
by  k’),  negonnau,  nuk-komau,  he  is  in 
advance,  he  leads  or  precedes. 

asuhkciu  [ amhke-au ],  he  goes  after, 
follows;  asuhknu-au,  he  follows  (him); 
suppos.  noh  amkiit,  he  who  goes  or 
comes  after;  an.  suffix  nah  uiut-amh- 
kauoh,  he  followed  them. 

naosukau,  he  goes  after,  pursues,  fol¬ 
lows.  See  follow. 

pomushau,  he  goes  on  foot,  he  walks 
See  walk. 

ussishau,  he  goes  quickly  to,  hastens 
[usseu,  with  sh’  of  violent  motion],  he 
runs  to  (as  distinguished  from  quog- 
queu,  he  goes  by  running,  runs). 

ptmeu,  he  goes  by  flying  (as  distin¬ 
guished  from  piimmeu,  he  flies,  and 
pumrnunau,  he  flies  to).  See  fly. 

nohham,  nohhcom,  he  goes  by  water, 
sails  ( comishodnhom?  go  you  by  water? 
R.W.,i.e.  by  boat,  mfsAodw).  See  arrive. 

pummohham,  pomohhorn,  he  goes  by 
sea  [ pummoh-com ] ;  n.  agent,  pum- 
mdhhamwaen,  pi.  -waenuog,  they  who 
.  go  by  sea,  mariners.  See  sea. 


go — continued. 

kemuhkhom,  he  goes  spying,  or  as  a 
spy  [ kemen-com ,  he  goes  secretly]. 

panneau,  he  goes  out  of  the  way,  goes 
wrong;  suppos.  part,  noh  panneont,  he 
who  goes  wrong  [penmen,  (he  is)  out 
of  the  wav]. 

wauonu,  w6onu,  he  goes  astray,  wan¬ 
ders;  nmamedin,  I  go  astray  ( ncowoowon , 
I  wander;  waiconmiog,  they  wander, 
C. ) ;  suppos.  part,  waont,  way ont,  going 
astray  or  out  of  the  way,  hence  the 
setting  of  the  sun,  or  his  going  out  of 
the  way.  See  sun. 

aohsuhqueau,  auhmhq-,  ahauhsnkq-, 
he  goes  to  and  fro  [ Auhmhque ,  to  and 
fro,  2  K.  4,  35]. 

dgushau,  dgqshau,  he  goes  below, 
beneath,  or  under  (it),  2  Sam.  18,  9; 
Job  24,  8  [agree,  below]. 

C'ree  Itoot-ayoo,  he  goes  there;  kew- 
ayoo,  he  goes  back,  returns;  koospu, 
he  goes  (from  river  or  lake)  inland; 
ndsep  ayoo,  he  goes  to  the  river,  etc.; 
wuthaweeoo,  he  goes  out,  Howse  81. 
god,  manit  (manlt,  pi.  manittdwock,  RAY.; 
Peq.  mundtu,  Stiles;  Del.  welsit  mannitto, 
the  good  spirit);  v.  subst.  manittco, 
manitio,  (he  is)  a  god;  pi.  manittcoog, 
manitoog,  El.  Gr.  “We  '  ay  God  is;  the 
Indian  of  this  is  Mannitcoa).  The  two 
first  syllables  stand  for  God;  the  latter 
assert  his  existence”,  Exp.  May  hew 
(MS).  In  his  translation  of  the 
Bible  Eliot  has  in  most  instances  trans¬ 
ferred  the  name  of  “God”  and  of 
“Jehovah”  to  the  Indian  text.  He 
gives,  however,  Manit  wame  masugkenuk, 
‘God  Almighty’,  Ex.  6,  3,  and  nen 
Manitto,  ‘I  am  God’  Is.  43,  12,  etc.; 
cf.  Manit,  ‘the  Lord’,  Ps.  2,  4;  Jeho¬ 
vah,  ‘the  Lord’,  v.  7;  God-ut,  ‘(against) 
the  Lord’,  v.  2.  The  possessive  form 
num-manitoom ,  my  god,  Ps.  3,  7;  7,  1; 
kum-manitcom,  thy  god,  etc.,  is  some¬ 
times  used.  The  word  is  derived  either 
from  dnue,  above,  with  the  suppos. 
part,  form  and  indef.  prefix:  in’ unit,  he 
who  is  above  or  more  than  (all)  (see 
more),  or  from  andean,  suppos.  Anhit,  he 
who  does  to  or  deals  with.  It  is  to  be 
observed  that  the  derivative  has  the  in¬ 
definite  and  impersonal  prefix  »i’, 
‘something  above  all’  or  something 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


269 


god — Continued. 

which  deals  with  us  (see  conduct  one’s 
self),  mattanit  ( mat-anit ),  he  who  is  not 
God,  the  not-God,  the  devil,  or  bad 
spirit;  see  devil. 

manittooot j,  manitoog  ( mamittowock , 
It.  W. ),  the  gods  of  the  Indian  mythol¬ 
ogy.  “They  have  given  me  the  names 
of  thirty-seven,  which  I  have,  all  which 
in  their  solemn  worships  they  invo- 
cate”,  R.  W.  110.  Kautdntomrit,  ‘the 
great  SouthWest  God’,  ‘to  whose  house  ! 
all  souls  go,  and  from  whom  came 
their  corn,  beans,  as  they  say’,  ibid., 
=  Cavitdntowunt,  ‘their  great  God’, 
It.  W.,  Introd.;  cf.  Jehovah  Keihtannit 
[the  great  god,  kehte-dnit ],  ‘the  Lord 
God’,  Gen.  24,  7.  “The  Massachusetts 
call  their  great  god  Kichtan  [Kiehtan?], 

.  .  .  the  Penobscots,  the  god  Tantum,” 
C'apt.  John  Smith,  1631.  “They  wor¬ 
ship  Kitan,  their  good  god,  or  ITobba- 
moco,  their  evil  god”,  Lechford,  Plaine 
Dealing.  Tantum  was  a  contracted 
form  of  keihtanit-com,  my  great  god  or 
our  great  god.  “  Kiehtan  .  .  .  the 
principal  and  maker  of  all  the  rest  [of 
the  gods]  and  to  be  made  by  none  .  .  . 
who  dwelleth  above  in  the  heavens 
.  .  .  far  westward,  whither  all  good 
men  go  when  they  die”,  Winslow’s 
Relation,  1624;  and  in  the  margin: 
“The  meaning  of  the  word  kiehtan,  I 
think,  hath  reference  to  antiquity,  for 
ehise  [kwtchise  ?]  is  an  old  man  and 
kiehchise  a  man  that  exceedeth  in  age”. 
(Del.  Getaunitourit,  God,  Hkw. )  Squan- 
tam  {—Kiehtan  and  Kautaniowitl): 
“They  acknowledge  a  god  whom  they 
call  Squantam,  but  worship  him  they 
do  not”  (Josselyn,  3  M.  C.  H.,  in,  300). 
Contracted  from  musquantam,  he  is 
angry;  musquantam  Manit,  God  is  an¬ 
gry,  R.  W.  “If  it  be  but  an  ordinary 
accident,  a  fall,  etc.,  they  will  say,  God 
was  angry  and  did  it”,  ibid.  Ilobba- 
mock  (Capt.  John  Smith),  Hobbamoco 
(Lechford),  Abbamoeho  or  Cheepie  (Jos¬ 
selyn),  ‘their  evil  god’,  ‘that  we 
suppose  their  devil’;  see  devil.  Kee- 
suckqudnd  [kesuk-anit] ,  ‘the  Sun  God’, 
R.  W.,  “a  name  of  the  sun,  by  whioh 
they  acknowledge  the  sun,  and  adore 
for  a  god  or  divine  power”.  Cheke- 


god — continued. 

suivdnd,  ‘the  Western  God’,  R.  W. 
( chekesu ,  the  northwest  wind,  ibid., 
from  ehekes,  violent,  fierce,  with  the 
animate  active  termination).  Wom- 
pandnd,  ‘the  Eastern  God’,  R.  W. 
[ wompan-anit ,  the  god  of  the  dawn 
or  of  daylight,  Eos].  Wunnanamianit, 
‘the  Northern  God’,  R.  W.  [wun- 
nanumdu-anit,  the  god  of  blessing,  or 
who  blesses,  confers  benefits  (?);  nanu- 
miyeu,  the  north],  Somvandnd,  ‘the 
Southern  God’,  R.  W.  [  =  sowan&yeu, 
soaniyeu  [sowainiu,  R.  W. ),  southward, 
to  the  south,  in  Eliot,  but  to  the 
southwest  according  to  Roger  Williams. 
“They  have  a  tradition  that  to  the 
southwest,  which  they  call  sowwainiil, 
the  gods  chiefly  dwell;  and  hither  the 
souls  of  all  their  great  and  good  men 
and  women  go”,  R.  W.].  Was  Soiv- 
wandnd  [. sowaniu-dnit ]  another  name 
of  Kiehtan  or  Kautdntowit  ?  Wetuo- 
manit,  ‘the  house  God’,  R.  W.  [ wetu- 
com,  my  house,  -anit],  Squduanit,  ‘the 
Womans  God’,  R.  W.  \_squa,  woman, 
-anit].  Muckquachuckquand,  ‘the  Chil¬ 
drens  God’,  R.  W.  [jnuckqua chucks, 
boy,  ibid.].  Xanepadshat,  ‘the  moons 
God’,  R.  W.  Paumpdgussit,  ‘the  Sea- 
God’,  R.  W;  “that  deity  or  Godhead 
which  they  conceive  to  be  in  the  sea’, 
ibid.;  see  sea.  Yotdanit,  ‘the  fire  God’, 
R.  W.  {gate,  fire,  ibid.];  see  fire. 

gold.  “These  Indians  call  gold  vassa- 
dor,  which  argueth  there  is  thereof  in 
the  country”  (Archer’s  Account  of 
Gosnold’s  Voyage,  1602,  3  M.  II.  C., 
vin,  77).  The  Indians  were  those  of 
the  mainland  near  Elizabeths  island 
(i.  e.  Cutty  hunk). 

good,  wunne,  whine  ( wirre ,  villi),  (it  is) 
good,  (it  is)  well  (in  the  abstract,  the 
possible,  or  subjectively);  wunnegen,  (it 
is)  good,  a  good  thing,  good,  pleasant, 
fair  (in  the  concrete,  the  actual,  or  ob¬ 
jectively) ;  ill.  wunnegenash,  good  things; 
suppos.  part.  inan.  uunnegik,  (when  it 
is)  good;  a  good  thing,  that  which  is 
good:  wahteouun  wanegik  kali  mach.uk, 
to  know  (that  which  is)  good  and  evil, 
Gen.  3,  5  ( icunnegin ,  welcome!  R.  W. ; 
Del.  wulik,  the  good,  Hkw.).  wunne 
is  largely  used  in  the  composition  of 


270 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BI  LLETIN'  25- 


gOOd — -continued. 

words  to  express  goodness,  happiness, 
good  fortune,  beauty,  etc. :  wunnetu, 
(he  is)  good,  a  goodly  man,  a  handsome, 
rich,  or  prosperous  man  (wunneto&e, 
good,  C. ;  wunnetu,  proper  and  personal, 
R.  IV.). 

goods  (effects,  property,  res),  maumachi- 
ash :  teaguash  asuh  maumachiash,  ‘  money 
or  stuff’,  Ex.  22,  7  ( maumacn'mash  [ty¬ 
pographical  error  for  maumach iuasK] , 
goods,  R.  W. ) 

goose,  hdnck,  pi.  hdnckock,  R.  IV. ;  Narr. 
co’urikh,  Stiles;  Peq.  kohunk,  Stiles; 
wompdhtuck,  a  goose,  C.  See  brant 
goose. 

gourd,  quoncoasq  ( qu&ncowask ,  a  bottle 
(made  from  a  gourd  ?),  C. ).  From  qunni, 
long,  and  ask,  green  vegetable  or  fruit, 
govern,  nanaanum,  nanawnnnum,  he 
governs,  rules,  protects  (it);  v.  i.  and 
v.  t.  an.  nanaivunnau,  nanaunnan  ( nana - 
uonau,  C.),  he  ruleth,  governeth  ( ndnd - 
wanumeeh,  keep  thou  me,  C. ;  nunnau- 
nauwinyeuwctm,  I  govern,  ibid.);  n. 
agent,  nananmcaen,  nanummnuwaen, 
nananuaen,  a  ruler,  a  governor  (pi.  nan- 
anuacheg,  magistrates,  rulers,  C. ) ;  nana- 
Anoncheg,  nanawunoncheg,  they  who 
rule.  See  ruler, 
grain.  See  corn. 

grandfather,  imttmtchikkinneasin,  C. 
(father’s  father  ?). 

grandmother,  okumm.es;  kokummus,  thy 
grandmother,  mother’s  mother,  2  Tim. 
1, 5;  but kokummes,  ‘thy  aunt’,  Lev.  18, 
14  ( wuttcokummmin ,  C. ). 
grape,  icenom-in,  pi.  wenominneash  ( we - 
nAmeneash,  R.  IV.).  See  vine, 
grass,  moskeht,  maskeht,  for  maskehtu, 
m’ ask-ehtu,  that  which  is  green,  or  sup- 
pos.  m’ask-it,  (when  it  is)  green;  pi. 
moskehtuash,  grass,  pasturage,  hay  ( mos - 
ketuash,  hay,  C. ;  maskituash,  grass  or 
hay,  R.  IV. ;  oskosk,  grass,  C. ) ;  v.  subst. 
moskehtuco,  it  is  grass;  dim.  moskehtuemes, 
El.  Gr.  12;  mishaskeht.,  much  grass. 
From  aske,  unripe,  immature,  raw  (ask- 
un,  ‘it  is  raw’,  R.  IV.),  from  which  by 
duplication  comes  ashkoshki  ( askdski , 
R.  IV. ;  askosque,  C. ),  green.  See  flags; 
green;  meadow;  medicine, 
grasshopper,  chansomps  ( chdnsops  qua i- 
shav,  a  grasshopper  jumps,  C. ).  qua- 


grasshopper — continued. 

quequeshont,  suppos.  part.  an.  from  qua- 
quequeshau,  a  double  freq.  from  que- 
shau,  he  leaps  or  jumps.  Eliot  uses 
•  these  words  interchangeably  for  ‘grass¬ 
hopper’  and  ‘locust’.  The  Mass.  Ps. 
(Ps.  78,  46)  has  chonsomps  for  ‘locust’, 
and  perhaps  this  name  properly  belongs 
to  the  common  cicada,  popularly  called 
‘locust’. 

grave  (adj.),  manunnu,  (he  is)  grave. 
See  slow. 

grave  (n. ) ,  weenohke:  woskeche  weenohket, 
on  or  above  his  grave;  posekinausu  wee- 
nohkeit,  laid  in  his  grave,  John  11, 
17;  tuppdskinongash,  graveclothes.  See 
bury. 

gravel,  mamossompsquehtu  (?),  Is.  48, 19. 
gray,  wompishocki,  C. ;  wompoquonat, 
wompuhquonat,  infin.  to  have  gray  hair 
or  be  gray-headed;  wompuhquou,  he  is 
gray,  has  a  gray  head;  nco-wompuhquom, 
I  am  gray-haired;  suppos.  wompoquoi, 
when  I  am  gray;  suppos.  part,  noh 
wompuhquont,  he  w  ho  is  gray  ( noh  wornp- 
puhqua,  he  is  gray,  C. )  [icomp/,  white, 
and  k’  progressive,  becoming  white], 
great,  mislie,  mim  ( mussi ,  rnishee,  C. ; 
mishi,  R.  IV.),  great,  large,  big,  abso¬ 
lutely  and  not  merely  by  comparison; 
pi.  adj.  missiyeuash,  (they  are)  great, 
inan.  obj.  mi  she  is  the  usual  form  in 
Eliot  of  the  adj.  anil  adv.,  missi  for  the- 
verb:  mishe  v:etu,  a  great  house;  wetu 
7nissi,  the  house  is  great,  as  in  2  Ghr.  2,  5; 
Esth.  1,  20;  Eccl.  9,  18.  Comparative 
anve  mishe,  dnve  missi,  or  mohsag  (see 
below),  greater  [m’sh,  the  indefinite 
particle  with  the  radical  ’sh,  expressing 
excess,  intensity,  and  perhaps  primarily 
greatness.  Heckewelder  gives  (Del.) 
chingue,  large;  chingue  or  ni’ chingue 
puschis,  a  large  cat;  in’ chonschican,  a 
large  knife;  “still,  it  is  easy  to  see  that 
m’chon  in  the  latter  word  is  derived 
from  chingue  (?),  large  or  great”  (Cor- 
resp.  448).  Elsewhere  he  gives  meechek 
achsinink,  at  the  big  rock  (Words  and 
Phrases  459).  The  m’  certainly  does 
not  belong  to  the  root,  which  is  identi¬ 
cal  with  or  nearly  related  to  the  -ash  of 
the  inan.  pi.],  missag,  mohsag  [ m’sag , 
m’shiki],  suppos.  concrete,  a  great  thing, 
i.  e.  a  thing  when  it  is  great,  great  rela- 


Trumbull] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


271 


great — continued . 

tively,  great  of  its  class  or  kind,  of  things 
inanimate:  mohsag  ivetu,  ‘  the  greater 
house’,  2Chr.  3,  5;  mohsag matcheseonk, 
‘so  great  a  sin’,  Ex.  32,  21;  ut  mishik- 
komukqut,  in  a  great  house,  2  Tim. 
2,  20;  cf.  Del.  m’chingue,  above. 

mogki,  mogke,  mukki,  (it  is)  very  great, 
huge,  ingens,  i  mm  an  is*  (usually  of 
things  inanimate);  pi.  mogkiyeuash, 
Gen.  41,  5  ( mamoekiuwccsh  wequananti- 
ganash,  ‘great  lights’,  i.  e.  the  sun 
and  moon,  R.  W. );  as  n.  mogagish, 
magagish ,  great  things;  cf.  mogkin- 
num,  mukkinum ,  he  gathers  together; 
ogketam  ( aketam ,  R.  W. ),  he  numbers, 
counts,  adds  up;  see  mogke  keitotnn- 
ash,  great  cities,  Deut.  6,  10.  The 
root  is  k’  progressive  or  cumulative. 
missngke,  rnasugke,  great,  powerful, 
mighty  (of  animate  beings,  with  rela¬ 
tion  to  position,  importance,  power, 
etc. ,  but  not  to  magnitude) ;  noh  masug- 
kenuk,  he  (who  is)  great;  ivame  ma- 
sugkenuk,  the  Almighty  ( Peq.  mciussha- 
keet  rriUndtu,  the  greatest  god,  Stiles) ; 
pres.  part,  noh  masugkenutche,  the  chief, 
and  so  the  eldest  (servant,  Gen.  24,  2); 
vbl.  n.  act.  mismgkencoonk,  greatness,  as 
of  a  king,  a  warrior;  see  plenteous. 
kehche  (old,  superior  in  age,  therefore 
chief),  in  compound  words  keht-,  chief 
or  greatest,  as  in  kehtequasseet  [ kehte - 
•wusseef],  the  great  toe;  kehtmquanitch, 
the  thumb;  keihtotan  [  keh  t-ota  w],  a  great 
city;  keihtannit  \keht-dnit],  the  great 
god  (the  Lord  God,  Gen.  24,  7);  hence 
kehtoh,  the  sea.  See  old;  sea. 

[*Note. — “This  requires  correction;  mogke 
signifies  great  by  aggregation,  as  its  related 
words  show:  mishe  wetu ,  a  great  house;  mogke 
keitotan,  a  great  city.”] 

great  (to  make),  misheheau,  he  makes 
(him)  great;  suffix  an.  num-mdsheh,  I 
exalt  him;  kum-mish-esh,  ‘I  magnify 
thee’,  Josh.  1,  7;  inan.  mishehtean,  he 
makes  (it)  great  (mishcowanat,  to  brag 
or  swagger,  C. ). 

green,  ashkashki,  ashkosqui,  oshkoshque 
( askaski ,  R.  W. ;  askosque,  C.),  green 
(it  is  green):  onatuh  'oshkoskq-ut,  ‘as 
the  green  herb’,  Ps.  37,  2;  ashkoshquh- 
konlu,  in  the  green,  ‘in  green  pastures’, 
Ps.  23,  2;  pi.  adj.  and  inan.  pi.  of  verb 


green — continued. 

subst.  ashkoshkiyeuash,  ( they  are)  green, 
Esth.  1, 6.  ;dimin.  cishkosquese,  greenish. 
ashkuhquame,,  green  (of  a  tree,  as  op¬ 
posed  to  dry  or  dead),  flourishing:  ut 
askuhquam-ut .  .  .  ut-nunohtu-ut,  ‘in  the 
green  tree  ...  in  the  dry’,  Luke  23,  31. 
nishnoh  askuhnk,  ‘every  green  tree’; 
askunkq,  a  green  tree,  Ezek.  17,  24 
( askkosquesinneut , tobegreen,  C. ).  From 
aske  ( askun ,  R.  W. ;  askin,  C. ),  raw, 
immature,  unripe;  by  duplication  cisk- 
ask-i,  which  is  nearly  related  to  cisq, 
ashq,  asquam ,  not  yet,  and  wuske,  new, 
young,  first  in  time.  See  grass. 

grieve,  neuantam,  he  grieves,  is  sorrow¬ 
ful  ( nun-nooliuam ,  1  grieve,  C.;  n’no1 
antam,  I  am  grieved,  R.  W. );  alique- 
neuantamook,  do  not  (you)  grieve;  vbl.  n. 
act.  neuantamoonk,  a  grieving,  sorrow, 
grief  ( Hcowantamwe ,  sad,  sorrowful,  C. ). 
unkquanumau,  onkqucmumau,  he  is 
grievously  afflicted  or  is  in  great  pain 
orsorrow;  vbl.  n.  act.  unkquanum.aoonk, 
onkq-,  excessive  grief  or  affliction  [uh- 
qu&e,  unkque,  at  extremity,  from  uhq’ ,  a 
sharp  point.  See  end.]. 

grind,  togkuhu'hosu,  togguhwhosu,  he 
grinds  in  a  mill  ( togguhhum ,  he  grinds, 
C. ;  tackhummin,  to  grind  corn:  tacl- 
humiinnea,  beat,  me  parched  meal,  R. 
W.)  [togk' ,  radical,  he  strikes  or  beats, 
and  ussu,  verb  of  an.  action],  sohqnt- 
tahham,  sukquehttahham,  sogquttahham , 
he  breaks  it  into  small  pieces,  be  a  s 
(it)  to  powder,  grinds  (it)  small  or 
fine;  causat.  inan.  from  sohqunnum,  he 
breaks  in  pieces,  and  that  from  sohqui, 
(it is) fine,  in  powder.  See  beat;  mortar; 
strike. 

groan,  mishanarnciu,  mlshonumm,  he 
groans;  num-mishannomunun,  we  groan. 
amcohkontoicau,  owohkontcDuu,  nuwakon- 
tcoau,  he  groans  ( nuttouahkontdcim ,  I 
groan,  C. ) ;  vbl.  n.  act.  auuiakontoowaonk, 
diuhkontowcionk,  ahhaohhdmcoonk,  au- 
wohhamcoonk,  a  groaning. 

ground,  ohke;  nunnobohke.  See  dry; 
earth. 

grow,  tannetu,  it  grows,  is  produced, 
as  a  plant  from  the  seed:  asinekosog 
pish  tannetoog,  thorns  shall  grow  or  be 
brought  forth,  Gen.  3,  18.  Elsewhere- 
na  pish  tannegen  .  .  .  mehtugquash,  ‘there 


272 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


grow — continued. 

shall  grow  .  .  .  trees’,  Ezek.  47,  12. 
nekin,  nekun ,  it  grows,  is  grown,  as  a 
plant  increases  by  growth :  nooche  nekin, 
it  began  to  grow;  pajeh  .  .  .  nekik,  until 
.  .  .  (when  it  was)  grown;  nish  nehe- 
wonche  nekukish,  things  which  grow  of 
themselves  spontaneously,  2  K.  19,  29. 
nekin  means  also  he  is  born;  suppos. 
nekit,  (when  he  is)  born;  infln.  as  subst. 
ivutch  nekinneat,  from  the  birth;  see 
birth;  born.  adtanekin=nekm;  adtane- 
gek,  Matt.  6,  28,  =negik,  Luke  12,  27. 
neetu,  he  or  it  grows,  as  a  plant  or  an 
animal:  mishasq  neetu,  the  rush  grows 
.Tob8, 11;  nag  neetuog,  they  grow  {neetu, 
he  is  born,  Prov.  17,  17;  Job  5,  7);  vbl. 
n.  act.  neetuonk,  birth,  =neekuonk.  ke-  1 
nuppUu,  he  grows,  increases  in  stature 
(grows  rapidly):  mukkies  kenuppetu,  i 
the  child  grew,  kesittu,  he  is  grown,  has 
attained  full  growth.  kesukkin[neau\, 
he  is  growing  up,  is  attaining  full 
growTth;  suppos.  pajeh  .  .  .  kesukit,  till 
he  ...  is  grown  up.  Cf.  keesaqushin, 
high  water,  R.W. ;  see  produce;  ripe; 
sun.  sonkin,  sonkuu,  it  springs  forth, 
shoots  up,  as  a  plant.  See  spring  up. 

guard.  See  watch. 

guide,  monchanau  (he  carries  away,  an. 
obj.),  he  guides  (him);  suffix  an.  urn- 
monchanuh,  he  guided  them  ( kummd -  j 


guide — continued. 

uchan-ish,  I  will  conduct  you;  maHichase, 
be  thou  my  guide;  mouchaiea,  a  guide, 
R.  W.).  sampvmshanau,  sampshanau, 
he  guides  (them),  conducts  (them) 
aright;  suffix  an.  wussanipshanuh,  he 
guides  them;  n.  agent,  sampicoshassean, 
a  guide;  part.  pres,  neg  sampshanoncheg, 
they  who  guide,  guides,  leaders  [samp- 
we,  right], 

guilty,  kesantam,  he  is  guilty;  nuk-kesan- 
tamunonun,  we  are  guilty,  kesohkoon- 
tam,  he  is  guilty;  suppos.  kesohkoontog, 
when  he  is  guilty  (kesuhkotamooonk, 
guilt,  Danf. ;  keesantamde,  guilty,  C. ; 
kesohkdadtdmwe,  guiltily,  ibid.), 
gull  (a  bird),  Peq.  uhpuckachip,  Stiles, 
gun,  peskunck,  R.  W.  “Conceiving  a 
similitude  between  our  guns  and  thun¬ 
der,  they  call  a  gun  peskunck,  and  to 
discharge  peskhommin — that  is,  to  thun¬ 
der”,  R.  W.  neimpduog  peskdmwoek, 
thunderbolts  are  shot,  ibid.  Abn.  ne- 
peskam,  je  tire  du  fusil  sur  quelqu’un; 
aSenni  peskakf  qui  tire?,  Rasies.  The 
root  is  the  same  as  in  pashksheau,  it 
bursts  asunder  with  violence,  through 
pohsheau,  it  divides  in  two,  and  pdhshe, 
half.  Cf.  Cree  pooskoo-piithu,  it  bursts 
(from  within) ,  as  a  gun,  Howse  146; 
pdskesiggun,  a  gun,  Howse  266-267. 
gunpowder,  satipuck,  R.  W. ;  sabuck,  C. 


HE 


had  ( auxil. ) ,  mahche,  ma  rnahche,  are  some¬ 
times  employed  to  form  a  pluperfect 
tense.  See  have. 

haddock,  pdkonnutam,  C.  See  codfish, 
hail,  mussLgon,  Ps.  78,  48;  148,  8;  mis- 
segun,  Rev.  16,  21  [rrmsi-kam,  great 
snow  ?]. 

hair,  meesunk,  meissunk,  meyausunk  ( me - 
sunk,  O'.;  wtslieck ,  R.  W.),  human  hair 
of  the  head,  qiumuhquoau,  he  has  long 
hair,  is  long  haired;  pres.  part,  quanuh- 
quoant,  quanonuhqudant,  having  long 
hair;  vbl.  quananukqudonk  {muppacuck, 
R.  W. ),  a  (long)  lock  of  hair,  wesha- 
gan,  wishagkin  { wesheck ,  hair,  R.  W. ), 
hair  on  the  body  or  limbs  of  man  or 
animals,  wool  ( noohke  shakdnash,  soft 


hair — continued. 

wool,  C.);  verb  subst.  coiceshaganit,  he 
is  hairy;  pi.  vjeshakinnucoash ,  (his 
hands)  are  hairy.  .C’f-  Sax.  sceacga; 
Engl,  shag,  hair;  Ethiop.  sha-ky,  hair¬ 
cloth.  Mr.  Pickering,  in  his  Index  to 
Eliot’s  Grammar,  gives  “weshagan,  hair 
of  animals”.  The  meaning  can  not  be 
thus  restricted.  See  beard,  wishshu- 
missuonk  (?) ,  hair  growing  on  the  body, 
Lev.  19,  20,  21,  25,  etc. 
half,  pohshe,  pdhshe,  pohque  ( poquem , 
half  [of  an.  obj.],  R.  W.;  paushe,  some, 
opposed  to  wame,  all,  R.  W.).  poh- 
shinuin  ( paushinum ,  R.  W.),  he  divides 
in  two,  he  halves  (it);  pohsheau,  it 
divides  asunder,  cleaves  in  two.  Cf. 


•TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


273 


half — continued. 

Sansk.  paksha,  a  side,  a  half;  Zig.  pax, 
yek-pash,  one-half;  Engl,  piece, 
hand,  m’nutcheg ,  menutcheg  ( menitcheg , 
C.);  wunnutcheg,  minnutch  (wunnicheke, 
R.  W.),  his  hand;  nun-nitchek,  my 
hand,  Exp.  Mayhew;  pi.  wunmdehe- 
ganash  (wunniskegannash  (?),  R.  W.), 
his  hands;  ut  wunnutchegan-it,  in  his 
hand.  From  unit,  primary  form  of 
anunit;  pi.  neg  anitcheg,  they  that 
take  hold  of;  suppos.  part,  of  anunau 
or  anau,  he  takes  hold  of  (him),  noh- 
kou,  the  right  hand;  wuttinnohkou  ( un - 
ninulikoe  menitcheg,  C.),  his  right  hand; 
nuttinnohkou,  my  right  hand;  see 
right  hand.  Perhaps  for  noli  kounuk, 
he  who  carries,  menadchu,  the  left  hand 
(menatche  menitcheg,  C. );  ummenadchu, 
his  left  hand;  ut  ummenadcheancoout,  in 
their  left  hands  ( yo  nrnunnatch,  to  the 
left  hand  (side  of  a  path,  etc.  ),R.  W. ) ; 
menadchue,  -chee  ( nummatchu ,  C.),  left- 
handed.  puttukqunitch  [ petukqui-nutch , 
round  hand],  the  fist;  anomanutch 
[ anome-nutch ,  within  the  hand],  the 
hollow  of  the  hand;  nogquamdch,  the 
palm  of  the  hand. 

handful,  ydnitchan  [ ydnunum-nutch ,  he 
shuts  the  hand;  suppos.  ydnitnutch, 
when  he  shuts  the  hand], 
handle,  mohmussunnum ,  he  handles  (it); 

freq.  from  mussunnum,  he  touches  (it), 
handsome,  wunne,  vrinne  ( wussinnu ,  he' 
makes  handsome,  adorns,  0. ;  ncosin,  I 
adorn,  ibid.).  See  good, 
hang,  kechequabinau,  he  hangs  (him); 
pish  knkkechequabinuk,  he  will  hang 
thee  (kuk-keechequauberiitch,  you  shall 
be  hanged  (I  will  hang  thee),  R.  W.; 
nukkechlquabes  peminneai,  1  am  choked 
with  a  halter,  C. ) ;  suppos.  part,  con¬ 
crete,  adt  kechequabenittimuk,  that  upon 
which  or  by  which  (he)  is  hanged,  a 
gallows,  ivaashanau,  he  hangs  (him); 
ne  waashuncok,  hang  ye  (him)  thereon; 
suffix  an.  cowadshanouh,  they  hanged 
him.  waashan,  he  hangs  or  is  hanging; 
woh  coiva&shun,  he  may  hang  or  be 
hanged;  suppos.  part.  inan.  waashunk, 
wodsliunk,  if  it  hang  (upon  him);  nag 
woushaog  mehtugqut,  they  hang  on  the 
trees,  Josh.  10,  26.  ogkoochin,hogkcochxn, 
it  hangs  or  is  suspended,  he  is  sus- 
B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 18 


hang — continued. 

pended  from  [ agwe-wutcheu ].  vdosliad- 
tau,  he  hangs  (it)  on  (him);  ne  wunooli- 
shadtauunat  wisq,  to  hang  a  vessel  there¬ 
on,  Ezek.  15,  3. 

happen,  aspunau,  ashpunau,  xpunau, 
slipunau,  asp-,  ushp-,  he  encounters  by 
chance,  he  is  happened  to.  The  forms 
of  this  verb  are  irregular;  it  is  gener¬ 
ally  used  intransitively  after  an  animate 
subject,  which  in  an  English  transla¬ 
tion  becomes  the  object:  ne  ashpuna- 
hettit  wosketompaog,  ne  imt-ushpono - 
neau  puppinashimwog ;  pasuk  ushpunaog 
warne,  ‘that  which  befalleth  men,  be- 
falleth  beasts,  one  thing  befalleth  them 
[all]’;  tatuppe  uspunaog  mime  (all  are 
happened  to  alike),  ‘  one  event  happen- 
eth  to  them  all’,  Eccl.  2,  14;  nagwame 
.  .  .  ushpunaog,  ‘chance  happeneth  to 
them  all’,  Eccl.  9,  11;  tohwutch  wame 
yen  spunnaog,  why  is  all  this  befallen 
us?  Judg.  6,  13;  shpumiadti  toll  kod 
shpunnai,  ‘let  come  on  me  what  will’, 
Job  13,  13.  miskauau,  mussuhkauau,  he 
encounters  by  mischance,  he  is  hap¬ 
pened  to  (restricted  to  the  encounter  of 
evil  or  mischance) :  machukish  .  .  .  pisli 
ummiskcuuuli,  evils  shall  befall  them, 
Deut.  31,  17. 

happy,  vunniyeu,  ivunnaiyeu  [ wunni-eu\ , 
he  is  happy;  anue  wunniyeu,  hap¬ 
pier  (sun  .  .  .  wunniyeuog?  are  they 
well?  C. );  kami,  thou  art  happy;  onk 
v:oh  naoni  umtch  ken,  that  it  may  be  well 
with  me  for  thy  sake,  Gen.  12,  13; 
kamaiimuw,  ye  are  happy;  suppos.  part, 
pi.  neg  wunniitcheg,  they  who  are  happy. 
Bee  good. 

harbor.  See  haven. 

hard,  siogke  (siokke,  C. ;  siuckat,  R.  W. ), 
hard,  difficult;  siogkok,  if  it  be  hard  or 
difficult;  pi.  sidgokish,  hard  matters  or 
things;  vbl.  n.  siogkeyeuonk,  a  hard  mat¬ 
ter,  ‘ hard  saying’,  John  6,  60.  menuh- 
ki,  strong,  unyielding,  hard.  See  sour; 
strong. 

hare  (?),  mohtukquasog  (Ps.  104,  18), 
ogkoshquog  (Prov.  30,  26),  ‘conies’,  but 
in  Lev.  11,  5,  6  ‘cony’  and  ‘hare’  are 
transferred  from  the  English,  oc.kqut- 
chaun  [ogkushki-  tchan  (?),  wet  nose], 
described  by  Roger  Williams  as  ‘  a 
wild  beast  of  a  reddish  hair,  about  the 


274 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


haro  (?) — continued. 

bigness  of  a  pig  and  rooting  like  a 
pig’,  was  probably  the  woodchuck 
(Arctomys  monax). 

harlot,  nanwunnoodsquawaen-in ,  a  harlot 
or  prostitute;  nan  wunncodsquaausue  n  -  in , 
one  who  is  a  prostitute  in  act,  who 
acts  the  harlot  [n.  agent,  from  verb 
nanwunncodsquau-ussu ] .  manissquadsu, 
mansquadsu,  she  commits  fornication, 
acts  the  harlot.  See  fornication;  adul¬ 
tery. 

harm.  See  hurt. 

harvest,  kepenum,  he  harvests  or  gath¬ 
ers  the  harvest  ( kepenurnrnin,  to  gather 
corn,  R.  W. );  kepenush,  ‘reap  thou’, 
Rev.  14,  15;  vbl.  n.  act.  kepenu- 
mcoonk,  the  harvesting,  harvest;  sup- 
pos.  impers.  and  part.  pass,  kepenumuk 
(when  it  is  harvested),  the  time  of 
harvest  ( nunnowa ,  harvest  time;  unofi- 
ant,  at  harvest,  R.  W. ;  from  nun&eu, 
it  is  dry(?);  ’ninnauwaet,  fall,  autumn, 
C. ).  See  seasons. 

hasten,  kenupshau,  he  makes  haste;  ke- 
nupshnush,  hasten  thou,  make  haste; 
suppos.  part.  an.  kenupshont,  when 
hastening;  freq.  kakenupshont,  making 
great  haste,  going  very  swiftly;  nag 
kakenupshonitcheg,  the  swift  (poten¬ 
tially)  [ kenuppeu ,  it  is  swift  or  quick, 
with  the  particle  of  violent  action  ’s/i], 
wapantam,  he  is  in  haste;  ncowdpdn- 
tam,  I  am  in  haste,  C. 

hat.  See  cap. 

hatch,  pwohkuhhowau,  (the  bird ) hatches. 
See  Is.  34,  15;  Jer.  17,  11. 

hatchet.  See  ax. 

hate,  sekeneam,  sekenam,  lie  hates  (it); 
an.  sekeneauau,  he  hates  (him);  suffix 
wussekenaouh,  vmssekeneauouh,  they 
hate  him;  vbl.  n.  act.  sekeneaudonk,  a 
hating,  hatred;  sekeneausuonk,  active 
hating,  hating  in  exercise;  vbl.  n.  pass, 
and  recip.  sekeneaadtuonk,  a  being 
hated,  reciprocity  of  hatred,  en¬ 
mity;  vbl.  n.  inan.  act.  sekeneamooonk,  a 
hating  of  (inan.  obj).  Primarily  seke¬ 
neam  signifies  he  refuses,  rejects,  hence 
manifests  an  aversion  to,  hates.  Cf. 
suhkou,  he  spits  (nis-mke,  I  am  spiteful 
or  mischievous,  C.).  Del.  kschingdlel, 
I  hate  you,  Hkw.  jishantam,  he 
loathes,  despises,  hates  ( nut-jishantam , 


hate — continued. 

I  hate,  I  despise,  C. );  an.  jishanumau, 
he  hates  (him). 

haughtiness,  qunuhqunneunkqussuonk, 
by  reduplication  from  qunnunkqui, 
high,  and  ussu,  verb  of  action,  he  acts 
very  high;  vbl.  in  -onk,  very  high  acting. 
See  proud. 

have  (auxil. ),  mahche  (after,  thereafter). 
A  word  which  expresses  completed  ac¬ 
tion  or  the  end  of  action,  that  which 
has  been,  was  employed  as  an  auxiliary 
to  the  verb  in  forming  the  perfect  and 
pluperfect  tenses  ( maut ,  maht-,  mauch-, 
m(sh-,  R.  W. ;  num-mahche,  I  have;  kum- 
mache,  thou  hast,  etc.,  0.  Cree  ghee , 
‘have’;  Chip,  ke  or  ge):  ne  mahche, 
that  which  hath  been,  Eccl.  3, 15;  uin- 
mahche  vssen,  he  hath  done  it,  Is.  44,  23 
( tashin  mesh  commadgf  how  much  have 
you  given?  R.  W. ;  mat  mesh-nawmdnash, 
I  did  not  see  those  things;  num-mant- 
aukeeteadmen,  I  have  done  planting, 
R.  W. ).  Cf.  mahtsheau,  it  decays,  fails, 
comes  to  an  end;  majish,  maumachish, 
at  last  ( mauehauhom ,  a  dead  man, 
R.  W. ) ;  mdhchinau,  he  is  sick,  etc.  See 
had. 

have  (v.),  ohtau,  he  has,  i.  e.  possesses 
or  owns  ( nuttohtu ,  I  have,  I  possess  (it); 
nutahtou,  I  have;  kutahtoup,  thou  hadst; 
noh  ahtou,  he  has;  nag  ahtoog,  they 
had,  C. );  suppos.  noh  ohlunk,  he  who 
has,  the  owner;  neg  qhtunkeg,  the 
owners  or  possessors;  vbl.  n.  ohtedonk, 
alitdonk,  a  having,  a  possession;  vbl.  n. 
pass,  or  suppos.  part.  inan.  ohteuk,  pos¬ 
sessed,  had,  owned;  hence  a  field,  land 
cultivated,  inclosed,  or  to  which  the 
idea  of  ownership  attaches  ( ahtiiuk ,  soil, 
a  field,  C. ).  See  belong  to. 

haven,  harbor,  kobpog,  kobpaonk ,  knp- 
pohkomuk,  kuhpdhkomuk,  koppdmuk, 
kobpaonk,  etc.,  all  derived  from  kup- 
pohham,  kobham,  he  shuts  close,  closes 
up,  which  is  from  kuppi,  kuppiyeu,  it  is 
close,  thick,  dense;  suppos.  kobpog, 
when  it  incloses  or  closes  up;  act.  vbl. 
kobpaonk,  a  closing  or  making  close; 
kuppohkomuk  [ kuppi-komuk~\ ,  a  closed 
place,  a  covert,  etc. 

hawk,  quanunon,  Lev.  11,  16;  ov'dh- 
shaog,  Dent.  14,  15;  mashquanon,  Job 
39,  26  (wushdwunan,  R.  W.).  Cf.  qun- 


IKUMBULLj 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


275 


hawk — continued. 

nonco,  ‘lion’ ;  quoliqunnonou,  ‘grey¬ 
hound’. 

he,  she,  ewd,  R.W.  (Muh.  uwoh,  Edw. ); 
noh,  he,  she;  ndgum,  him,  her,  El.  and 
C.  (Del.  nek'it,  nekarna,  Ilkvv. ).  Strictly 
regarded,  noh  is  a  demonstrative  and 
relative  pronoun,  corresponding  to  the 
inan.  demonstrative  ne;  ewb  [iio]  is  the 
proper  personal,  represented  by  w’,  u’ , 
or  m’  as  a  prefix,  and  ’oh  or  ’uh  as  a 
suffix,  in  the  3d  pers.  sing,  of  verbs, 
etc.:  nen  nnoh  [ nenne-noh ],  I  am  he, 
Is.  41,  4;  noh  anakausit,  he  who  labor- 
eth  [anakausu  (without  prefixed  pro¬ 
noun),  he  laboreth];  uttiyeuwohf  where 
is  he?  John  ' 7,  11;  noli  neen,  I  am  he, 
i.  e.  I  am  that  man  of  whom  you  speak, 
John  9,  9;  howan  noh?  who  is  he?  i.  e. 
that  he,  v.  36  (id noh,  in  him;  ut  ndgum, 
to  him;  nashpe  ndgum,  with  him, 
C. ;  matta  ne,  mcitta  no,  not  that  (house), 
not  that  (man),  ibid.;  yo  Appitch  ewb, 
let  him  sit  there;  awaim  ewb?  who  is 
that?  R.  W. ;  Del.  nil  nipawwit,  he  that 
stands  there,  Hkw.,  =noh  nepau,  EL). 
wuhhog,  his  body,  himself  [• iv’hogk ,  his 
body]  ( wuhbek ,  the  body,  R.  W. ): 
nashpe  wuhhogk-uh,  by  himself,  Heb. 
6,  13.  nuttaiheh,  he  belongs  to  me,  he 
is  mine:  nen  wuttaiheuh,  I  belong  to 
him,  I  am  his,  Cant.  2,  16;  pi.  nish 
wuttaihe-asli,  the  things  which  are  his; 
imttciihe,  his.  See  this. 

head,  muppuhkuk,  muhpiihkuk,  a  head; 
uppuhkuk,  his  head;  kuppuhkuk,.  thy 
head  [ m’pAhkuk ,  the  hollow;  from 
puhki,  puhpuhki,  it  is  hollow],  -ontup, 
head  (summit,  top),  in  compound 
words,  as  chepioniup  \chippe-ontup,  sep¬ 
arated  head],  a  skull  ( tsipanantep ,  t£te 
de  mort,  Rasies) ;  elsewhere,  wuskondn- 
tup  (bone  head),  a  skull  ( muskonontip , 
C. );  wompontup  (white  head),  a  white 
or  hoary  head;  kodtanlup,  the  top  or 
crown  of  the  head  (the  scalp?)  ( uppa - 
qudntup,  the  head;  nuppaqudntup,  my 
head,  R.  W. ;  Abn.  metep,  tete;  netep, 
ma  tete;  3d  pers.  Step). 

headdress  (?),  ehetuhquab,  ‘a  crown’. 

heal,  neetskehhuau,  he  heals  or  cures 
(him).  See  cure. 

health,  vbl.  n.  pass,  neetskehettuonk, 
health  produced  or  restored,  a  being 


health — continued, 
cured;  act.  wunnanumAonk,  health,  well¬ 
being;  sun  wunnuhketeaonkannu?  is  it  a 
healthy  time,  is  it  healthy?  C.  See 

well. 

heap,  kohkuhquag,  kuhkuhquag  (when  it 
is  heaped  up,  made  high),  a  heap,  a 
summit,  the  top  [from  kuhkuhqueu,  he 
goes  up,  ascends],  numwonkquau  (it  is 
made  full),  nomunkqudg  (when  it  is 
made  full),  a  heap;  nanomwonkquaeu 
nano  nunquaash,  ‘heaps  upon  heaps’, 
Judg.  15,  16  [from  numwaeu,  it  is  full, 
and  unquaeu,  it  exceeds,  or  extremely] . 
sokenug,  a  heap  of  corn,  R.  AY.  “The 
women  of  the  family  .  .  .  dry  the 
corn  in  round  broad  heaps”,  ibid, 
[pass.  part,  suppos.  from  sokenurn,  he 
pours  (it)  out:  when  it  is  poured  out]. 

hear,  nootam  ( noh  ncotam,  0. ),  he 
hears  (it),  nunnootam,  I  hear  (nurmffi- 
tam,  C. );  naotash,  hear  thou;  an.  nootah 
( ken  nootah ,  C.),  hear  thou  me;  neotau, 
he  hears  (him) ;  suppos.  nooliit,  when  he 
hears;  noh  nootiit,  he  who  hears,  may 
hear;  vbl.  n.  nmtamcoonk  (ncotamuonk, 
C. ), a  hearing. 

hearken,  kukkeitau,  kuhkeihtau,  he 
hearkens  to  (him),  he  listens  with  at¬ 
tention  to  (him);  suffix  kukkehtah, 
hearken  thou  to  me;  noh  kukkeitok,  to 
him  ye  shall  hearken  (uetop  kikkita, 
friend,  hearken  to  me,  It.  AAL ;  kuh- 
kehtam,  he  hearkens  (to  it,  inan.),  C. ). 

heart,  metah  [m’tah],  a  heart;  nuttah, 
my  heart;  kuttah,  thy  heart;  wuttah, 
his  heart  ( wuttdh ,  It.  AV.;  Muh.  utoh, 
Edw.;  Del.  w’dee,  Hkw.;  Minsi  uclidee, 
Barton;  Alg.  othai,  McK. ).  Pro¬ 
nounced,  says  Duponeeau,  as  “the 
German  dee  or  tee  (English  day  or 
tag)” ,  Notes  to  El.  Gr.  xi,  xii. 

heat,  kussittau  (it  is  warm),  the  heat  of 
the  sun,  natural  heat,  kussopittag,  kos- 
soppag  (when  it  is  hot),  great  heat  (by 
the  action  of  fire);  vbl.  n.  kussoppissu- 
onk  [from  kussoppis.vt,  he  is  hot],  heat, 
an  inflammation  ( kissopetteahddnk ,  fer¬ 
vency  or  heat,  C. ).  kassampskussum,  he 
heats  (it),  makes  it  hot;  suppos.  part, 
inan.  kussampskussuk,  when  it  is  heated. 
See  hot. 

heath-cocks,  auiickuck-qudnog,  R.  AV.  ' 
Probably  the  Tetrao  cupido  or  pin- 


276 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BVU.F.TIN  25 


heath-cocks — continued. 

nated  grouse,  formerly  very  common 
in  New  England,  though  now  rare,  but 
possibly  Tetrao  umbellus,  the  ruffed 
grouse,  pheasant,  or  ‘partridge’  of 
Massachusetts  and  Connecticut.  So 
named  for  the  beauty  of  its  plumage: 
aunakeu,  he  is  painted,  decorated  with 
paint;  pi.  aunakeuck,  they  are  painted, 
R.  IV. 

heaven,  kesuk  (Jceesuck,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  keesk, 
Stiles;  Hkw.  gischuch,  Del. ),  the  visible 
heavens,  the  sky:  kesuk  kah  alike,  the 
heaven  and  the  earth,  Gen.  1,1.  See 
sun. 

heavy,  tohkequii,  tuhkequan,  (it  is)  heavy; 
tuhkequog,  that  which  is  heavy  ( tuhke¬ 
quan ,  heavy,  C. ;  kuikqussaqu n,.kukqu s- 
suckqun,  you  are  heavy;  qum'iequn, 
heavy,  R.  W. ). 

heed,  nunnukqussu,  he  takes  heed, 
acts  cautiously  (as  if  in  danger);  nun- 
nukqussish,  take  heed  to  thyself,  be¬ 
ware;  nunnukqussitch,  let  him  take  heed 
( nen  nunnukqus ,  I  beware,  C. ;  act.  inan. 
nunnukqussuontash  keitoh,  beware  of  the 
sea,  C. ) ;  act.  an.  nunnukqussuonau,  he 
takes  heed  of  (an.  obj.).  Cf.  ndnvk- 
que,  (it  is)  dangerous;  nunnukquodtut, 
in  peril,  in  danger.  See  dangerous. 

heel,  mogquan  ( mogqudn ,  C. ),  a  heel; 
wogquan,  wogquoan,  his  heel;  pi.  -| -ash. 
From  mogquen,  it  is  enlarged,  is  more 
great,  swells,  protuberates.  Hence,  too, 
mogquen,  a  boil  or  tumor  (Webster 
suggests  with  a  query  the  alliance  of 
English  heel  with  Greek  Kit  kg,  a 
tumor). 

height,  sohkunkquok,  sohkunkquodt,  adv., 
in  height  (with  measure  of  elevation  or 
altitude),  ne  sohkunkquok,  its  height. 
ne  anoohque  spconogkog,  ne  ancohqueu 
spongok  (?),  its  height  from  bottom  to 
top,  Gen.  6,  15;  Ex.  25,  10,  =ne  sohk¬ 
unkquok,  Ex.  25,  23,  —ne  anoohque 
spohtag,  Ex.  27, 1,  —ne  ashpohtag,  Ex. 
37,  1,  =ne  ashpuhtag,  Ex.  37,  10,  =ne 
kudtunkquag,  Ex.  30,  2,  =ne  ohshpohtag, 
Ex.  37,  25,  —ne  sohkonkog,  1  K.  6,  2. 
sohkonkqussuonk,  height  of  a  man  or  an. 
obj.;  wussohkonkqussuonk,  his  height 
[ sonkuk ,  when  it  shoots  up,  as  a  plant]. 
See  high. 

hell,  chepiohkomuk.  See  devil. 


helmet,  vppvhkukqut  (on  his  head); 

muhpuhkukqut  (on  a  head), 
help,  anmunau,  anninnuman,  he  helps 
(him);  suffix  u'ut-anm'imaoh,  he  helped 
them;  anninnumeh,  help  thou  me  (kut- 
tdnmimmi ?  will  you  help  me?  neen-kut- 
tinnum-ous,  I  will  help  you,  R.  W. ). 
Primarily  to  give  to,  t<>  bestow  upon. 
See  give. 

hemp.  See  flax. 

hen,  m6nish,  ndmpash,  a  hen,  a  cock,  C. ; 

monsh,  a  cock,  El. 
her.  See  he. 

here,  ye u,  yeuut,  in  this  place;  opposed 
to  naut,  there,  in  that  place.  See  this, 
hereafter,  ompetAk:  nish  pish  ompetak 
onagish,  the  things  which  shall  be 
hereafter,  Is.  41,  23;  Rev.  1,  19;  4,  1 
( ompetag ,  shortly,  C.). 
herring  (?),  ommis,  pi.  ommissuog,  her¬ 
ring,  C. ;  aumsfwg,  a  fish  somewhat 
like  a  herring,  R.  W.;  Peq.  umpsuauges, 
alewives,  Stiles.  See  menhaden, 
hide  (n.).  See  skin, 
hide  (v. ),  adtahtau ,  adtahtou,  lie  hides 
(it);  nut-adtahtau-un,  I  hide  it;  adtah- 
taush,  hide  thou  it  ( attahtouimat ,  to 
hide,  C. ).  eidtashau,  he  hides  or  con¬ 
ceals  (himself  or  another  person);  adt- 
ash,  hide  thou  (them);  suffix  v'Ut-tat- 
tashuh,  he  hid  them,  puttogqueu,  he 
hides  himself,  is  hid;  puttogquesh,  hide 
thyself;  vbl.  n.  puttogivhonk  [= puttog - 
queu-onk~\,  a  covering  or  hiding;  put- 
togquequohhou,  that  which  serves  to 
hide,  a  veil,  puttagham,  puttughum,  he 
hides  (it),  lit.  he  covers  it  over  (put- 
toghumunat  poshkissuonk,  to  cover  one’s 
nakedness,  C.).  onkhum,  he  covers  (it), 
he  hides  (it):  nut-onklium  nuskesuk,  I 
hide  my  face;  vbl.  n.  onkwhonk,  a  cov¬ 
ering  (screen  or  curtain,  etc.);  an.  onk- 
u'hau,  he  hides  or  covers  (him), 
high,  qunnunkque,  (it  is)  high,  tall  {qui- 
nuhqui  wetu,  a  high  house,  C. ,  qui- 
nuhque,  highly,  ibid.);  qunnunkque 
qunnunkque,  very  high;  qunnunkquoh- 
teciu,  he  is  high,  i.  e.  elevated,  qun- 
nunkqussu  ( qunnaiiqussu ,  R.  W.;  qui- 
nukqu&su,  C. ),  he  is  high  or  tall.  From 
qunni,  long. 

high  place,  kodtuhkoag,  kodlohkdag,  kod- 
uhkoag,  a  high  place,  the  summit  of  a 
mountain  or  hill;  as  adj.  ut  kodtuhkde 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


277 


high,  place — continued. 
wadchu-ut,  on  the  top  of  the  mount 
[ kodt-ohke?  Cf.  kodt-ontup,  the  top  of  the 
head],  kogkussohkoag,  a  high  place;  pi. 
-pink.,  1  Sam.  13,  6  [suppos.  redupl.  of 
kussohkoi] .  knssohkdi,  kussohkoiyeu ,  a 
(high)  peak  or  point  of  rock  or  earth; 
kussohkoiompsk,  ‘a  sharp  rock’,  1  Sam. 
14,  4;  en  kussohkoiyeue  wadchu-ut,  into 
a  high  mountain,  Is.  40,  9  [from  kous, 
ukqs,  anything  sharp  or  pointed], 
hill,  wadchuernes,  pi.  -{-ash  [dimin.  of 
wadchu,  mountain];  en  wadchue  ohkeit, 
‘to  the  hill  country’;  wadchuekontu, 
‘in  the  hill  country’  (Del.  wachtscliunk, 
on  the  hill,  Hkw. ). 

himself,  wuhhog;  see  he.  wuttin,  wut- 
tinne,  he  himself,  ille  ipse.  Though 
Eliot  mentions  tin,  tinne  as  ‘suppletive 
syllables  of  no  significance,  but  for 
ornament  of  the  word’  (Gr.  23),  it 
is  evident  enough  that  they  were  em¬ 
ployed  to  give  emphasis  to  the  pronoun 
when  separated  from  the  verb.  From 
ewd,  the  pronoun  of  the  third  piers, 
sing.,  was  formed  the  verb  ivntt hirudin- 
neat  [ wut-unneainneat ],  to  be  like  or 
such  as  [unne]  himself;  see  kind  (n.). 
nehewonche,  of  himself,  sua  spionte. 
hinder,  vmttameheau,  he  troubles,  dis¬ 
turbs,  hinders  (him);  alique  wuttamheh, 
do  not  trouble  me  ( kotammish ,  I  hinder 
you;  cotammume,  cotamme,  you  trouble 
me,  R.  W. ;  kcotamehish,  I  hinder  you; 
ncDtarnehhuvjarn,  I  hinder,  C.).  See 
trouble. 

hind  parts,  ivutamiyeu,  ( wuttomiyeu ,  be¬ 
hind,  as  prep.,  C.);  ootdmiyeu,  his  hind 
parts;  id  vrutamiyeu,  ‘into  the  draught’, 
Matt.  15,  17.  See  behind, 
hip,  mobpee  [ m'obpi ],  a  hip,  upiper  piart 
of  the  thigh,  ham  ( Sapwas ,  a  hip,  C. ; 
apdme,  the  thigh,  R.  \Y. ) ;  kobpiaog, 
kuppiaog,  thy  thighs;  wobpe,  his  thigh. 
Cf.  mehquau,  a  thigh, 
hire,  onkquotteau,  onkquatmt,  he  hires 
(him),  piays  (him)  wages:  kut-onkquat- 
oush,  ‘I  will  give  thee  hire’,  1  K.  5,  6 
( kut-taunckquittaunch ,  I  will  pay  you, 
R.  W. ).  annoonau,  he  employs  in  serv¬ 
ice,  he  hires  (him)  ( kuttannmnsh ,  I 
will  hire  you,  R.  W. ) .  See  recompense, 
his,  wuttaihe.  See  he. 


his  own,  nehenwonche,  hisown,  tlieirown, 
of  himself,  sua  spoil te  ( wunnehenwonche, 
their  own,  C. ) . 

hiss,  rnaunuwonat,  tohiss;  nohmonodwau, 
he  hisseth,  C.  queksco  [quek-ussu],  he 
hisses;  queksamg,  they  hiss,  Lam.  2,  16 
[lit.  they  make  quacking,  quek-usmog, 
onomatopioetic] ;  queksumau,  quekussu- 
mau,  he  hisses  at  (him). 

hither,  yen  nogque  (toward  this  pilace, 
in  this  direction):  yen  nogque  in  kali  yd 
hi,  hither  and  thither  ( yeunogque ,  this 
way,  C. ;  Del.  yu  lindachqui,  this  way, 
to  this  side,  Hkw.). 

ho!  chuh!  interjection  of  calling:  chuhf 
ken,  quskishf  ‘ho!  such  a  one,  turn 
aside!’  Ruth  4, 1  ( chuh  narnuk!  behold! 
C.). 

hoarse,  tanne  ontowdonk,  a  hoarse  voice, 
C. 

hoe,  anaskham,  he  digs,  he  hoes  (ands- 
kig,  pi.  -f -anash,  hoes;  anaskhomu'dutow- 
win,  a  breaking-up  hoe;  anaskhommin, 
to  hoe  or  break  upi  (the  earth) ;  anask- 
homwock,  they  hoe,  R.  W. ).  See  weed. 

hog,  ockqutchaun,  pi.  -\-nug,  R.  W.,  ‘a 
wild  beast  of  a  reddish  hair,  about  the 
bigness  of  a  piig  and  rooting  like  a  png, 
from  whence  they  give  this  name  to 
all  our  swine’.  The  animal  named  by 
R.  W.  is  the  groundhog  or  woodchuck 
(Arctomys  monax).  Mr  Judd,  in  Gen. 
Register,  xr,  219,  identifies  the  ‘wood- 
shau ’ ,  ‘  tvoodschock ’ ,  and  ‘wejac.k’  of 
the  early  fur  traders  with  the  ‘fisher’ 
or  ‘ wallaneag’  (Mustela  canadensis). 
See  fisher.  I  suspect  that  ‘  woodchuck  ’ 
is  corrupted  from  the  aboriginal  name, 
and  that  the  dictionary  reference,  ‘See 
chuck  ’ ,  as  a  guide  to  the  etymology,  is 
wrong. 

hoist,  ushpunnum,  ashpunnum,  he  hoists 
or  lifts  (it)  upj:  ushpunnumwog  sepag- 
hunk,  they  hoist  the  sail,  wauaupunish, 
hoist  up  (the  sail),  R.  W.  See  hold. 

hold,  kdunum,  he  holds  in  the  hand,  car¬ 
ries,  bears  (it).  Seebear(v. ).  kinunau, 
he  holds  or  carries  (an.  obj.):  vkkin- 
unoh,  she  beareth  them,  Dent.  32,  11; 
suppos.  part.  an.  konunont  ahtompeh, 
‘  handling  the  bow  ’ ;  konunont  anogqsoh, 
holdingthestars  (in  his  hand,  Rev.  2, 1). 
kogkounum  [freq.  and  intens.  from 


278 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN'  25 


hold — continued. 

k&unuvi],  lie  holds  habitually  or  con-  j 
tinues  to  hold  (it),  he  holds  (it) 
strongly,  lays  hold  of  it.  mmuhkinum, 
he  holds  (it)  fast,  takes  a  strong  hold 
of  (it);  nummenuhkinnum,  I  hold  fast 
(I  hold,  C.);  menuhkenish,  hold  thou  it 
fast  [ menuhki ,  (it  is)  hard,  strong, 
firm],  summdgunum  wunnutcheg,  he 
holds  out  (stretches  out)  his  hand;  see 
stretch  out.  ushpunum  wunnutcheg,  he 
holds  up  (lifts  up)  his  hand;  suppos. 
aspunug  wunnutcheganash,  when  he  held 
up  his  hands,  Ex.  17,  11.  wuttinnum 
wequananteg  ut  vmnnutchegut,  he  holds  a 
lamp  in  his  hand,  waapinum  wunnut- 
clieg ,  he  holds  up  (raises  up)  his  hands. 

hold  (to  take),  tohqunau  mosquoh,  he 
catches  a  bear;  see  catch,  wuttannun 
vmsseelut,  he  takes  hold  of  (catches  him 
by)  his  feet;  noli  anumwoh  anunont  weh- 
tauogut,  he  who  takes  a  dog  by  the  ears, 
Prow  26,  17. 

hole,  wdnogq,  pi.  wonogquash  [ wonogku , 
owonogku,  he  burrows,  has  a  hole] ;  | 
wonogquash,  pits,  holes,  or  dens  of  wild 
beasts;  excavations,  pukqui,  (there  is)  j 
a  hole,  an  orifice;  suppos.  inan.  puk-  \ 
quag,  a  hole  or  hollow  (the  eye  of  a 
needle,  Mark  10,  25);  by  reduplication 
puppuhquag.  See  bore. 

homage.  See  tribute. 

home,  ut  wekit  (at  his  house,  to  his 
house),  at  home,  to  home  ( wettu&muck , 
at  home,  R.  W. ).  mat  appu,  he  is  not  at  j 
home  (mat  apeu,  R.  W.).  nickquenum, 

I  am  going  home,  “which  is  a  solemn 
word  amongst  them, .  .  .  confessing  the  j 
sweetness  even  of  these  short  temporal 
homes”,  R.  W.  (Del.  n’matschi,  I  will 
go  home,  Hkw.). 

honor,  quttidnum,  quehtianum,  he  honors, 
shows  honor  to;  quttidnumcok  ketasscot, 
honor  ye  the  king;  with  an.  obj.  quttid- 
nuinau,  he  honors  (him);  quttidnum 
kaosh,  honor  thou  thy  father  (cf.  queli- 
tam,  he  fears),  quttidntam,  he  honors 
(it) ,  i.  e.  regards  it  as  honorable  (qut- 
tiantamwe,  honorable,  C.);  vbl.  n.  pass. 
quttidnittuonk,  the  being  honored,  honor 
received. 

hoof,  muhkos,  mdhkas  [ m'uhkous ,  a  sharp 
point];  pi.  muhkossog,  nails,  claws, 
hoofs:  ‘ horsesekossog ’ ,  horses’  hoofs, 


hoof — continued. 

Judg.  5,  22;  wuhkossog,  his  (or  its) 
hoofs  ( mokassuck ,  nails,  R.  IV.;  mooh- 
kos,  a  hoof,  C. ).  neesukossau,  he  parts 
the  hoof  [neese-uhkos,  two-nailed];  part, 
an.  neesukossont,  parting  the  hoof,  pas- 
8ukkonsau,  ‘he divides  the  hoof ’(?),  Lev. 
11,  7  (cf.  verses  4,  5,  6);  from  pamk- 
uhkos,  single  nailed  or-having  an  un¬ 
divided  hoof  (?).  See  claws;  nail. 

hook,  uhqudn;  uhquoan,  uhquon,  a  hook, 
a  fishhook  ( uhquon ,  C. ;  hoquaun,  pi. 
-atinash,  R.  W.;  Del.  aman,  a  fishhook, 
Ilkw.).  om,  Matt.  17,  27.  sohsogkinnit- 
tumco  (it  hooks  or  fastens),  pi.  +ug, 
‘hooks’,  ‘taches’,  Ex.  26,  6,  etc.;  soh- 
sogkittikeu,  it  is  hooked  or  fastened; 
from  sogkunum,  he  catches  or  clasps 
it,  hooks  on  to  it.  Cf.  sogkepoo  [sogk- 
uppco~],  he  bites;  sogkemas,  a  gnat.  See 
end. 

hope,  anndosu  ( noh  annodsu,  C. ),  he 
hopes;  nut-anndus  (mU-aririooux,  C.),  I 
hope;  suppos.  anndosit,  when  (or  if)  he 
hopes;  vbl.  n.  act.  anndosuonk,  annoau- 
suonk  ( an noosmonk,  C. ) ,  a  hoping,  hope, 
expectation. 

horn,  askon;  vrutaskon,  his  horn.  Not 
distinguishable  from  (if  not  identical 
with)  dskon  or  askon,  a  raw  hide  or 
undressed  skin,  as  well  as  muskon  [m’«s- 
konl~\,  a  bone;  umskon,  his  bone.  Cot¬ 
ton  gives  oskdn,  a  hide;  weween,  a  horn. 
The  latter  is  evidently  from  waSenu,  it 
winds  around,  is  curved.  See  bone. 

hornet,  aohkeaumcos,  Josh.  24,  12;  but 
bee,  Ps.  118,  12.  See  bees. 

horse,  nahnaiyeumOoadt,  a  horse,  a  crea¬ 
ture  that  carries,  C.  Eliot,  for  the 
substantive,  transfers  the  English 
‘horse’,  ‘horsesog’,  but  has  noh  naoo- 
mukqut  horsesoh,  he  who  rides  a  horse, 
and  nawmukqutcheg,  nayeumukqutcheg, 
horsemen,  riders  ( wunnia  naynayodme- 
wot,  he  rides  on  horseback,  R.  W. ), 
from  nayeutam,  he  carries  or  bears  it 
(upon  his  person);  an.  nayeau,  he  car¬ 
ries  (him) ;  pass.  part,  nayeumuk,  carried ; 
hence,  actively,  riding.  See  bear.  Del. 
nanayunges,  a  horse,  formed  from  a  vesis, 
a  beast  (?),  from  which  the  last  sylla¬ 
ble  is  taken  (?),  and  nayundam,  to 
carry  a  burden  on  the  back  or  shoul¬ 
ders,  Hkw.  Corresp.  402. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


279 


hot,  kussittau {kussuttah,  R.  W.),  it  is  hot, 
with  reference  to  the  heat  of  the  sun, 
the  weather,  or  natural  heat;  kosittag, 
kdsittag,  kdsohtag  (suppos.  part,  inan., 
when  it  is  hot),  the  heat  of  the  day 
( kesaosinneat ,  to  be  warm;  nuk-kesooap,  I 
am  warm,  C. ;  kdusitteks,  hot  weather, 
R.  \V. ).  kussopdsit,  when  it  is  warm 
[suppos.  from  kussopeasu,  dim.  (?),  a  lit¬ 
tle  hot].  An.  subj.  kussoppusm  [kuss-ap- 
wo.su] ,  he  is  hot  ( nuk-Hssdpis ,  I  am  hot; 
nuk-kisseeppeis,  I  itch;  kussuppesinneat, 
to  be  hot,  C. );  vbl.  n.  kussoppissuonk 
(a  heating  of  the  person),  inflamma¬ 
tion.  kussopittaeu,  it  is  hot,  by  the  action 
of  fire,  made  hot,  heated,  made  very  hot; 
as  adj.  kussdpittde,  kussdpetae,  hot;  sup¬ 
pos.  inan.  kussoppag,  (when  it  is)  very 
hot  (vbl.  n.  kissopetteahdonk,  fervency  or 
heat,  C. ;  this  is  formed  from  a  causat. 
verb  kussopettealihuau,  he  makes  it  to  be 
hot),  kussampskussum,  he  heats  or 
makes  hot  (a  furnace,  oven,  or  the 
like) .  The  root  in  all  these  words  is 
ohkus  ( okus ),  as  in  m’kussa,  a  burning 
coal,  from  which,  too,  in  the  suppos.  | 
an.  form,  may  perhaps  be  derived  kesuk, 
the  sun;  see  sun.  Cf.Gr.  Kaico;Kavdoo; 
Kavdig;  ai'Qoo,  to  burn;  aiQrfPj  the 
empyreal  region,  the  sky;  ehrj,  eiXif,  ' 
heat  of  the  sun;  ?'/Azo?. 
house,  wetu,  El.  Gr.  11;  neek,  nek,  my 
house;  keek,  thy  house;  week,  wek,  his 
house:  ut  wekit,  in  his  house;  ut  weeku- 
wout  or  wekuwomut,  in  his  (their) 
house;  “hence  we  corrupt  this  word, 
wigwam” ,  El.  Gr.  \\{wetu,  ahouse;  wetu- 
omuck  noteshem,  I  came  from  the  house; 
wetudmuck,  at  home;  nekick,  my  house; 
Mkick,  your  house,  R.  W.);  weetu  ne 
weetimuk,  ‘a  tent  to  dwell  in’,  Is.  40,  22; 
pi.  wetuomash;  ut  weetuomut,  on  the 
house,  in  the  house  or  houses,  wetu  is 
evidently  the  3d  pers.  sing,  indie,  of  a 
verb  which  can  not  be  accurately  trans¬ 
lated  into  English,  but  to  which  ‘he 
makes  his  home’  approximates,  and 
week  {weeg)  appears  to  be  the  supposi¬ 
tive  form  of  the  same  verb.  From  this 
last  comes  weekinneau,  he  lives  in  or 
occupies  a  house;  weekitteau,  he  builds  a 
house;  an.  wekuhkau,  he  builds  ( is  build- 
ingorconstructing)  a  housefor  (any per¬ 
son  or  an.  obj . ) ;  vbl.  n.  weekitteaonk,  a 


house — continued. 

building.  Nearly  related  are:  weetomau, 
he  lives  with  (another);  weetomp,  a 
friend,  kinsman;  weetahtu,  a  sister  ( wee - 
tauoog,  they  live  together,  Ind.  Laws); 
weetaudrnau,  he  takes  (her)  as  a  wife, 
i.  e.  to  his  house;  weetauadteog,  they 
marry  or  are  married  ( awetaw&tuock , 
they  make  a  match,  R.  W. ) ;  cf.  neetu, 
he  is  born,  he  is  produced,  he  or  it 
grows;  neetuonk,  birth;  nekit,  (when 
he  is)  born,  etc.  komuk  (an  inclosed 
place),  an  English  house  or  building 
other  than  a  dwelling  house,  rarely 
employed  except  in  compound  words: 
woskeche  komuk,  the  top  of  the  house, 
on  the  roof;  qunnunkque  komuk  (a  high 
building),  a  tower;  maumachie  komuk 
asuhmeeckumeekomuk(meechimukkomuk, 
C. ),  ‘store  house  or  barn’,  Luke  12,  24 
(maayeakdrnuk,  a  meeting  house;  chippi- 
komuk,  a  chamber,  C. ). 
how,  toll,  tohhen:  tih  kitteashe?  toll  kutteas- 
hishf  how  many  times?;  tohhen  nohnom- 
puf  how  often?;  tohuttcoche?  how  long? 
( tou t  R.  W.,  a  general  interrogative, 
where?  how?  what?  etc. :  tou  anuckqua- 
quef  tounuckquaque?  how  much?;  tou- 
nuckquaque  yd  umclie?  how  far  from 
hence?  R.W. ;  uttoh  unnuhkithquat?  how 
far? ;  uttoh  [ ul-toh ]  missi ?  how  great? ;  uttoh 
unni?  what  manner?  C. ).  tohsu?  tahshe? 
tolishe?  how  much?;  pi.  tohshinash?  tah- 
slunash?  tohsuash ?  how  many?;  an.  toh- 
suog?  how  many  persons?  {tolislie,  so 
much;  netohshit,  so  often;  tohtohshinnash 
kesukodash?  how  many  days?  C. ;  tasliin? 
how  much?;  tashinash  paponash ?  how 
many  winters?;  an.  pi.  tahsliincheck? 
how  many?  R.  W. ).  uttoh  [to  what, 
ut-toli\,  how,  as  adv.  of  comparison: 
uttoh  en  wunnegen,  how  beautiful  {uttoh 
missi,  how  great,  C. ) . 
howl,  mishontoodnat,  to  roar;  mishontoo- 
ahpuhsinneat,  to  howl;  num-mishonto- 
oahpuhs,  I  howl,  C.  (?).  amco,  he  howls 
or  yells;  conwog,  they  howl;  vbl.  n. 
mnaoonk,  howling.  See  shout;  roar, 
humble  (adj.),  hohpdu,  he  is  humble; 
hohpae  {hohpcoe,  C. ),  humble;  n.  agent. 
holipdenu,  one  who  is  humble,  suppos. 
part.  pi.  nag  hohpacheg,  hohhohpacheg, 
ahhohpdcheg,  olihohpdnutcheg,  the  hum¬ 
ble;  vbl.  n.  liolipaonk,  humility. 


280 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


humble  (v. ),  hohpahehheav,  he  makes 
(him)  humble,  he  humbles  (him). 

hundred,  an.  pasukmog,  inan.  pasilk- 
ooash:  nequt  pamkmog,  one  hundred 
(persons);  yauut  pamkooe  kodturnwae, 
for  four  hundred  years,  lit.  yearly  to 
the  four-hundredth  ( nquit  pmrsuek, 
one  hundred,  R.  W. ;  nequt  pasmkoo  or 
passdkoog,  C. ) . 

hungry,  kodtuppm,  he  is  hungry;  nak- 
kodtup,  I  was  hungry  ( n’cclttup ,  I  am 
hungry,  R.  W. ;  nuk-kodtup,  C. ) ;  suppos. 
noh  kodtupvit,  he  who  is  hungry,  pi. 
nag  kodtupwutcheg;  n.  agent,  kodtnpwen 
[for  kodtuppooen],  a  hungry  man  [from 
kod-uppm,  he  desires  to  eat],  paskd- 
nontam,  he  is  extremely  hungry,  he 
starves  or  is  starving;  noh  nahen  nup- 
pooe  paskanontam,  he  is  like  to  die  with 
hunger;  vbl.  n.  paskdnontamooonk,  starv¬ 
ing,  extreme  hunger.  See  eat;  starve. 

hunt,  adchaeu,  he  hunts,  is  hunting 
( auchadi ,  he  is  gone  to  hunt  or  fowl; 
n’tauchaumen ,  I  go  to  hunt;  auchatituck, 
let  us  hunt,  R.  W. ;  nuttahchun,  I  hunt, 
C. ;  Del.  yuh’  allauuitan,  come,  let  us  go 
a-hunting,  Hkw.);  vbl.  n.  audchaonk, 
hunting  (the  game  taken  by  hunting, 
Prov.  12,  27);  n.  agent,  adchaen,  aud- 
chaen,  a  hunter  ( adchdenin ,  a  fowler, 
C. ).  V.  t.  an.  adchanau,  he  hunts  (ani¬ 
mals  or  live  game);  adchanaog,  they 
hunt;  suppos.  part,  adchanont,  (when) 


hunt — con  tin  ued . 

hunting;  noh  adchanont,  he  who  hunts; 
with  inan.  obj.  adchontam  vunnehtuonk, 
he  hunts  his  prey,  Job  38,  39.  See 
strive  after. 

hurl,  togkonat  qusmkquanash,  to  hurl 
stones  (from  a  sling,  1  Chr.  12,  2);  v.  i. 
togkau,  togkm,  he  hurls,  he  strikes.  See 
strike. 

hurry.  See  hasten. 

hurt,  uvskheau,  woskeheau,  he  hurts, 
injures,  does  harm  to  (him);  suppos. 
part.  an.  woskeheunt,  harming,  hurting 
(when  he  hurts);  mat  pish  kmiroskhuk- 
koo,  he  shall  not  hurt  thee;  negat.  im- 
perat.  woskeheuhkon,  do  him  no  harm 
( woskehheaog  icuhhogkduh,  they  hurt 
themselves,  C. ;  nmumkheum,  I  hurt, 
ibid.);  pass,  nancoskhit,  I  am  hurt; 
adj.  uvskehhuwde,  hurtful;  vbl.  n.  act., 
woskehuwaonk  (a  hurting),  hurt,  vio¬ 
lence;  vbl.  n.  pass.,  voskehittuonk, 
violence  suffered  (a  being  hurt),  a 
wound;  n.  agent,  woskehhmeaen,  one 
who  hurts  or  harms,  ‘the  spoiler’.  Cf. 
wusqlieonk,  blood. 

husband,  wasukeh,  valisukeh,  the  hus¬ 
band  of,  (her)  husband  ( wdsick ,  R.  IV.; 
wasukkion,  v-asekkien,  a  husband,  C. ) ; 
nasuk,  my  husband;  kasuk,  thy  hus¬ 
band;  kahmkowoog,  your  husbands. 

husks,  icuhhogkomminneash;  ut  icuhhog- 
komunit,  to  the  husk. 


I 


I,  neen,  nen;  prefixed  n’,  nut  ( neen,  R. 
W  . ;  nen,  C.;  Del.  ni,  Hkw.):  nen  n noh, 
I  am  he.  The  characteristic  n  of  the 
first  person  fills  the  place  that  in  several 
other  languages,  Semitic  and  Aryan,  is 
assigned  to  the  -principal  consonant  of 
the  pronoun  of  the  second  person.  It 
may  be  denominated  n’  demonstrative. 
"With  the  Indian  all  action  began  or 
centered  in  self,  nen,  the  reduplicated 
demonstrative,  was  the  emphatic  ‘this 
one’ ;  hence  enin,  man;  ninnu,  male; 
unni,  any  (one  person  or  thing  of  the 
kind  spoken  of),  as  well  as  ne,  this 
(thing);  no,  these;  noh,  he  who,  that 
person;  nag,  they;  neane  [ne-unni~\,  so 


I — continued. 

as,  thus;  nan,  nenan,  the  same;  n’nih „ 
it  is  so,  that  is,  etc.  (cf.  Engl,  thou, 
they,  the,  this,  that,  theft,  thus,  there). 
nuttinne,  I  myself,  ego  ipse.  See 
kind  (n. ). 

ice,  kuppadt,  kuppdd  ( capdt ,  R.W. ;  Peq. 
kuppat,  Stiles) ;  suppos.  from  kuppieu, 
it  is  closed:  when  it  is  closed  up  or 
stopped. 

idle,  sesegenam,  sasegenam,  he  is  idle 
(habitually,  by  reduplication  from 
segenam,  he  is  indolent,  slothful;  see 
slothful,  slow);  n.  agent,  sesegenamteen, 
an  idle  man;  vbl.  n.  sesegeneammont 
(sdsekeneamodonk,  C. ),  habitual  idleness- 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


281 


idle — continued. 

nanom pa nissi chick  ( pi. ) ,  idle  persons,  R. 
IV.;  vbl.  n.  nanompanissuonk,  idleness, 
C.  [from  nanompamvau,  he  begs?] . 
idol,  nun neukontun k,  n  unnubont  auk  ( nin - 
nukuntonk,  C. ),  an  image,  an  idol, 
if,  tohneit:  tohneit  nenag,  if  it  bo  so. 
image.  See  idol. 

imitate,  nuttianndu,  I  imitate;  aiann.au- 
onate,  to  imitate,  C. ;  cf.  eiyane  ( aianne , 
C. ),  kinds  of,  or  of  the  kind  of.  See 
like;  likeness. 

immediately,  teanuk  ( tedno ,  R.  W. ), 
quickly,  suddenly,  immediately, 
immerse,  touopham,  he  puts  (it)  into 
the  water,  hence  he  soaks,  he  seethes, 
etc.  ( touwopskhdmmke ,  ‘cast  anchor’, 
R.  W. ) .  Cf.  chauopham  weyaus,  he  boils 
flesh  ( chouwophash ,  cast  it  overboard, 
R.  W. );  nepataush  sabaheg,  he  seethes 
pottage. 

impossible.  See  possible, 

in. 

[Note. — Left  unfinished.  See  ut .] 
increase,  mishehteau,  he  increases  (it), 
he  makes  (it)  great;  pish  mishehteauun, 
it  shall  be  increased,  made  great. 
moochekohteau,  he  increases  (it),  he  has 
very  much  of  (it) .  More  commonly  in¬ 
crease  is  expressed  by  nano,  signifying 
‘more  and  more’  (El.  Gr.  15):  nano 
missi,  it  increaseth  (is  more  and  more 
great) ;  nano  waantam,  he  increaseth  in 
wisdom  (is  more  and  more  wise);  nano 
moonatash  (inan.  pi.),  they  increase  in 
number. 

indolent.  See  slothful;  idle, 
infant,  peisses  [for  peississu,  he  is]  very 
small,  an  infant  (of  either  sex);  intens. 
papeissu  ( papoos ,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  poup- 
pous,  Stiles);  suppos. peississit, papeissit, 
when  he  is  very  small:  n oh  peississit, 
the  smallest  child,  ‘he  -who  is  least’, 
Matt.  11,  11;  peississit  ketompas,  thy 
younger  sister,  Ezek.  16,  46;  suppos. 
part,  (pi.)  nag  papeississitcheg,  infants, 
very  small  children.  From  peawe, 
peaeu,  it  is  small;  dim.  pease,  peasin 
(suppos.  peasik),  and  papSase  (suppos. 
papeasick),  it  is  very  small;  papease-ussu 
(contr.  papeissu),  he  is  very  small.  See 
child,  boy,  girl,  etc.  (Del.  pilawesis,  a 
boy;  pilawetit,  a  male  infant  babe;  que- 
tit,  a  female  infant  babe,  Hkw. ) 


inform,  nahtinau,  he  shows  (it)  to  (him), 
he  informs  (him)  of  (it);  nahtus, 
show  thou  (it);  nahtusseh,  show  thou 
(it)  to  me  ( nunnohtin ,  I  show,  C.); 
causat.  inan.  from  ndau  (he  sees):  he 
makes  him  see  it;  cf.  nehtau,  show 
thyself  to  (him),  1  K.  18,  1.  wahteau- 
wahuau  [causat.  inan.  from  wahteau,  he 
knows],  he  makes  ( him )  know  it  ( wah- 
teauuah,  make  him  to  know’,  C. ).  kuh- 
kootamau,  kukkuhtomau,  he  informs 
(him)  of.  See  teach, 
inhabit.  See  dwell, 
inhabitant,  noh  ayit,  pi.  nag  ayitcheg; 
noh  wadohkit,  pi.  nag  wadohkitcheg.  See 
dwell. 

inhabited,  ohke  na  icadolitimuk,  a  land 
inhabited  (i.  e.  where  itwas  possessed  or 
occupied);  ohke  matin  wutohkein, an  un¬ 
inhabited  land ;  ohke  qiish  'wutohkein ,  the 
land  shall  be  inhabited;  chipohke  [ chepi - 
ohke),  uninhabited  land, 
injure.  See  hurt. 

inquire,  nataotomau,  he  inquires  of 
(him),  questions  (him);  natootomuhkau, 
he  prosecutes  inquiry,  seeks  informa¬ 
tion  from  (him);  nadwushitteau,  he  in¬ 
quires  into  (it),  investigates  (it)  ( neen 
pitch  nnadsittamen,  I  will  inquire  into 
it;  wunnadsittamiMa,  let  us  search  into 
it,  R.W.).  See  question, 
instead  of,  nornpe,  nohnompu:  sun  nen 
nompin,  am  I  in  (his)  stead?  Gen.  30,2 
[nompeu,  it  is  in  the  place  or  stead  of 
(it);  nompenau,  he  is  in  the  place  or 
stead  of  (him)]. 

instruction,  kuhkootamwehteaonk,  in¬ 
struction,  teaching.  See  teach, 
integrity,  sampwuttahhdonk;  sampiveh- 
teauaonk,  vbl.  n.  from  sampwehteau,  he 
makes  it  straight  or  right, 
intend,  unnantam,  anantam,  he  wills, 
thinks,  purposes,  intends,  has  in  mind: 

[ mattal ]  ne  anantam  nen,  qut  ken  ne 
anantaman  (suppos.),  ‘not  as  I  will,  but 
as  thou  wilt’,  Matt.  26,  39;  ne  anontag, 
according  to  his  will  (what  he  may 
will  or  intend).  This  verb  expresses 
simple  mental  activity — volition,  pas¬ 
sion,  thought.  It  is  the  primary  and 
type  of  a  large  class  of  verbs  (corre¬ 
sponding  to  Zeisberger’s  third  form  of 
conjugation,  in  the  Delaware,  “in  elen- 
dam,  indicating  a  disposition  of  the- 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


282 


intend — continued . 

mind”)  which  Eliot  regards  as  “a  sort 
of  verb  substantives”  formed  from 
“adnouns  of  virtue  and  vice,”  etc. 
(Gr.,  p.  16),  and  of  which  he  gives,  as 
an  example,  a  paradigm  of  the  verb 
waantam,  he  is  wise,  regularly  conju¬ 
gated  by  affixing  the  verbal  particles  to 
the  “adnoun”  waantam ;  but  waantam 
is  primarily  a  verb  and  not  an  adnoun 
or  adjective.  I  have  called  unaantam 
or  anantam  the  primary,  but  strictly 
speaking  it  is  a  derivative  by  redupli¬ 
cation  from  a  more  simple  form,  antam, 
which  expresses  mental  and  emotional 
activity,  as  usm  expresses  physical 
activity,  and  is  correspondingly  em¬ 
ployed  in  composition  (see  unnanta- 
mundt).  kesontam,  he  purposes,  in¬ 
tends,'  forms  a  resolution  or  resolves. 
pakodtantam,  he  determines,  intends, 
intention,  unnantamcoonk  ( unantamoo - 
onk,  C. ) ;  vbl.  n.  from  unnantam:  an  in¬ 


intention — continued, 
tending  ( n’ teatammowonck ,  that  is  my 
thought  or  opinion,  R.  W. ). 
into.  See  put  into, 
investigate.  See  inquire, 
iron,  moodshog,  moushag  ( mowashuck ,  R. 
W. ),  from  mooi,  black;  cf.  wompohshog, 
brass  (?),  from  wompi,  white,  misseh- 
chuog,  iron,  from  missi,  great  ( mmeh - 
ehooog,  mines,  C. ).  See  steel, 
is,  sun?  is  it?;  sunnamatta ?  is  it  not?  See 
appu;  ayeu;  na;  nont;  ohteau. 
island,  munndh,  munnohhan  (munnoh- 
onk,  C.).  Strictly  munndh  signifies  an 
island;  munnohhan  [ munnoh-anni ],  any 
island  or  whatever  is  island  (cf.  kehtoh, 
kehtohhan  [usft],  the  sea,  seas);  pi. 
munnohhanash;  munndhhanit,  menoh- 
hannet,  on  an  island.  For  m'nunnu, 
m’nunoo,  a  dry  place  (it  is  dry)(?). 
aquidnet,  ahquednet,  ogquidnet,  (at  the) 
island:  kishke  ahquednet,  near  an  island, 
Acts  27, 16;  pi.  ogquidnash,  islands,  Is. 
40, 16. 


J 


jaw,  wutompeuk,  wuttompek,  his  jaws; 
urutompeukanaxoash,  their  jaws;  mutom- 
peuk,  a  jaw,  anyone’s  jaw. 
jealous,  mwsummuam  (?),  (he  is)  jealous; 
suppos.  part.  an.  mcosumont,  when  he  is 
jealous;  vbl.  n.  pass,  meositteamooonk, 
jealousy. 

jerk,  teadche  wuttotukkon,  “  it  jerketh  or 
suddenly  twitcheth”,  C. 
join,  mosogqneog,  they  join  (lit.  stick, 
adhere)  (nummdsogeem ,  I  join,  C. ) ;  inan. 
pi.  mdsogquohtaash,  they  are  joined  to¬ 
gether,  adhere  closely.  See  stick  (v. ). 
missussin,  (it  touches)  it  adjoins,  reaches 
or  extends  to.  See  touch, 
joint,  anaquesuonk,  onoquesuonk ,  pi.  -ong- 
ash,  joints. 

journey.  See  day’s  journey;  go;  walk, 
judge,  wusmrn,  he  judges,  passes  judg¬ 
ment  on;  with  an.  obj.  wussumau,  he 
judges,  condemns,  sentences  (him); 
suppos.  part,  noh  wossumont,  wasumont, 
he  who  judges,  he  (when)  judging; 
suffix  an.  aosumuh,  he  judged  him.  wus- 
sittum,  he  judges  (it),  he  passes  judg¬ 
ment  on  (it);  sometimes  intrans. 


judge — continued. 

noosittum,  I  judge;  suppos.  part,  urussit- 
tuk,  when  he  judges;  noh  wussittuk,  he 
who  judges,  the  judge  of;  vbl.  n.  act. 
wussittumcoonk,  a  judging,  judgment, 
sentence;  vbl.  n.  pass.  wussumUteaonk, 
judgment,  sentence  (referred  to  the  ob¬ 
ject),  being  judged;  n.  agent,  vmssumm- 
waen(-in),  a  judge;  pi.  -enuog,  judges. 

jump.  See  leap. 

just,  sampivi,  (it  is)  just  or  right;  an. 
sampwesu,  (he  is)  just,  i.  e.  he  does 
justly;  vbl.  n.  act.  sampweusseonk,  just 
doing,  justice.  See  right. 

justify,  sampiveogquanumau,  he  justifies 
(him),  i.  e.  accounts  him  just;  pass, 
(same  form),  he  is  justified,  accounted 
just;  vbl.  n.  pass,  sampweoguanitluonk, 
being  accounted  just,  ‘justification’. 
This  word,  probably  formed  by  Eliot, 
illustrates  the  copiousness  of  the  lan¬ 
guage  and  its  self-defining  power: 
sampwi,  right,  just;  ogquanum,  he 
counts  (an.  objects),  with  the  pass, 
vbl.  form,  denoting  abstract  activity, 
but  with  regard  to,  or  rather  from 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


283 


justify — -continued. 

the  point  of  view  of,  the  object  of  the 
verb.  Elsewhere  (as  in  Rom.  5,  16, 
18)  Eliot  employs  the  causat.  form  of 


I  justify — continued. 

thevbl.  n.  pass,  sampwenehittuonk,  being 
made  just  or  right,  from  sampweneh- 
|  lieau,  he  makes  (him)  to  be  just. 


TC 


keep,  wadchanum,  he  keeps  (it);  oowad- 
chanum-un,  he  keeps  it;  suppos.  noli 
wadchanuk,  he  who  keeps  (it),  a  keeper; 
wadchanish,  keep  thou  (it).  See  para¬ 
digm  of  this  verb  in  El.  Gr.  24-27.  It 
signifies  not  merely  to  keep,  but  to  keep 
safely,  to  preserve,  to  save,  wadchau, 
he  keeps  (him),  protects,  keeps  safe 
(him) ;  suffix  an.  anuadchanuh,  he  keeps 
him;  ncowadchanuk ,  he  keeps  me;  wad- 
cha.neh,  keep  thou  me;  wadchanumeh, 
keep  thou  it  for  me  (wauchauwama,  R. 
W. )  See  paradigm  in  El.  Gr.  28-63. 
This  verb  is  largely  employed  by  Eliot 
in  the  composition  of  words  new  to  the 
language,  but  not  the  less  intelligible  to 
his  Indian .  hearers;  as,  vbl.  n.  pass. 
wadchanittuonk,  a  being  kept  safe,  ‘sal¬ 
vation’;  n.  agent,  wadchmoaen-in,  one 
who  keeps  safe,  a  saviour  ( wduchaunat , 
a  guardian,  R.  W. ).  ndndweliteouunat, 
to  keep  (?),  C. ;  nun-ndnaueehtoo,  I  keep, 
ibid.  nandwanumeh^'keep  thou  me,  C. ; 
nun-nanauwinnit,  I  am  kept,  ibid.  See 
protect. 

kernel,  wutch  ubbuhkumunit  yean  wuh- 
hogkomunit,  ‘from  the  kernels  even  to 
the  husk’,  Num.  6,  4. 

kettle,  ohkuk,  olikuhk,  ahkuhq  ( aucuck , 
R.  W. ;  ohkuke,  C. ) ,  an  (earthen)  pot  or 
vessel,  a  kettle;  pi.  -\-quog  [from  ohke, 
earth],  mishquockuk,  a  red  copper  ket¬ 
tle,  R.  W.  [mishq’ -ohkuk,  red  earthen]. 
See  dish. 

kick  at,  togkishkom,  he  kicks  at  or 
against  (it) ;  kut-togkishkomun,  thou 
kickest  against  it  (contract,  togskom ); 
from  togku,  he  strikes,  with  ’.? h  of  vio¬ 
lent  action.  V.  i.  tittinnogshau,  he 
‘kicked’,  Deut.  32,  15. 

kidneys,  muttoounussog  (pi.),  the  kid¬ 
neys,  the  reins;  nuttoounnussog,  my  reins, 
Ps.  26,  2. 

kill,  nushau,  he  kills  (him);  nunnush,  I 
kill  or  killed  (him);  suppos.  noh  nush- 


kill — continued. 

ont  or  nashont,  he  who  kills;  nush  ( niss , 
R,  W. ),  kill  thou;  nushook  ( nissoke , 
R.  W. ),  kill  ye;  pass,  nushau,  nusheau, 
he  is  killed;  pish  nun-nushit,  I  shall  be 
killed;  nag  nushitcheg,  the  slain  (Gr. 
vEKpob,  vekvs;  Lat.  nex,  necis;  necor, 
neci).  nushuhkau  (he  goes  on  killing, 
continues  to  kill),  he  daughters  ( nisheh - 
konat,  to  kill,  C. )  [nushau,  with ’A*  pro¬ 
gressive].  Y.  i.  nushehteau,  nushteau,  he 
kills,  he  is  a  murderer  ( nun-nishteam , 
I  kill,  C. ) :  nushehteaog  ut  mayut,  they 
commit  murder  in  the  way,  Hos.  6,  9; 
negat.  imperat.  nushehteuhkon,  thou 
shalt  not  kill. 

kind(adj.),  womonausu  [womonau-ussu, 
he  acts  lovingly],  he  is  kind  to;  vbl.  n. 
womonausuonk  (love  in  exercise),  kind 
acting,  kindness.  See  love. 

kind  (n. ),  unni  ( aianne ,  C. ;  iane,  Mass. 
Ps. ),  eiyane,  of  the  sort  or  kind  of ;  as  a 
suffix  -in,  -enin,  -ane,  etc.,  marking  the 
relation  of  an  individual  to  a  species  or 
of  species  to  genus,  family,  or  class;  as 
in  neane,  neyane,  such  as,  of  this  or  that 
kind  [ne-unni]\  suppos.  inan.  neaunak 
{nednag,  such,  C. ),  when  it  is  of  the 
kind,  like;  and  as  substantive,  likeness 
(see  like),  unnaieu,  unnayeu,  it  is  such 
or  so,  it  is  of  the  kind  of  [unne-ayeu~\: 
ne  wunnegen  unnai inneat  (infin. ),  ‘it  is 
good  so  to  be’,  1  Cor.  7, 26,  i.  e.  to  be  in 
such  a  state  or  condition  ( ayeuonk ). 
An  analysis  of  this  verb  furnishes  the 
key  to  Eliot’s  translation  of  Ex.  3,  14, 
which  proved  so  inexplicable  a  puzzle 
to  Mr  Pickering  and  Mr  Duponceau, 
and  which  Heckewelder  concluded, 
after  long  research,  must,  “if  it  means 
anything,  be  either  ‘  I  am  a  man,  I  am 
a  man  ’  or  ‘  I  do  so,  I  do  so  ’ ,  ”  and  which 
his  correspondent,  Dencke,  thought 
might  be  a  new  verb  formed  by  Eliot, 
but  “not  genuine  Indian”  (Notes  on 


284 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  2i> 


kind  (n. ) — continued. 

Eliot’s  Grammar,  2  M.  H.  C.  9,  xxiv- 
xliv).  Mr  Pickering,  at  the  point 
where  his  investigations  promised  sue-  j 
cess,  was  misled  by  Cotton’s  vocabu-  j 
lary,  where  the  verb  unniinat  is  given 
with  the  translation  ‘to  become’  and 
“nuttinni,  I  am  become”.  This  trans¬ 
lation  was  perhaps  suggested  to  Cotton  1 
by  some  such  use  of  the  verb  as  in 
John  1,  12:  connaumoniinneat  God 

[wunnaumon-iLnnainneai],  ‘to  become 
the  sons  of  God’,  to  be  of  or  such  as 
sons  of  God.  Eliot  himself  contributed 
to  the  misunderstanding  by  stating 
that  tit,  tin,  tinne  were  syllables  of  “no 
signification,  but  for  ornament,”  and 
only  “in  way  of  an  elegancy”  received 
the  affix  of  the  verb,  “as  nuttinne,  kut- 
tinne,  wuttinne.”  The  manner  in  which 
these  augments  are  employed  in  Eliot’s 
translation  makes  it  clear  that,  vrhile 
the  t  may  be  interposed  for  euphony 
merely,  the  additional  syllables  are  . 
always  significant,  though  not  always  j 
translatable  to  English,  and  that  the 
compound  pronouns  are  equivalent  to 
nut-unni,  kut-nnni,  init-anni,  marking 
the  contrast  or  relation  of  ‘such  as’  I, 
thou,  or  he  to  or  with  those  of  another 
kind  or  class.  This  significance  attaches 
to  the  verbal  forms:  nut-tirmiin,  I  am  of 
the  kind  of,  I  am  such  as;  ne  nuttinniin 
(ne  nuttunniin,  Mass.  Ps. ),  I  am  such 
as  that,  I  am  of  that  kind  or  class,  ‘so  I 
am’,  John  13, 13;  yen  nuttiniin  (yeu  nut- 
tinnaiin,  ‘thus  I  have  been’,  Gen.  31, 
41),  thus  I  am;  nen  nuttinniin  nen  nut¬ 
tinniin,  I  am  such  as  I  myself  am  such 
as,  I  am  of  my  own  kind,  ‘  I  am  that  I 
[which]  I  am’,  Ex.  3, 14.  So  wdth  the 
pronouns  of  the  2d  and  3d  persons: 
nedne  unnantog  .  .  .  ne  vmttinniin,  ‘as 
he  thinketh  .  .  .  so  is  lie’,  Prov.  23,  7; 
wuttinnin  howan,  whosoever,  i.  e.  of  what 
kind  soever,  he  be,  Matt.  16,  24,  2.5;  ne 
pish  wuttinniin,  ‘so  will  be  his  manner’, 

1  Sam.  27,  11;  neaniit  wuttinneumin,  ne 
wuttinniin  wussontimomun,  ‘as  with  the 
servant  so  with  his  master’,  Is.  24,  2. 
neannssit  ( nenhhenissit ,  ‘such  a  one’, 
C. ),  ‘after  its  kind’,  suppos.  from 
neammu  [ne-unni-msu],  the  an.  form 
of  neane;  suppos.  neaunak,  of  the  an. 


kind  (n.) — continued. 

kind  or  species  of,  resembling,  like. 
wanie  eiyane,  all  kinds  of  (inan.  obj.). 
See  like. 

king,  ketassaot,  pi.  ketassootamuvg,  kings 
( =tahsootamwog,  Gen.  35, 11).  The  first- 
syllable  is  kehte,  great  or  chief,  which 
is  occasionally  omitted,  as  above,  and 
also  in  the  verbal  ketasscotamcoonk 
(sometimes  assajtamcoonk,  as  in  Dan.  5, 
28,  31,  and  tahsootamooonk,  Zeph.  3,  8; 
Matt,  4,  8,  etc.),  a  kingdom.  *1  have 
not  met  wdth  the  verb  form  assaotam 
or  tahscotam,  and  can  not  wdth  certainty 
determine  its  primary  signification. 
See  sachem. 

kinsman,  neetomp,  my  friend,  my  kins¬ 
man;  pi.  -j-aog;  weetomp,  his  friend  or 
kinsman;  weetompain,  a  friend,  a  kins¬ 
man,  i.  e.  the  kinsman  of  anyone.  wut- 
tinnunkumuin ,  a  kinsman  of  a  female, 
Ruth  3,  12;  4,  1;  nuttinonkumuog,  my 
kinsman,  Acts  9,  3.  wuttonkqs-oh,  his 
kinsman;  nutonkqs,  ‘my  kinswoman’, 
Prov.  7,  4  ( natdncks ,  my  cousin,  R.  W.; 
tvadtonkqsin,  a  cousin,  C. ).  ouwatuonk, 
kindred,  C.  See  cousin. 

kiss,  chipwuttoonapwau,  he  kisses  (him); 
wut-chipivuttoonapoh,  he  kisses  or  kissed 
him;  chipivuttcondpiveh,  kiss  me  ( nut - 
ckipwuttaonap,  I  kiss,  C. );  reciprocal 
chipwuttamapwuttuog,  they  kiss  each 
other;  vbl.  n.  ehipmittoonapuvonk  (a 
kissing),  a  kiss  [ chippe-wuttaon ,  sepa¬ 
rated  mouth], 

kite,  qussukquanush,  Lev.  11, 14;  weenont, 
Deut.  14,  13;  but  weenont,  a  raven,  Lev. 
11,  5. 

knave,  aiontogkoinp,  a  knave;  pi.  -\-aog, 
C.  (?). 

knee,  mukkuttuk  ( mukkuttuk ,  C. ),  a  knee; 
pi.  -\-quog  ( wonke  kittuk,  a  crooked 
knee,  C.)  [ m’quttnuuk ,  that  which  sinks 
down,  from  quttaueu,  it  sinks  down, 
goes  down],  Cf.  Engl,  knee;  AS. 
cneoiv;  hnigan,  incurvare,  inclinare,  to 
bow,  to  bend,  to  incline. 

knife,  chohquog  ( chauq[u\ock ,  R.  W. ; 
“whence  they  call  Englishmen  Chdu- 
quaquock,  that  is,  Knive-men”;  see 
Englishman);  kenehquog  ( keeneehquog , 
C. ),  a  sharp  knife  [from  kenai,  it  is 
sharp]  ( chequdd weehquog,  a  razor,  C. ). 
wiaseck,  mocotick,  punnetunck,  eiassuncky 


TKl’MBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


285 


knife — con  t  i  n  ued . 

cliauquock,  a  knife,  RAY.;  eteaussonkash 
(pi.),  knives,  G. ;  Peq.  punniedunk, 
wiyauzzege,  knife,  Stiles;  Del.  pach- 
kschican,  a  knife.  “All  words  ending 
in  -lean,  -Mean,  or  -kschican  denote  a 
sharp  instrument  for  cutting”,  Hkw. 
Corresp.  413. 

knock,  ehuhchunkquttahhdm,  he  knocks 
(at  the  door);  nutehoh.ehunkquttahh.am, 
I  knock. 

know,  ivaheau,  he  knows  (him);  suffix 
koowdhush,  I  know  thee;  kcowalieiunwco, 
ye  know  me;  suppos.  part,  noh  wah- 
eont,  he  who  knows;  pi.  nag  viahe- 
oncheg,  they  who  know  (an.  obj.); 
pass,  unheau,  he  is  known  ( kaowahhish , 
I  know  thee;  ncowaeh  noh,  1  know  him; 
noowahik,  he  knows  me;  kcoirdhik,  he 
knows  thee,  C.  Cotton  devoted  more 
than  three  pages  of  his  Vocabulary  to 


know — continued. 

examples  of  the  forms,  an.  and  inan., 
of  the  verb  ivaheau,  wahteou ) ;  vbl.  n. 
vahheonk,  knowledge  (of  persons),  ivah- 
teou,  he  knows,  perceives,  understands 
(it);  with  inan.  obj.  or  intrans.  wah- 
teouun,  he  knows  it;  ivahteauog,  they 
know  (it)  (nag  wahteoog,  C. );  ncoivah- 
teouun,  I  know  it  ( noirautam ,  I  under¬ 
stand,  R.  W. ;  ncowdteo,  I  know,  I  under¬ 
stand,  C. );  suppos.  part,  noh  wahteunk, 
he  when  knowing,  he  who  knows; 
vbl.  n.  wahteonk,  wahteauonk,  knowledge 
(of  things).  Caus.  an.  wahteouivaheau, 
he  makes  (him)  known  to  (him),  he 
makes  (him)  know  (him),  wahteau- 
wahhuau,  he  makes  (it)  known  to  (him). 
tatta,  I  know  not  ( netop  tatld,  my  friend, 
I  know  not,  R.  W.;  tattd  pitch,  I  can 
not  tell,  it  may  so  come  to  pass,  ibid. ; 
mat  nooivahteooo ,  I  can’t  tell,C. ).  See  no. 


L 


labor.  See  bear  children;  work, 
lack.  See  want. 

ladder,  tohkcotauonk  (tahkeosowontuk,  C. ) . 
From  tohkcotaau,  he  climbs  upon;  toh- 
ka>su,  he  climbs, 
ladle.  See  spoon, 
lake.  See  pond;  water, 
lame,  quaquenukqshau,  kukqunukshau,  he 
halts  or  is  crippled,  freq.  from  qunnuk- 
quesu,  he  is  lame  ( nickqussaqus ,  I  am 
lame,  R.  W. ),  denoting  temporary  or 
casual  lameness;  suppos.  part,  noh 
quanukesii,  quinnukquesit,  he  who  is 
lame;  pi.  nag  quanukesitcheg,  the  lame 
(quinnukquesukekeshkhoowae  doers,  a  lame 
creature  (animal),  C. ).  kehkechau,  he 
halts,  Gen.  32,  31 ;  suppos.  part.  pi.  nag 
kehkechwhutcheg,  they  who  halt,  weh- 
wepetu,  he  is  lame,  is  a  cripple  (from 
birth,  Acts  3,  2;  14,  8).  ncochinmvesu 
[an.  from  noochumwi,  it  is  weak],  he  is 
weak,  impotent,  lame,  etc.:  ncoelmm- 
wesu  lit  umeseetit,  he  is  ‘impotent  in  his 
feet’,  Acts  14,  8;  he  is  lame,  2  Sam. 
4,  4;  noh  neochumwesit,  he  that  is  lame, 
Prov.  26,  7. 

lamprey,  qunnamaug,  pi.  -\-snek,  ‘lam- 
pries,  the  first  that  come  in  the  spring 


lamprey — continued, 
into  the  fresh  rivers’,  R.  W.,  but  qun- 
nammag,  bass,  C. 

land,  ohke;  wunohke,  good  land,  Dent. 
3,  25  (auke,  sanaukamuck,  earth  or  land; 
nittauke,  nissaivndwkamuck,  my  land; 
imskilukanwek,  new  ground,  R.  IV. ). 
See  earth;  field. 

landing-place,  niindlikomuk,  a  landing 
place  ( ‘ shore ’ ,  Acts 27,  39):  ketalihanne 
unnunohkomuk,  the  sea  shore,  Jer.  47,  7. 
From  nunae,  dry;  ohke,  land;  komuk, 
inclosed  place  (?). 

language,  unnontcoivaonk:  unnontcowaog 
Canaane  unnontanvaonk,  they  speak  the 
language  of  Canaan,  Is.  1'9, 18  (Indianne 
Unnontcoivaonk,  the  Indian  language,  C. ; 
awanagusantowosh,  speak  (thou)  Eng¬ 
lish;  eencintowash  (=unnontcoash‘t), 
speak  Indian,  R.IV. ).  penanmntcoivaonk 
[ pencoe-ininantooicaonk ],  a  strange  lan¬ 
guage  (nippenowdntawem,  I  am  of  an¬ 
other  language;  penowantoivawhett&ock, 
they  are  of  a  divers  language,  R.  IV.). 
siogkontoowaonk,  a  hard  language. 
hettanronk,  language,  speech  peculiar 
to  a  nation  [vbl.  n.  from  hettuog,  they 
talk  with  one  another]. 

lasciviousness,  kogkeusquawonk  [kogkei, 
mad,  squa,  woman:  ‘nymphomania’]. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


286 


last,  tnajish,  machish,  at  the  last,  lastly: 
majish  ne  kesukok,  in  the  last  day;  og- 
guhsemese  maji»li,  ‘yet  a  little  while’  (to 
the  end),  John  13,  33;  peissit  majish- 
yeurn,  ‘there  remaineth  the  youngest’,  I 
1  Sam.  16,  11;  from  mahche  (see  have, 
aux.);  it  denotes  time  future,  maurna- 
chvih  [redupl.  from  machish'],  the  very 
last,  at  last:  nen  maumachish,  I  am  the 
last  (ut  mom&ush  ne  kesukok,  at  the  last 
day,  John  Cotton;  momachisheue,  lastly, 
C. ;  momachisheyeue,  Danf. ). 

lasting,  michemohtau,  machemohtau  (it  is 
for  ever),  michemohtae,  machemohtae, 
everlasting  [ micheme ,  forever,  and  oh- 
tau\\  suppos.  michemohtag  ( micheme 
ohtag,  Ps.  145, 13),  that  which  is  (when 
it  is)  everlasting. 

late  (in  the  day  or  night),  cheke,  checheke 
(slow),  wussdume  tdtsha,  it  is  too  late, 
R.  W. 

lately,  pas wu  ( paswese ,  soon,  in  a  short 
time,  C. ;  paswit,  nateah,  kumma,  lately,  \ 
ibid.. )  [pasicco,  pasoooo,  it  is  near] .  kut- 
tumma,  kittumma,  very  lately,  El.  Gr. 
21  (kittummdy or -m&ish,  evennow;  kittu- 
myai  tokean,  as  soon  as  I  wake,  R.  W.). 

laugh,  ahanu,  hahanu  ( ahdnu ,  R.  W.; 
ahhdnu,  C. ),  he  laughs;  ahanuog,  they 
laugh;  kenaau  hahaneogish,  ye  who 
laugh  ( ahdnuock ,  they  laugh;  tawhitch 
ahdneanf  why  do  you  (dost  thou)  laugh? 
R.  IV.);  vbl.  n.  a hanuonk,  hahanuonk 
( ahluxrdionk ,  C. ),  laughing,  laughter 
( winne  tahansha  or  ahanshaonk,  a  pleas¬ 
ant  laughter,  C. ) .  ahanehtam,  he  laughs 
at  (it);  ahanehtauau,  he  laughs  at 
(him). 

law,  naumatuonk,  pi.  -ongash.  See  com¬ 
mandment.. 

lazy,  segenam,  intens.  sasegenam,  sesege- 
neam,  he  is  habitually  or  by  disposition 
idle,  he  is  slothful  (segeneamde  missinnin, 
lazy  folks,  C. ).  ndnnogquesue,  lazily, 
C.  See  slothful. 

lead(n.,  a  metal),  mohmutlahtag,  mdmut- 
taltag.  In  Num.  31,  22  the  same  word 
is  used  for  tin,  but  perhaps  not  else¬ 
where. 

lead  (v. ),  sagkornpanau,  sagkompagunau, 
he  leads  (them) ;  suffix  an . wussagkompa- 
ndpoh,  he  did  lead  them;  ahque  sagkom- 
pagunaiinnean  ( sagkompaginnean ,  Luke 
11, 4;  sagkornpaginninnean,  Ind.  Prim. ), 


lead  (v. ) — continued. 

do  not  lead  us,  ‘ lead  us  not’,  Matt.  6, 13; 
suppos.  part,  noh  sagkompagunont,  one 
who  leading;  n.  agent,  sagkompagunu- 
aen-in,  a  leader,  =  sagkompaginnuen,  Is. 
54,  4  (nus-sogkompaginnuwam,  I  lead,  I 
rule,  C. ).  See  sachem,  negonshaeu,  lie 
leads,  is  in  advance  [from  negative,  first; 
see  run] ;  n.  agent,  negonshaen-in,  a 
leader  (but  not  implying  authority  or 
command),  rnonchanau,  he  leads 
(them),  shows  the  way  as  a  guide. 
sampwushanau,  sampshonau,  he  leads 
(them),  makes  them  go  right;  n.  agent. 
sampwoshassaen,  a  leader,  a  guide;  sup¬ 
pos.  noh  sampshanont;  pi.  neg  samp- 
slianoncheg,  they  who  (may)  lead  or 
guide,  vohtomp,  in  compound  words, 
one  who  leads  or  directs;  nohtompeantog 
[from  peantog,  when  he  prays],  a  leader 
in  prayer,  a  minister;  nohtompuhpe- 
quodt,  one  who  leads  in  music,  ‘chief 
musician’,  etc. 

leaf,  umnnepog,  pi.  —  quash  (wunntpog, 
R.  IV. ;  wunnepog,  C. ;  Del.  wunipach, 
Hkw. ) ,  from  umnne,  beautiful,  good,  and 
the  suppos.  of  a  verb  which  is  nearly 
related  to  or  identical  with  neepau,  it 
rises  up,  stands  erect.  Cf.  nepeunk,  a 
bush;  nepun,  summer, 
league,  wunnmwaonk .  See  covenant, 
lean  (adj.) ,  dnomrussu,  he  is  lean  ( nanow - 
wussu,  R.  IV.;  onaummue,  C. );  ianau- 
vmssu,  Gen.  41,  3;  atveeyausee  wees  pish 
dnauwusseumco,  ‘  the  fatness  of  his  flesh 
shall  wax  lean’,  Is.  17,  4. 
lean  on,  ompatussin,  he  leans  on  (it);  pi. 
ompatussinuog,  they  lean  on;  suppos. 
ompatussuk,  when  he  leans,  quenuhtau, 
he  leans,  rests,  or  supports  (one  thing 
on  another).  See  Amos  5,  19;  cf. 
quenohtag,  a  foundation, 
leap,  queshau,  quehshau,  he  leaps  or 
jumps  ( chdnsops  quwshau,  a  grasshop¬ 
per  jumps;  nuk-queeshshom,  I  leaped, 
C.);  freq.  quequeshau,  he  goes  leaping, 
continues  to  leap;  queshadtam,  queishon- 
tam,  he  leaps  over  (it), 
learn,  netuhtau, nehtuhtau,  he  learns  (it), 
or  v.  i.  nun-netuhtou-un,  i  learned  it 
( nunniehtuhtou ,  I  learn,  C. );  vbl.  n. 
act.  netuhtauonk,  learning  (kodnehtdh- 
Idonk,  C. ). 


trumbull] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


287 


leave  (to  take),  ironkomau,  he  embraces 
(him).  See  embrace;  farewell, 
leave  (v.  i.),  amaeu,  he  leaves,  departs. 
See  depart. 

leave  (v.  t. ),  nukkonau,  he  leaves,  for¬ 
sakes,  abandons  ( him ) ;  suppos.  nukko- 
nont,  when  he  leaves,  when  leaving 
(mat  kunnickansh,  I  will  not  leave  you) ; 
recipr.  nukkdnittuog,  they  leave  or  for¬ 
sake  one  another.  See  forsake.  V.  i. 
orinan.  obj.  nukkodtum  ( nukodtum ,  C. ), 
he  leaves  ( nick&ttash ,  leave  thou,  de¬ 
part;  nickattammoke,  leave  ye,  R.  W. ; 
ne  teag  nogkodlumuk,  a  thing  left,  C. ). 
See  remain. 

leave  off,  ahque,  he  leaves  off,  desists, 
refrains  from. 

left  (participle),  nakkodtumuk;  see  leave. 
sequnau,  sequnneau,  he  is  left,  re¬ 
mains;  suppos.  part,  noh  sequnit,  he 
who  remains;  pi.  nag  sequnutcheg  ( nag 
asqunutcheg,  Neh.  1,  3),  they  who  are 
left,  ‘the  remnant  that  are  left’;  sup¬ 
pos.  part.  inan.  ne  sequnuk,  ne  ashqunuk, 
that  which  is  left;  vbl.  n.  pass,  sequnit- 
tuonk,  being  left,  a  remainder,  that 
which  is  left;  see  remain,  seqidtah- 
whau,  asquttahwh.au,  ushquehtauwhau, 
etc.,  he  is  left  or  remains  (with  regard 
to  others  who  are  not  left  or  are  gone) : 
matta  pasuk  usquehtahwhdun,  not  one  is 
left;  suppos.  part.  pi.  nag  sequttahwhut- 
cheg  ( asqut -,  ashqueht-,  etc.),  they  who 
remain;  suppos.  part.  inan.  ne  sequtted- 
muk,  what  is  left;  pi.  nish  sequttedmuk- 
ish,  the  remnants,  the  leavings, 
left  hand,  mena.dchu,  the  left  hand;  urn- 
menadchu,  his  left  hand  ( mendtche  men- 
itcheg,  the  left  hand,  C.;  nummatchu, 
left-handed,  C. ;  yo  nmunnatch,  to  the 
left  hand,  R.  W. ) ;  menadchue,  left- 
handed;  menadchee  wusseet,  his  left  foot; 
menadcheinniyeu,  on  the  left,  to  the  left. 
See  hand. 

leg,  rnuhkont  ( mohkont ,  R.  W.),  a  leg;  pi. 

-{-ash;  ivuhkont,  his  leg. 
leggings  (?),  muttasash,  metasash,  ‘san¬ 
dals’,  Mark 6,  9;  ‘greaves’,  1  Sam.  17,  6; 
‘hosen’,  Dan.  3,  21  ( muttassash ,  stock¬ 
ings,  C.).  See  stockings, 
lend.  See  borrow. 

length,  ne  sdhteag,  its  length  (extent  of 
material  object  from  end  to  end);  aeli- 
taeu  nesahteag,  on  the  two  ends,  Ex.  25, 


length — continued. 

19,  i.  e.  on  both  ends  or  sides  of  its 
length,  on  both  ends,  longways;  vbl.  n. 
sohteaonk,  (abstract  )  length.  From  soft, 
the  particle  signifying  forth  from:  soh- 
adt,  to  so  far  forth.  Cf.  ndadt,  afar  off, 
to  a  distance.  See  measures  of  length, 
lest,  ishkont  \=asequnit,  ushqunit,  there 
remains,  is  left  (?) ;  see  left], 
let  down,  nmkemao,  it  is  let  down;  nm- 
kompanau,  he  let  (him)  down,  low¬ 
ered  (him)  as  by  a  rope;  punnompanau 
ut  manootat,  he  let  (him)  down  in  a 
basket;  nun-nookompanit,  Iwasletdown; 
suffix  an.  wun-naikompan-uh,  she  let 
them  down  (by  a  cord),  Josh.  2,  15; 
ncoMnum,  he  lowers  (it),  takes  (it) 
down. 

let  me,  let  us  “may  be  expressed  by 
adding  this  word,  pd,  unto  the  indica¬ 
tive  mode,  as  pdnoowaantam,  let  me  be 
wise”,  El.  Gr.  25  ( pd-nooivaeh ,  let  me 
know  him,  C. );  but  Eliot  very  rarely 
employed  this  particle  to  form  the  1st 
pers.  pi.  of  the  imperative,  which  in 
all  transitive  verbs  was  regularly  formed 
in  -ontuh  or  -i Utah:  ayeuontuh  manaon- 
skog ,  let  us  make  bricks,  Gen.  11,  3; 
hah  nushontuh,  come,  let  us  kill  him, 
Matt.  21,  38;  Mark  12,  7;  ayimuttah 
wetuomash,  let  us  build  houses,  Mark 
9,  5  ( =ayimontuh ,  Gen.  11,  4);  ontuh, 
let  us  go  to;  v.  i.  monclietuh,  let  us  go. 
Roger  Williams  gives  nearly  the  same 
form  for  active  verbs  and  for  subjective 
verbs,  -etuck  or  -ituck,  as  cowwetuck,  let 
us  sleep;  toketuck,  let  us  wake;  metesit- 
tuck,  let  us  go  eat;  petiteatita,  let  us  go 
in;  wussauhemutta,  let  us  go  forth;  nick- 
attamidta,  let  us  depart;  mecdnntitea,  let 
us  fight;  aquetuck,  let  us  refrain,  etc. 
liberate.  See  deliver, 
lice,  yeuhquog,  yeukooog. 
lick,  nmsquodtam,  ncosquatam,  he  licks 
(it);  freq.  naonmsquodtamivog puppissai, 
they  lick  the  dust. 

lie,  pannooivau,  he  lies,  deceives  (noh 
pannmau,  C. );  ahque  pannoowah,  do- 
not  lie  to  me;  matta  nup-panncowam, 
I  lie  not;  vbl.  n.  act.  pannoowaonk, 
lying;  n.  agent,  panncowaen-in,  a  liar 
(suppos.  pi.  pupannouwdchick,  liars, 
R.  IV.  117).  From  panne-noowau,  he 
speaks  wrongly. 


288 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


lie  down,  seepsin,  sepsin,  he  lies  down;  I 
nus-seepsin,  I  lie  down;  sepsish,  lie  | 
down;  from  sepe,  long,  extended,  and 
t issu,  verb  of  an.  activity:  he  makes 
himself  long,  sesepdeu,  he  lies  stretched 
at  full  length,  he  stretches  himself; 
freq.  from  sepe,  (it  is)  long,  extended, 
lie  with.  See  couple, 
life,  keteaonk,  living,  the  life  principle, 
life;  pomantamooonk,  living,  life  as  a 
state  of  being;  pometuonk,  a  lifetime, 
a  generation.  See  live, 
lift  up,  ushpunum,  waapinum,  he  holds 
or  lifts  (it)  up;  see  hold,  tahshinum, 
he  lifts  (it)  up,  he  raises  (it);  nut- 
tahshinum  nunnutcheg,  I  lift  up  my 
hand;  tahshinash  (or  tohshinush)  kenut- 
cheg ,  lift  up  thy  hand;  suppos.  tah- 
shinuk,  when  he  lifts  it  up;  inan.  subj. 
but  ah  iahshemco,  thy  heart  is  lifted  up. 
tahshinau,  he  lifts  (him)  up,  raises 
(him);  tahshin  kuhhog,  lift  up  thyself; 
nut-tahshin,  I  lift  up  myself, 
light  (adj.),  nunkinnu,  nonkaneu,  he  is 
light  ( kun-nauki ,  you  are  light,  =  kiiri- 
naukon,  ndukon,  light,  R.  W.;  nonkke 
wednun,  a  light  burden,  C. ) ;  anue 
nunkinwog  onk,  they  are  lighter  than, 
Ps.  62,9;  nunkomp,  a  young  man 
[■ nunkane-omp ],  dimin.  nunkompaes 
( n&nkup  or  nonkumpaes,  a  boy,  C. ). 
light  (n. ),  wequai  ( wequdi ,  R.  W. ;  tvequd- 
shim  (dimin.?),  moonlight,  ibid.),  it  is 
light;  m6  wequai,  there  was  light;  im- 
perat.  3dpers.  sing,  wequaiaj,  let  there  be 
light,  wompag,  (when  it  is)  light,  bright 
light,  daylight;  opposed  to  pohkenahtu, 
in  darkness  [suppos.  inan.  from  wompieu, 
it  is  white  or  bright] ;  see  day.  wequd- 
nanteg  ( wequanantig ,  R.  W. ;  wasdquond- 
netwk,  C. ),  a  light,  candle,  lamp,  torch, 
etc.  ( wekinan ,  a  light  fire,  R.  W.;  we- 
qudndnetuckonnauhtuk,  candlestick,  C. ). 
lightning,  ukkutshaumun  (it  lightens), 
lightning;  infin.  as  noun  kutshamundt, 
lightning,  Zech.  9, 14  (cutshdusha,  RAY. ; 
Abn.  sa’sanbigSak,  l’eelair,  Rasies), 
like,  ogque,  agque,  ivutogque  ( ogqueu ), 
like  to,  resembling;  ne  ogquP,  like  it  or 
like  that.  See  liken;  likeness,  unneu, 
it  is  of  the  same  kind  as,  it  is  of  like 
kind  (see  kind,  n.);  suppos.  aunak, 
dunag,  dncig,  etc.,  (when  it  is)  of  the 
kind,  (when  it  is)  like,  neane,  neyanne 


like — continued. 

(as,  El.  Gr. ),  ne  unneu,  that  kind  of, 
such  as  that,  in  that  manner,  so,  such, 
like;  neyanneyeu,  neyanneu,  it  is  like,  he 
is  like;  suppos.  neaunak,  ne  dunag, 
(when  it  is)  like  that,  in  the  likeness  of, 

‘  according  to  ’ :  n’naj  neaunak  unnauma- 
tuonk,  let  it  be  done  according  to  the 
law,  Ezra  10,  3;  nedunag  yea  muttaok, 
‘the  fashion  of  this  world’,  1  Cor.  7,  31; 
neaunak  menutcheg,  in  the  form  of  (like) 
a  hand,  Ezek.  10,  8;  with  verb  of  an. 
activity  neanussn,  neyanussu,  he  is  of  the 
kind  of  or  is  like  to,  he  is  such  as  [ne- 
unneu-ussu'} ;  suppos.  neanussit,  neydnu- 
sit,  (when  he  is)  of  the  kind  of  or  is 
like  to:  neanussit  .  .  .  n’nih,  as  is  .  .  . 
so  is;  neanussit  uvskeionip,  ‘in  the  like¬ 
ness  of  man’,  Phil.  2,  7  ( neahanissit 
wosketomp,  such  a  man;  neahhenissit, 
such  a  one,  C.) .  See  so;  likeness;  such. 
netatuppe,  that  which  is  equal  to  or  alike 
(like,  so,  El.  Gr.  22);  neane  .  .  .  neta¬ 
tuppe,  like  .  .  .  so  (netdtup,  it  is  all  one, 
R.  W.);  from  ne  and  tatuppeu,  it  is 
equal;  see  equal,  tatuppeyeuoo,  it  is 
like,  i.  e.  it  is  equal  to  or  the  same  as; 
pi.  tatuppeyeuoaog,  they  are  alike,  oi ta¬ 
luk,  as,  like:  onatuh  .  .  .  netatuppe,  as 
...  so  (used  only  with  the  suppos. 
mood,  for  unne  toh,  as  though,  as  when, 
as  if). 

liken,  ogquontam ,  he  likens  or  compares 
(it)  to  (it)  ( ogquantam ,  he  supposes, 
C. ).  ogquanumau,  he  likens  (him)  to 
(him  or  it);  ahque  ogqudnum,  ‘  count 
me  not’,  do  not  compare  me  with  or 
liken  me  to,  1  Sam.  1, 16;  howan  ogqua- 
numdg  God-ut,  to  whom  will  you  liken 
God?  Is.  40,  18;  sometimes  in  the 
causat.  an.  form  nut-ogqueheonau,  I 
compare  (them)  to,  make  (them)  like; 
elsewhere  ogqunneau,  he  compares  or 
likens  (him)  to;  vbl.  n.  ogquenneunk, 
likening, alikeness.  ogquenneunkqussu, 
he  is  like,  resembles,  he  is  made  like  to 
(by  life  or  action  [usaw]  );  inan.  ogquen- 
neunkquodt,  (when)  it  is  like,  is  likened 
to;  sometimes  as  n.,  a  likeness  or  com¬ 
parison. 

likeness,  ogquenneunk,  agqueneunk,  like¬ 
ness,  resemblance;  or  suppos.  form  og- 
quenneunkquodt,  agqueneunkquok,  when 
(it)  is  like,  neanussit  (when  he  is  like), 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


289 


likeness — continued. 

in  the  likeness  of.  unnussuonk,  a  like¬ 
ness  (of  person  to  person),  resemblance: 
ut  nehewonche  wuttinnussuonganit,  ‘in 
his  own  image’,  Gen.  1,  27;  wuttinnus- 
suonk,  his  form,  appearance,  Is.  52,  14 
[vbl.  n.  from  unni  and  ussu] .  See  like, 
line.  See  mark. 

lineage,  wutontseonk.  See  descent, 
linen,  hashabponak,  ‘linen  cloth’;  wane- 
gik  hashponak,  ‘fine  linen’.  See  flax, 
“lion”,  qurinonoo.  ‘‘For  beasts,  there  are 
some  bears,  and  they  say  lions  also;  for 
they  have  been  seen  at  Cape  Anne”, 
N.  E.  Plantation,  ch.  xii.  Cf.  quoh-  ■ 
qunonou,  ‘a  greyhound’;  quanunon,  a 
hawk.  Probably  the  ‘catamount’  or 
‘ panther  ’ . 

lip,  mussissittcon  (missZcstcon,  C. ),  pi.  -\-ash;  j 
wussissetamash,  his  lips, 
liquid.  See  soft, 
lisping,  sekontarwau,  C.  (?). 
little,  pewe,  peawe,  C.,  for peau,  it  is  little 
or  small*;  more  commonly  (dimin. )  i 
jxasin,  (it  is)  a  little  thing;  suppos.  inan. 
peasik,  peydsik,  peesik,  (when  it  is)  little: 
anue  peasik  onk  ne  moteag,  less  than  ; 
nothing;  double  dimin .jpeamesan,  a  very  \ 
little  thing;  otherwise papedsin,  suppos. 
papeasik,  (when  it  is)  a  very  small 
thing,  a  very  little  thing;  an.  papeasu,  '■ 
suppos.  papeasit,  papeissit,  (he  is)  very  ' 
little;  and peississu,  suppos.  peississit,  by 
redupl.  papeississit.  See  infant,  ogguhse,  j 
little  in  quantity  or  amount  ( ogkosse,  C. ) ; 
pi.  an.  oggulisnog,  few  (persons);  inan. 
oggusinash,  few  (things) ;  dimin.  ogguh- 
semese  nippe,  a  very  little  water.  See 
few. 

[*  Marginal  note.— In  the  Dahomey  lan¬ 
guage  “the  addition  of  pee-wee,  or  small,  is 
sufficient  to  express  an  almost  entirely  dif¬ 
ferent  meaning  in  our  idiom;  thus  toh,  a  city; 
toh  pee-wee,  a  village;  hoh,  a  house;  hohpee-wee , 
a  hut”  (Forbes's  Dahomey, 1, 219).  See  Pee-wee 
in  Bartlett’s  Dictionary  of  Americanisms.] 

live,  pomantam,  he  lives;  nuppoman  tam, 

I  live;  suppos.  noli  pamontog,  he  who 
lives;  pi.  neg  pamontogig,  the  living, 
they  who  live;  pres.  part,  pamonta- 
mutche,  living,  alivej  adj .  pomantamwae, 
living;  vbl.  n .pom.antam.6onk,  life  (am’- 
paumpmauntam,  I  am  very  well;'  as- 
paumpmaunlam  sachim,  how  does  the 
sachem?  R.  W. ;  asq  nuppomantam,  I  am 
B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 - 19 


live — continued. 

yet  alive,  C. ).  The  form  of  this  verb  in 
-antam,  denoting  mental  activity,  with 
the  prefixed  particle  of  indefinite  mo¬ 
tion  or  activity,  pit,  seems  to  mark  as  its 
primary  signification  the  power  of  men¬ 
tal  action,  or,  rather,  the  continued  ex¬ 
ercise  of  that  power;  cogitat,  ergo  est. 
Heckewelder  gives,  from  the  Unarm,  ili 
k’lehelleya ?  are  you  yet  alive?;  ili  n'pa- 
pomissi,  I  am  yet  able  to  walk  about; 
and  states  that  “ pommauchsin  implies 
action  or  motion  connected  with  life, 
which  is  still  the  principal  idea”  (Cor- 
resp.  392). 

liver,  mushqun;  wushqun,  wusqun,  his 
liver. 

living,  keteae,  having  life;  vbl.  ketea- 
onk,  living,  the  life  principle,  vitality, 
life:  uk-keteaonk  weyaus  ohteau  tvusque- 
heonganit,  ‘  the  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the 
blood’,  Lev.  17, 11.  keteau,  he  is  well, 
he  is  recovered  from  sickness,  he  is  in 
life  and  health;  causat.  keteahheau,  he 
makes  (him)  live, 
lo!  behold!  kusseh! 

lobster,  ashaunt,  pi.  -\-teaug,  R.  W. ;  Peq. 
muschundaug  (pi.?),  Stiles;  au  so  haini- 
auc  hoc,  Wood, 
log,  qutioiv,  a  log,  C. 
long,  qunni  (it  is)  long;  qunni  onk,  longer 
than  ( anVqunnag  [for  anue  qunnag  ?] 
longer,  longest,  C. ) .  sepe  \_sepeu~\  (it  is 
extended,  stretched  out),  long,  extend¬ 
ed  through  time  or  space,  ‘a  good 
while’,  Gen.  46,  29:  sepe  mahche,  long 
after,  Josh.  23,  1;  hence,  sepu,  sep,  a 
river;  sepagenum,  he  spreads  or  stretches 
(it)  out;  sep&ghunk,  (sepdkeliig,  R.  W. ) 
a  sail;  sepepomantam ,  he  lives  long,  he 
is  long  lived,  ‘stricken  in  years’, 
Gen.  24,  1;  sepsin  [sepe-ussin],  he  lies 
down,  makes  himself  long,  stretches 
out,  etc. 

long  as,  tohsahke  (to  sahke,  C. );  time  fu¬ 
ture,  ndpajeh,  so  long  as,  until;  nisalike; 
ash:  ash  pamantam,  while  I  live, 
long  time  ago,  ndadt,  noddt  it,  nmadt 
(when  it  is  far  off  ),  ‘  in  old  time’,  Josh. 
24,  2;  nvadtuck,  a  long  time,  El.  Gr.  21. 
newutch  cheku,  ‘after  a  long  time’, 
Matt.  25,  19.  See  far. 
look,  nuhquaeu,  he  looks  or  directs 
the  eye  (with  reference  to  the  act  of 


290 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin*  25- 


look — continued. 

looking  and  without  regard  to  the  ob¬ 
ject  or  purpose);  nuttinuhquain  nogque, 

I  look  toward  (it) ;  unuhqvAeu,  ahaomk- 
queu,  ‘he  looks  this  way  and  that  way’, 
Es.  2, 12;  unnuhquash  ketahhaniyeu,  look 
thou  toward  the  sea,  1  K.  18,  43;  from 
nogque,  toward  (?);  cf.  ncohqueu,  ncohque  \ 
(no  uhquaeu) ,  sofar  as;  na  naohque,  so  far 
distant  ( nencohque ,  so,  C. );  ancohque, 
so,  thus;  wehque  (weque,  R.  W.),  so  far 
as,  etc.  The  compounds  are  numer¬ 
ous;  as,  ompamuhquaeu,  he  looks  back¬ 
ward  or  behind;  sohhcoquaeu,  sonkco- 
quaeu,  he  looks  forth;  ushpuhquaeu, 
spuhqudeu,  he  looks  upward  (pdnikqud, 
squint-eyed,  C.,  i.  e.  panne-uhquaeu,  he 
looks  wrong  or  astray ) . 

nadtauwompu,  natawompu,  he  looks 
(in  order  to  see  something);  neg  nad- 
tauwompuog,  they  look ;  nadtauwompip, 

I  looked;  v.  t.  inan.  nadtauwbmpattam, 
he  looks  for  (it);  an.  nadtauwompamau, 
he  looks  for  (him).  The  primary  verb 
woihpu  or  6mpu  is  not  found  by  itself  in 
Eliot,  but  is  preserved  in  other  Algon- 
quian  dialects;  cf.  Chip,  oowahbunden, 
he  seeth  it,  John  11,  9;  nin  ge  ivdhbah- 
mcih,  I  have  seen  him,  John  1,  34;  Cree 
wdppu,  he  sees;  ne  wdppamou,  I  see 
him,  Howse  43,  53.  womdmpu,  he 
looks  down;  vjomompish,  womdmpsh, 
look  thou  down,  wussampu,  vmssompu, 
he  looks  out  from  (a  window  or  other 
opening):  ncosamp  nukkenogkeneganit,  I 
look  out  from  my  window  ( umssaum - 
patammin,  to  view  or  look  about;  wus- 
saumpatdmoonck,  a  prospect,  R.  W. ). 
pcosampu,  posampu,  he  looks  into  or  in : 
pmsampit,  when  he  looked  in  (to  the 
tomb),  poonampu,  he  looks  away;  an. 
poonampcimau,  he  looks  away  from 
(him);  pconamparneh,  look  thou  away 
from  me,  Is.  22,  4. 

moneau,  he  looks  on  or  at  (him); 
suppos.  part,  moneauont  mittamwussis- 
soh,  (when)  looking  at  a  woman;  mon- 
neah,  look  on  me;  pass,  infin.'  wunnetu 
en  moneauwoneat,  beautiful  to  look 
upon,  Gen.  26,  7;  intens.  monunneau, 
he  looks  at  with  attention,  he  regards 
attentively  (him) ;  inan.  rnoneam,  he 
looks  on  or  at  (it);  intens.  monunaum 
ohke(Ge n.  6,  12),  moninneam  ohke  (Ps. 


look — continued. 

104,  32),  he  looked  on  the  earth;  mone- 
aumunat,  monunneaumunat  (infin.  as 
noun),  sight,  appearance,  looks. 

natinneham,  he  looks  for  (it);  natin- 
neawhau,  he  looks  for  (him).  See 
search  for. 

looking-glass,  pepenautchitchunkquonk, 
pepenawutchitchuhquok,  a  mirror  (pebe- 
nochicha  uqudnick  and  kaukakineamuck, 
a  looking-glass,  R.  W. ) .  Exp.  May  hew 
(MS)  gives  an  Indian  word  of  61  letters 
signifying  ‘our  well-skilled  looking- 
glass  makers’ :  nup-pahk-nuh-t6-pe-pe- 
nau  -umt-  chut  -  chuh-qu6-ka-neh-cha-n eh- 
c.ha-e-nin-nu-mun-n6-ndk  ( ! ) . 
looks  (appearance),  nogqiissuonk,  appear¬ 
ance  or  looks;  nunnogquis,  I  appear, 
C.  Anukquok,  noquok:  onatuh  noquok 
ncoteau,  ‘as  the  appearance  of  fire’, 
Num.  9,  15,  =nogquodt,  v.  16;  u-oskeche 
nokquok,  (its)  outward  appearance,  2 
Cor.  10,  7.  unnussuonk:  woskeche  unnus- 
suonk,  (his)  outward  appearance,  1 
Sam.  16,  7.  See  look;  like;  likeness, 
loose,  ompeu,  ompu,  he  is  free,  loose, 
unbound;  infin.  ompenat,  to  be  free, 
to  be  unbound,  1  Cor.  7,  27;  suppos. 
ompean,  if  thou  be  free;  v.  t.  an.  om - 
peneau,  ompinneau,  he  looses,  unbinds, 
frees  (him);  wut-ompinneuh,  he  loosed 
him;  ompinneuk,  loose  ye  him;  inan. 
ompenum,  ompeneum,  he  looses,  unbinds 
(it)  ( aumpaniimmin ,  to  untie  a  knot; 
aumpanish,  untie  this,  R.  W. ) ;  ompene- 
ausu,  he  is  loosed,  set  free,  unbound 
[ ompeneau-ussu ,  denoting  the  act  of 
loosing  or  un binding] .  ponanau,  he  lets 
(him)  loose,  sets  (him)  free:  pish  pona¬ 
nau  psuksesoh,  he  shall  let  loose  the 
bird,  Lev.  14,  7.  See  scatter, 
lose,  wanneheau,  he  loses  (him);  suppos. 
noh  wanneheont,  he  who  loses  (an. 
obj.).  wannehteau,  wanteau,  he  loses 
(it);  suppos.  wanteunk,  wannehteunk,  if 
he  loses  (it);  pass.  part,  ne  wanteomuk, 
ne  wanteamuk,  that  which  is  lost.  Caus. 
from  wanne  (there  is  not),  destitute  of, 
without. 

lot  (hazard),  tanohtoadtuonk,  determina¬ 
tion  by  lot,  a  casting  of  lots, 
loud,  mishontcowaeu ,  mishontmaeu  (there 
is  a  loud  noise,  lit.  a  great  voice) ;  mish- 
antcoivash,  shout,  cry  out,  speak  loud. 


TRUMBVLLj 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


201 


loud — continued. 

(mi slut  unto wash,  speak  out,  R.  W. );  as 
adj.  mishontccnvae,  loud;  nano  mashan - 
tooicagk  match  eke  (?),  ‘it  waxed  louder 
and  louder’,  Ex.  19,  19.  See  noise, 
love,  womantam,  he  loves,  he  loves 
(it);  ncD-womantam,  I  love;  womanta- 
mook  wanegik,  love  ye  that  which  is 
good;  koo-xuomantam-umwoo,  ye  love 
(noovtomontam  wussukhonk,  I  love  a 
book,  C. ).  An.  womonau,  he  loves  (him 
or  her) ;  noowomon,  I  love  (ncowomon,  or 
womos,  miitamwus,  I  love  a  woman); 
kancomomli  ( kcovomonntish ,  C.;  cowam- 
maunsh,  R.  W. ),  I  love  thee  ( cowam - 
rnaunUck,  he  loves  you,  R.  W. ) ;  vbl.  n. 
act.  womondonk,  a  loving,  love  (referred 
to  the  lover) ;  pass,  and  recipr.  womo- 
nittuonk,  being  loved  or  loving  one  an¬ 
other,  love  ( referred  to  the  loved  object) 
or  mutual  love.  Recipr.  an.  womonitlit- 
teuh,  let  us  love  one  another;  womonit- 
tegk  (wdmontek,  E.  M. ),  love  ye  one  an¬ 
other  (munnehk-wamontcopaneg ,  they 


love — continued. 

strongly  ( menuhki )  loved  one  another, 
E.  M.).  An.  act.  womonaum,  heactslov- 
ingly,  is  kind  or  loving  ( tvomosinneat ,  to 
be  kind;  num-mahtche  womoaus,  I  have 
been  kind;  womoausinneat,  to  love,  0. ); 
vbl.  n.  womonau suon k,  love  in  exercise, 
kindness,  love  acting.  Duponceau,  in 
Notes  on  El.  Gr.,  x,  derives  this  verb, 
as  well  as  wunnanum,  he  blesses,  “from 
wunnegen,  good;  Delaware,  'ivuliechen,  it 
is  good  or  well  done.”  Perhaps  from 
wameantam,  he  thinks  all  or  wholly 
(of),  he  wholly  regards, 
low  (adj. ),  tiohqui,  tiuhque  [tiohqueu,  it  is], 
short,  low  (tiohquohque  wechumukko- 
muk,  a  low  barn,  C. ).  Bee  short, 
low  (adv. ),  woomiyeu  (it  is  down),  down¬ 
ward;  woomiyeu  woomiyeu,  very  low, 
Deut.  28,  43. 

lower,  nookinum,  he  lowers  (it),  lets 
it  down;  pass.  inan.  nmkemco,  it  is  let 
down  or  lowered;  nookeu,  he  descends, 
goes  down. 


m: 


mackerel,  waurwhunnekesdog  (pl.),R.W. 
[ wunne-aunekesuog ,  they  are  finely 
painted,  they  have  handsome  colors], 
mad,  kogkeau,  kogkei,  (he  is)  mad  ( kog - 
kewau,  John  10,  26;  kogkeae,  mad,  C.) ; 
n.  agent,  kogkeanin,  a  madman;  suppos. 
noli  kagkeadt,  he  who  is  mad ;  pi.  nag  kag- 
kedcheg,  kogkedcheg,  they  who  are  mad; 
vbl.  n.  kogkeaonk,  madness,  furor.  An. 
act.  kogeesu,  (he  acts)  mad;  he  is  mad 
in  action.  This  word  is  apparently 
derived  from  k’  progressive  by  redu¬ 
plication,  k’  k’  denoting  rapid  or  forci¬ 
ble  progression.  Cf.  Gr.  6 voo,  to  move 
with  rapid  motion,  to  rush,  to  rage,  or 
be  furious;  OvOii,  a  raging;  Lat.  furor; 
Gr.  (pepsdQcn ,  ferri.  kogkeusquaivonk, 
harlotry,  lasciviousness  [kogke-squa, 
woman-madness] ;  kogkeissippamooonk, 
drunkenness,  drink-madness,  etc. 
magistrate,  nananuwaen,  an  overseer, 
ruler,  magistrate  (pi.  nananuacheg,  mag¬ 
istrates,  Ind.  Laws;  nanauunnuaen-in, 
a  justice,  C. ;  neen-nanoumunnemun,  I 
oversee  it,  R.  W.).  See  keep;  over¬ 
seer;  ruler. 


maid,  nunksqua,  nunksq,  a  girl,  puella 
( nonkkishq ,  wisskisqua,  a  girl,  C. ;  Abn. 
naiikskSe,  dimin.  narikskSessis,  ‘fille, 
vierge’,  Rasies);  penomp  ( keegsquaw , 
kihtuckquaw,  R.  W.),  virgo.  See  girl; 
virgin;  woman. 

maimed,  noli  woskesit,  he  who  is  (sup¬ 
pos.)  maimed.  See  hurt. 

maize.  See  corn. 

make,  ayim,  ayum,  he  makes  (it); 
ayimwog,  they  made  ( nuttiyam ,  I  make; 
ayimunat,  to  make,  C. ) ;  an.  ayeuau 
ahlompeh,  he  made  a  bow  (but  ayim 
kduhquodtash,  he  made  arrows);  noli 
ayik,  he  who  makes  (it),  the  maker; 
tecigkutayimf  what  makest  thou?  kcxit- 
teau,  kesteau,  he  produces,  perfects, 
makes,  creates;  kesteauopnashaonk,  ‘he 
created  the  wind’,  Amos  4,  13;  kuk- 
kesteoh  name  teanteaqussinish,  ‘thou 
hast  created  all  things’,  Rev.  4,  11; 
elsewhere  kesteaunat  (kestoutmat,  to 
finish,  C.),  to  complete,  to  perfect; 
ne  kesteaumuk,  that  which  is  created; 
noh  kesteunk,  he  who  creates,  a  creator 
( nuk-keesteo ,  I  make;  nag  kesteoog,  they 


2^2 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


make — continued. 

make,  C.;  keesittin  keesuck,  he  made 
the  heavens;  wukkesittmnes  wdme,  he 
made  all;  wuckeeuitin  adke,  he  made  the 
earth,  R.  W.);  with  an.  obj.  kezheau,  he 
made  (him),  created  (him);  nuk-kezeh, 
Icreatehim;  nuk-kezheop,  nuk-kezheomp, 
I  did  create  (him);  suppos.  part,  kez- 
heunt,  creating,  when  he  creates.  Cf. 
keteau,  he  comes  to  life,  lives;  keteah- 
heau,  he  gives  life  to,  ‘quickeneth’, 
causes  to  live. 

male,  nompaas,  male,  a  male  (of’  the 
human  species),  nomposhim,  a  male 
animal  (other  than  man);  adj.  nompo- 
shimwe.  enewashim,  a  male  animal, 
R.  W.  “The  males  of  quadrupeds  are 
called  lenno  wechum,  by  contraction 
lennochum;  the  females,  ochque  wechum, 
by  contraction  ochquichum.  With  the 
winged  tribe  .  .  .  lenno  wehelle  for  the 
males,  and  ochquechelle  (with  a  little 
contraction)  for  the  female”,  Hkw.,  of 
the  Delaware,  Corresp.  368,  369.  nin- 
nu  (he  is  a  man),  male:  ukkezheuh  naho 
ninnuoh  kali  squa,  ‘he  created  them 
male  and  female’,  Mark  10,  6  (but  of 
animals  pish  nompaiyeuco  kali  sq  uaiyeuoo, 
they  shall  be  male  and  female,  Gen. 
6,  19).  See  man. 

man,  ninnu,  (he  is)  a  man;  pi.  ninnuog, 
men,  homines  ( nnin ,  nninnuog,  man, 
men,  R.  W. ;  Mull,  pausuck  enin,  or  ene- 
sMetomp,  one  man;  nemannauw,  (he 
is)  a  man,  Edw. ;  Narr.  yeuh,  Stiles, 
i.  e.  yeuoh,  this  one;  Del.  lenno, 
Hkw.  “ Lenno  in  the  Delaware  lan¬ 
guage  signifies  man,  and  so  does  lenape 
in  a  more  extended  [restricted?]  sense. 
In  the  name  of  the  Lenni  Lenape  it 
signifies  people;  but  the  word  lenni 
which  precedes  it  has  a  different  sig¬ 
nification,  and  means  original  (?)  and 
sometimes  common,  plain,  pure,  un¬ 
mixed”,  Hkw.,  Corresp.  412.  This 
lenni  is  the  same  word  written  nanwe 
by  Eliot  and  Cotton,  of  the  same  der¬ 
ivation  as  ninnu\  but  with  the  form  of 
the  adjective  [nivnu-ae,  n’mt-ae],  and 
signifies  any,  common,  normal.  See 
general).  This  word  ninnu  is  merely 
the  emphasized  demonstrative  of  the 
third,  and  through  it  of  the  first,  per¬ 
son,  noh,  neen,  n'un,  or  en’n,  and  with 


man — continued. 

the  verbal  form,  en’n-u,  lie  is  such  as 
this  one  or  as  I.  It  was  employed  only 
when  speaking  of  men  of  the  same  race, 
tribe,  or  nation  as  the  speaker,  or  those 
nearly  allied  to  it.  “General  [names] 
belonging  to  all  Natives,  as  Ninnuock, 
Ninnimissin&wock,  En  iskeetom pa  incog, 
which  signifies  Men,  Folk,  or  People,” 
R.  W.,  Introduction.  See  he;  kind 
(n.);  like;  this;  missin,  below. 

wosketomp  (vir,  a  brave),  a  man;  pi. 
-\-aog  ( skeetomp ,  pi.  -\-auog,  man,  men; 
eniskeetompahwog,  people,  R.  W. ;  Eliot 
has  wosketompaog  kah  nandnuacheg, 
‘both  high  and  low’,  Ps.  49,  2;  woske- 
lomp,wosk,  man;  nanwi  woske,  any  man; 
onkatog  woske,  another  man,  C.).  This, 
the  tribe  name  of  man,  appears  to  be 
compounded  of  woskeheau,  woskehteau, 
he  does  harm,  hurts,  destroys,  spoils 
(see  hurt)  and  omp,  man.  The  lat¬ 
ter  word  was  perhaps  obsolete  when 
Eliot  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  lan¬ 
guage,  but  it  was  retained  in  many  com¬ 
pound  words,  as  will  be  noticed  below. 
wosket-  may  be  nothing  more  than  the 
suppositive  form  of  umske,  young,  as  in 
wuskenin  ( wuskenin ,  C.;  wuskene,  RAY.) , 
a  young  man,  a  youth;  but  this  would 
restrict  the  application  of  wosketomp  to 
young  braves,  when,  as  is  evident,  it 
was  understood  to  have  a  more  ex¬ 
tended  use  by  Eliot  and  Williams.  The 
first-mentioned  etymology  gives  a  sig¬ 
nificance  to  the  tribe  name  correspond¬ 
ing  to  that  of  the  Pequots  (Paguatoog, 
the  destroyers)  and  Mohawks  (Mo o- 
whauog,  the  devourers). 

The  recurrence  of  the  word  omp  in 
compounds,  though  it  nowhere  ap¬ 
pears  standing  by  itself,  shows  it  to 
have  been  the  ancient  dialectic  or 
tribe  name  of  man,  appropriated,  in 
accordance  with  Indian  usage,  to  the 
favored  race,  whose  men  were  all  viri, 
freemen,  and  masters,  while  those  of 
other  tribes  were  contemptuously  re¬ 
garded  as  homines,  barbari,  captives 
and  slaves.  See  missin,  below'.  From 
this  root  come,  apparently,  nompaas 
[ n’omp-ddas ,  the  man  animal],  male; 
netomp  [ neetu-omp~\ ,  my  friend,  brother 
(Abn.  nidanbe,  Rasies);  mugwomp 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


293 


man — continued. 

[viogke-omp,  great  man],  a  captain; 
nunkomp  [nunkon-omp,  light  man],  a 
young  man,  not  yet  a  warrior;  penomp 
[ pencoe-omp ,  strange  to  man,  nescius 
viri  ?],  a  virgin;  ompategash  [ omp-ohta - 
gish,  belonging  or  appropriate  to  man], 
weapons,  used  in  the  Mass.  Psalter, 
John  18,  3,  where  Eliot  has  auivah- 
teaongasli;  alitomp  [ adt-omp ,  ahhut-omp, 
belonging  to  man],  a  bow;  ompeh- 
tedonk,  ompetedonk  [vbl.  n.  from  omp- 
ohteau,  it  belongs  to  man],  ‘an  old 
Indian  word’,  says  Cotton,  ‘that  sig¬ 
nifies  obedience  by  giving  any  [trib¬ 
ute]  ’ ;  tribute  or  royalty,  exacted  by 
and  paid  to  a  superior  (see  tribute). 
The  primary  signification  of  the  word  ! 
omp  is,  perhaps,  a  freeman,  independ¬ 
ent,  owing  no  fealty;  it  is  allied  to 
ompeu,  he  is  free,  unbound,  loose  (see 
loose),  ompenum ,  he  looses,  unbinds; 
but  these  last  may  he  derivatives  from 
the  common  root.  Heckewelder  states 
that  in  the  Delaware  the  names  of 
animals  ‘  ‘  walking  in  an  erect  post¬ 
ure”  terminate  regularly  in  ap  or  ape, 

‘  ‘  hence  lenape,  man  ’  ’  (Corresp.  411 ) .  A 
considerable  class  of  words  used  by 
Eliot  to  express  manner  of  standing 
and  change  of  posture  have  apparently 
a  similar  origin,  being  compounds  of 
a  verb  ornpav,  he  stands;  as  sampcokom- 
pau,  he  stood  upright;  quenikompau, 
he  stands  upon  (it);  ohpikkompau 
[=  ompik-ompau ?],  it  stands  upon,  etc. 
(see  stand).  It  may  be  that  to  stand 
erect  is  the  primary  and  to  be  free  a 
secondary  signification  of  the  same 
verb,  ompau  or  ompeu.  CL  Del.  nihilla- 
pewi,  ‘I  am  free,’  ‘my  own  master,’ 
Zeisb.;  Abn.  arenahbe (pi.  -\-ak),  homo; 
seenaiibe  (pi.  -\-ak),  vir,  Rasies;  kiganbe, 
‘jeune  homme  non  marie,’  ibid. ;  “les 
petits  animaux  dl’r.  [dicitur]  nanpekikS, 
sk8ekik8,  du  male  et  femelle”,  ibid.; 
Alg.  nape,  male;  aMsinape,  man,  Lahon- 
tan,  u,  294;  napema,  a  married  man,’ 
ibid. 

missin,  indef.  missinnin,  pi.  missinnin- 
nuog,  man,  homo,  or  rather  barbarus; 
in  the  pi.  people,  nations,  race,  etc. 
Applicable  only  to  men  of  other  tribes 
or  races  than  that  to  which  the  speaker 


man — continued. 

belongs;  hence,  used  to  signify  cap¬ 
tives,  tributaries,  etc.  From  missi  and 
ninnu,  corresponding  exactly  to  the  ol 
noWoi  of  the  Greek.  Roger  Williams 
has  ninni  missi ndwock  (=  named  missin- 
ntiog,  common  men),  ‘folk  or  peo¬ 
ple.’  missinnin  kali  puppinaskim,  man 
and  beast  (only  in  Gen.  6,  7) ;  howae 
missinnin  ken?  of  what  people  are  you? 

manifest,  pohquaeu,  pohqude,  open,  clear. 
See  open. 

many,  mdnaog,  (they  are)  many  (per¬ 
sons)  ;  inan.  m&natash,  mdnaash,  many 
(things)  ( wussaume  maunduog,  ‘they 
are  too  full  of  people’,  there  are  too 
many;  maunetash,  ‘great  store,’ abund¬ 
ance,  R.  W. ) .  tohsuog  ?  how  many  (per¬ 
sons)?;  inan.  tohsuash,  tohshinash,  tah- 
shinash?  how  many  (things)?  See  how. 
neadtahshe,  as  many  as;  suppos.  pi.  an. 
neadtahshehettit  (when  they  are  counted 
or  summed  up),  as  many  as. 

mariner,  pummohhamwaen-in,  a  mariner; 
pi.  -waenuog  ( pummuhshottoeninuog , 
mariners,  C.)  \_pumm6h-ann,  he  goes 
by  sea],  kehtalihancog  (pi.),  mariners, 
seamen  [ kehtoh-aom ,  he  goes  by  sea]. 

mark,  kuhkinneasu,  he  marks  (it),  dis¬ 
tinguishes  (it)  by  a  mark;  vbl.  n.  kuh- 
kinneasuonk,  marking,  a  mark,  a  sign. 
kuhkinneam,  he  marks,  distinguishes, 
notes  (it),  kuhkhani,  he  marks  (it)  out; 
suffix  ukkuhkhamun,  he  marks  it  out  (cf. 
kuhkuhheg,  a  bound  or  landmark;  kuh- 
kuhhunk,  a  boundary;  kuhkuhwaonk, 
order,  regularity). 

marrow,  wein,  ween,  the  marrow  (Abn. 
8in,  graisse  de  moelle,  Rasies.) 

marry,  wussentam,  he  marries,  C. ;  ‘he 
goes  a  wooing’,  R.  W. ;  nooseentam,  I 
marry,  C. ;  wussenetuock,  ‘  they  make  a 
match’,  R.  W. ;  vbl.  n.  vmssentamdonk,  a 
wedding  (a  marrying) ;  n.  agent,  wussen- 
tamwaen-in,  one  who  marries,  a  bride¬ 
groom.  noli  wusso,  she  is  married, 
Gen.  20,  3;  she  ‘who  is  another  man’s 
wife’,  Ind.  Laws  xi,  p.  8.  wetauomau, 
ireetdomau,  he  marries  (her),  he  takes 
(her)  as  a  wife  ( weetauog ,  they  live  to¬ 
gether,  Ind.  Laws  xm,  p.  10) ;  suppos. 
noli  wetauadteadt,  he  who  is  married,  a 
married  man;  pi.  neg wetauadteacheg,  the 
married;  vbl.  n.wetaudtuonk,  marrying, 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


294 


marry — continued. 

taking  a  wife;  n.  agent,  wetauadteaen-in, 
a  bride  (one  marrying);  recipr.  we- 
tauadteog,  they  marry  one  another 
( awetawdtuock ,  ‘they  make  a  match,’ 
R.  W. ).  See  husband;  wife, 
marsh.  See  meadow, 
marten  (Mustela  americana),  wappen- 
augh,  openock,  Gen.  Reg.  xi,  219  (marte, 
pepanakessS;  peau  de  marte,  epanakessS, 
Rasies;  openock  and  wappenauk,  Judd, 
Hist,  of  Hadley,  355;  Del.  ivoap  chus, 
Zeisb.  Voc.  13). 

master,  sonlirn,  master  (governor,  C. ), 
poss.  nus-sontim-om  [-com],  my  master; 
ni issontimom  ketassoot,  ‘my  lord  the 
king’,  2  Sam.  13,  33;  pi.  sontirndog,  son- 
timosog  (vbl.  n.  sontimeoonk,  sovereignty, 
C.).  ‘ 

mastery,  sohkausuonk,  solikdhsuonk,  mas¬ 
tery,  victory,  vbl.  n.  from  solikdm,  soli- 
kausu,  he  conquers. 

mat,  munnotaubana,  ‘embroidered  mats 
which  the  women  make’  to  line  their 
houses,  hangings,  R.  W.  abockqudsin- 
ash,  the  mats  with  which  the  wigwams 
are  covered,  ibid. ;  cf.  ne  dbuhqudsik,  the 
covering  of  it,  Cant.  3,  10;  upp61iqu6s, 
obbohquos,  a  tent,  covering,  etc.  inattan- 
nauke,  pi.  mattannoukanash ,  ‘a  fine  sort 
of  mats  to  sleep  on’,  R.  IV.  matasquas, 
a  mat,  C. 

matter,  unniyiuonk,  res.  See  business, 
may,  woh ,  ‘may  or  can’,  joined  to  a 
verb,  ‘expresses  the  notion  of  a  pos¬ 
sibility  to  be’,  El.  Gr.  20.  Eliot  classes 
it  as  a  ‘conjunction  of  possibility’,  El. 
Gr.  22:  ivoli  kenushehf  ‘intendest  thou 
to  kill  me?’  Ex.  2,  14;  uttoh  woh  yeush 
en  n’niht  how  can  these  things  be? 
maybe,  mamidt,  ‘it  may  be  that’,  Gen. 
16,2  (ammiat,  perhaps,  it  maybe;  am- 
miate  matteag,  may  be  not,  C. ;  see  tattd, 
R.  W.  63).  paguodche,  pagwodche,  it  may 
be,  perhaps  ( pogqudlche ,  perhaps,  C. ). 
toh,  ‘it  may  be’  (an  ‘adverb  of  doubt¬ 
ing’),  El.  Gr.  22  ( toh  with  the  significa¬ 
tion  of  would  that!  ( utinam )  is  ‘an¬ 
nexed  to  every  person  and  variation  in 
the  optative  mood’,  El.  Gr.  34,  65). 
See  how. 

meadow,  wompaskeht;  wompasqueldu,  in 
a  meadow,  micuckaskeete ,  a  meadow, 
R.  W.  \_—mukkoshqut,  a  plain,  from 


meadow— continued. 
mogki-askeht,  or  mogki-oshk-ut,  great 
green  place,  or  where  there  is  much 
grass],  tattagoskltuash,1  a  fresh  mead¬ 
ow’  R.  W.  [= tattdgk-oskeht ,  pi.  oskeh- 
luash,  shaking  grass  (boggy,  marshy)]. 
wososhquit,  marsh:  na  ut  wososhquit, 
‘the  marshes  thereof’,  Ezek.  47,  11 
(wossuskeht,  a  meadow,  C. ). 
meal,  pishquihick,  unparched  meal,  It. IV. 
[=pasquag,  that  which  is  fine  or  in 
powder].  See  fine,  ncohkik  ( ndkehick , 
‘parch’d  meal  .  .  .  which  they  eat 
with  a  little  water,  hot  or  cold’,  R. 
W. ;  nocake,  ‘which  is  nothing  but  In¬ 
dian  corn  parched  in  the  hot  ashes;  the 
ashes  being  sifted  from  it,  it  is  after¬ 
wards  beat  to  powder’,  Wood,  N.  E. 
Prospect),  used  by  Eliot  for  ‘meal’, 
‘flour’,  ‘ground  corn’ ipasquag  ncohkik, 
‘  fine  flour  ’ ;  vbl.  n.  causat.  inan.  ncokhik- 
anehteush,  ‘grind  thou  meal’,  Is.  47,2, 
i.  e.  make  it  to  lie  meal.  From  noohki, 
it  is  soft;  suppos.  ncohkik,  that  which  is 
soft.  Del.  ‘  ‘ psindamdean,  or  tassmandne, 
as  they  call  Indian  corn  parched, 
pounded,  and  used  with  water  or  boiled 
down  as  pottage”,  Hkw., Hist.  Account, 
p.  187.  Abn.  pesedamSn,  ‘  farine  de  bid 
groule’;  nSkhdmen,  ‘farine’;  skamSnin- 
Skhamen,  ‘  farine  de  bid  d’Inde’,  Rasies, 
measure,  quttuhhum,  qutham,  quadham, 
he  measures  (it),  takes  the  measure 
(weight,  capacity,  or  dimensions)  of  it; 
qutluhliush  ( quttoohhush ,  C. ),  measure 
thou  (it);  freq.  qnaquadhum,  he  meas¬ 
ures  (it)  repeatedly  or  habitually;  vbl.  n. 
quttuhhamooonk,  measure,  weight,  etc.  (a 
measuring);  suppos.  part.  inan.  quttuh- 
heg,  quttulncheg,  (that  which  measures) 
a  measure;  v.t.  an.  and  inan.  quttuldm- 
mauau,  he  weighed  (it)  to  or  for  (him); 
nuk-quthumau  teaguash,  I  weighed  him 
the  money,  Jer.  32,  9;  active  (verb  of 
action)  quttuhwhdm,  he  measures;  pass, 
it  is  measured,  hence,  by  measure;  after 
a  numeral,  measures  of  (sometimes,  but 
rarely,  pi.  quttuhwh6mash ):  shwinchage 
quttuhwhdm  pasquag  ncokhik,  ‘thirty 
measures  of  fine  flour’,  1  K.  4,  22  (nen 
nuk-quttohwhom,  I  measure,  C. ). 
measures  of  length:  dmskinausu,  a 
span  ( omskinnau ,  he  spans  (it),  Is.  48, 
13);  nequtomskinaiim,  one  span  ( nees- 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


295 


measures  of  length — continued. 
aumsquss&yi,  two  spans  (of  wampum); 
shwaumscussdyi,  three  spans;  yowomp- 
scussdyi,  four  spans,  It.  W. ) .  Cf .  omp- 
skot  ( dmpscat ,  a  {unseat,  R.  W. ;  ompskod, 
C. ),  a  penny  (i.  e.  a  penny’s  worth  of 
wampum,  a  span?);  nequt-ompskot,  one 
penny  (neesaumscat,  two  pence;  yoiv- 
omscat,  four  pence,  R.  W. ) .  quttauatu, 
qudttuatu  [ qutta ,  six] ,  six  pence  ( in  wam¬ 
pum)  R.  W.,  =quttatashaumscat;  neen, 
two  quttduatues;  shwln,  three  quttaua-  t 
tues,  eighteen  pence;  yowin,  four  qut- 
tiiuatues;  qutta tashincheck  aumscat  (sixty 
pence),  ten  qutt&uatues,  =piuckquat 
[ piuck- quttauatu ] ,  tensixpences,  =nquit- 
tompeg  or  nquitnishcausu,  one  fathom, 
ibid,  neemehchagunausu,  twenty  fath¬ 
oms;  ncibo  ncipanna  tashinausu,  fifteen  j 
fathoms,  Acts  27,  28  (nquittdrnpeg, 
nquitnishcausu,  one  fathom;  nees-aum- 
q>augatuck,  two  fathoms ;  piuckquampdu- 
gatuck,  ten  fathoms,  =nquit  pclusck; 
shwe-padsuck,  thirty  fathoms,  R.  W. ). 
ishquanogkod,  ‘acubit’;  after  a  numeral, 
ishquanogkod,  an.  ishquanogkussu,  by  cu¬ 
bits,  cubits  long;  nequt-ishquonogkot,  one  1 
cubit,  Matt.  6,  27,  =nequt-isquanogkod, 
Luke,  12,  25. 

measures  of  time.  See  day;  month; 
year. 

meat,  weyaus.  See  flesh. 

medicine,  moskehtu,  vutskehtu  ( maskit , 
physic,  R.  \V. );  iydnaskelituash,  ‘many 
medicines’,  i.  e.  various  kinds  of  medi¬ 
cines,  Jer.  46,  11  [ m’askeht ,  grass,  an 
herb]. 

meditate,  missantam  [ missi-antam ,  he 
thinks  much],  he  reflects  or  meditates 
upon  (he  aims  at,  C. );  natwontam,  he 
meditates,  considers  of,  devises  (studies, 
meditates,  etc.,  C. ). 

meet,  nogkushkau,  nogkishkau,  he  meets 
(him)  ( nokusk&uatees ,  meet  thou  him; 
nockuskauatUea,  let  us  meet,  R.W.; 
vrnnne  nogkishkoadtuonk,  well  met,  as  a 
salutation,  C. ) .  See  assemble;  gather. 

melon,  monaskootasq  ( ohhosketdmuk ,  a 
watermelon;  moonosketdmuk,  cucumber; 
quinosketdm.uk,  muskmelon,  C. ).  See 
squash. 

melt,  sdbohteau,  it  melts;  inan.  ph,  saboh- 
taash,  sabahtaash,  they  melt,  from 
salae,  saupae,  (it  is)  soft;  see  soft.  | 


melt — continued. 

Act.  intrans.,  sdbohsosu,  he  melts,  per¬ 
forms  the  act  of  melting,  sdbassum,  s6- 
bossum,  sauppasum,  he  melts  (it) ,  makes 
(it)  soft;  n.  agent,  sdbossumwaen-in,  a 
melter,  founder,  Jer.  6,  29;  suppos. 
part.  inan.  [from  sab&e,  saupaeu,  it 
melts]  sabaJieg,  sdbdhig  (when  it  soft¬ 
ens),  pottage;  adj.  sdbassumwe,  molten, 
melted.  See  dissolve, 
melt  away.  See  consume;  dissolve, 
member,  pompuhch&i,  pompuhehaei,  a 
member,  limb,  organ;  pi.  -\~y^uash: 
ukkosue  pompuhehaei,  the  virile  organ; 
n.  collect.  porripuhcftdAnneunk,  the  mem¬ 
bers  (collectively),  1  Cor.  12,  26. 
mend.  See  repair. 

menhaden,  “aumsuog  and  munnawhat- 
teatig,  a  fish  somewhat  like  a  herring”, 
R.  W.  ( dmmis ,  pi.  dmmissuog,  herring, 
C. ;  Peq.  umpsuauges,  alewives,  Stiles). 
The  former  was  probably  the  alewife, 
Alosa  vernalis.  The  latter  was  Alosa 
menhaden,  ‘white-fish’,  ‘bony-fish’, 

‘  hardhead  ’ ,  or  pauhagen.  It  was  used 
by  the  Indians  as  a  manure,  whence 
perhaps  its  name,  from  munndquohteau, 
he  manures  or  enriches  the  soil  (cf. 
“Fishes  called  1  aloof es'  used  for  ma¬ 
nure”,  Winth.,  in  Phil.  Trans.,  1678). 
menstruation,  qussinausuonk;  qussinau- 
sit  [suppos.  from  quttinausu],  when  (she 
is)  menstruous  ( qushendwsui  and  mat- 
tapeu,  ‘a  woman  keeping  alone  in  her 
monthly  sickness’,  R.  W.). 
mercy,  monaneteau,  he  is  merciful;  mo- 
nanetegk,  be  ye  merciful;  vbl.  monan- 
eteaonk,  mercy;  mondnum,  he  shows 
mercy,  is  kind;  an.  suffix  monanumeh, 
be  thou  merciful  to  me.  kitteamontea- 
*  num,  he  shows  mercy  or  compassion, 
he  pities;  suppos.  noli  kodtumonteanu- 
mont,  he  who  is  merciful  or  pities  ( nuk- 
kitteamonteanitteam,  I  pity,  C. ). 
merry,  weekontam,  he  is  glad;  howan  we- 
kontog?  is  any  merry?  James  5,  13; 
weekontamwog,  they  made  merry, 
Judg.  9,  27.  See  glad;  mirth, 
message,  kuttcoonk,  nehtarnoonk:  negon- 
tcowau,  he  sends  a  message  to  ( nekon - 
chuonat,  to  send,  C.).  See  send, 
messenger,  anneonaen-in,  a  messenger, 
one  who  is  sent:  anneonau nnoonaenauh, 


296 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


messenger — continued. 

he  sent  a  messenger  to  (him).  See 
send. 

metals.  See  gold;  iron;  lead;  steel, 
middle,  n6eu,  naihaueu,  in  the  middle, 
in  the  midst;  en  ndeu,  ut  nGeu,  in  the 
midst  of;  ndahtuk,  noolduk  [nGeu-tuk], 
in  the  middle  of  the  river;  nGetipukok, 
nGeutipukkok  [ nGeu-tippaco ],  midnight, 
mighty,  missugke  (great,  powerful);  sup- 
pos .  masugkenuk,  (when  he  is)  powerful: 
wame  masugkenuk,  the  Almighty,  Ex. 

6,  3. 

milk,  sogkodtunk  ( sogkddonk ,  C. )  [suppos. 
part.  inan.  from  soh-kodtinnum:  that 
which  is  drawn  forth;  pi.  sogkodtungash, 
teats,  dugs,  mammae],  meninnunk, 
woman’s  milk:  Meninnunk  vmtch  Muk- 
kiesog,  ‘Milk  for  Babes’,  is  the  title 
of  Cotton’s  catechism;  and  in  the  quota¬ 
tion  from  1  Pet.  2,  2,  meninnuamie  is 
substituted  for  the  sogkodtungane  of 
Eliot’s  version  (munndnnug,  a  woman’s 
milk,  R.  W. )  [from  natnau,  he  sucks; 
suppos.  part,  inan.,  that  which  is 
sucked]. 

millstone,  toguhwonganompsk,  togwonka- 
nompsk.  See  grind;  mortar, 
mind  (to  have  in),  unnnntam,  he  thinks, 
purposes,  wills,  etc.  See  think, 
mine,  nuttaihe,  it  is  mine  (it  belongs  to 
me);  pi.  an.  nuttaiheog,  inan.  nuttaihe- 
ash,  they  are  mine;  nuttaihein,  it  is  ours. 
See  belong  to. 

mingle,  mix,  kenukshau,  it  is  mingled  or 
mixed  with;  kenukshaog  penuwohtea-ut,  I 
they  are  mingled  among  the  heathen,  | 
Ps.  106,  35  ( nuk-kinukkinurn ,  I  mingle 
or  mix,  C. ;  wAnnickshan,  to  mingle; 
wunnickshaas,  mingled,  R.  W. );  from 
kenugke,  (it  is)  among, 
minister,  nohtompeantog  ( nohtomp-pean - 
tog,  one  who  leads  in  prayer), 
mink  (Putorius  vison) ,  nottomag  (?),  Judd, 
in  N.  E.  Gen.  Reg.  xi,  219  (=mik$e, 
ecureuil,  of  Rasies  ?) . 
mire.  See  mud. 
mirror.  See  looking-glass, 
mirth,  pGcinatam,  he  makes  mirth,  Ezek.  t 
21, 10;vbl.  n. pGanittnmooonk,  mirth;  neg  j 
pGacheg,  they  who  make  merry,  Jer. 
30, 19.  mishe  muxkouantam,  he  makes 
great  mirth,  Neh.  8,  12.  wekontamooonk, 


mirth — continued. 

gladness,  mirth  [ wekontarn ,  he  is  glad]. 
See  glad;  merry;  play, 
miry,  saupaeu,  snhaeu,  it  is  soft  (softened 
i  by  water?);  saup&e,  sabde,  soft,  miry. 
Cf.  samp;  suppawn. 

mischief,  woskehmvaonk,  hurt,  injury 
done ;  woskehittuonk,  woskehtowon k, 
hurt,  injury  suffered.  See  hurt, 
miserable,  kittumongkeneankquat,  miser¬ 
able  (pitiable),  C. ;  kuttumonkee  yeue, 
miserably,  ibid.  See  pity, 
mishap,  mussuhkauau,  miskauau,  it  hap¬ 
pens  to  (him);  applied  only  to  the  en¬ 
counter  of  evils  or  mischance.  See  hap¬ 
pen. 

miss.  See  want. 

mist.  See  fog;  vapor. 

mistake,  nup-puhtantam,  1  mistake,  C. ; 
vbl.  n.  puhtantamcoonk,  mistaking,  ibid. ; 
cf.  puttahham,  he  is  caught,  ensnared, 
trapped,  panneu ,  he  errs,  goes  wrong 
or  astray.  See  astray, 
mistress,  sonkisq,  sonkusq,  sonksq,  mis¬ 
tress,  queen;  keliche  sonksq  (great  mis¬ 
tress),  queen,  Esth.  1, 9, 11, 15,  =kehchis- 
sunkisq,  v.  12  (Narr.  saunks,  the  queen, 
or  sachem’s  wife;  pi.  sauncksqnGaog ,  R. 
W.;  saunck  sqaauh,  queen,  Stiles;  smick 
squa,  Conn.  Rec.  n,  289)  \sontim-squar 
master-woman,  or  sonkquau  ( sohkau ), 
she  prevails  or  has  the  mastery], 
mock,  momontauau,  momonelitauau,  he 
mocks,  derides,  makes  a  mock  of 
(him);  suppos.  part,  noh  momontauont, 
one  who  mocks;  suffix  ummomontau- 
6uh,  they  mocked  him;  inan.  momon- 
ehtam,  momontam,  he  mocks  (it), 
he  makes  a  mock  of  (it);  v.  i.  act. 
momontuhm,  momontussu,  he  mocks, 
is  mocking;  n.  agent.  niGmontuhsuen, 
momonehtasuen,  a  mocker.  GGntGlikon- 
auau,  he  mocks  at,  derides  (him) 
(elsewhere,  GGtuhk-,  eiontuhk-,  eiontogk-, 
GGntogk-,  etc.);  wuttGontGhkonGuli,  they 
mock  him;  kuttGontohkoneh,  thou  mock- 
est  me;  v.  i.  act.  GGtGhkossu,  Gontogkkossu, 
he  mocks,  is  mocking;  n.  agent.  GGntoh- 
kusscowaen,  a  mocker, 
moist,  ogqushki,  (it  is)  moist,  wet.  See 
wet. 

moldy,  ogquonksh&eu,  ogquonksheau,  it 
is  moldy;  adj.  ogquonkshde;  vbl.  n.  og- 
quonkshunk,  mold,  ‘mildew’.  Cf.  oq- 


TRUMBULL] 


NATICK-ENGLISH  DICTIONARY 


297 


moldy — continued. 

quonkquag,  ‘rust’,  Matt.  6,  19;  ogqush- 
ki,  it  is  wet. 

mole,  mameechumit,  Lev.  11,  30. 

money.  “The  Indians  are  ignorant  of 
Europe’s  coin;  yet  they  have  given  a 
name  to  ours,  and  call  it  moniash,  from 
the  English  money”,  R.  W.  Eliot 
translates  money  by  tedguash,  teauguash 
(pi.  of  tedg,  thing,  object),  res;  and 
Roger  Williams  gives  nut-teciuguash , 
‘my  money’.  See  wampum. 

month,  nepduz  (the  sun),  a  month  ( pau - 
suck  n’padus,  a  month;  nquit  pawsuck- 
en’pauus,  one  month;  nees  pawsuck 
n’padus,  two  months,  etc.,  R.  W. ). 
See  sun;  moon. 

moon,  nepauzshad,  nanepauzshad,  nane- 
paushadt  ( nanepatishat ,  the  moon,  the 
moon  god;  munndnnock,  a  name  of  the 
sun  or  moon,  R.W.;  Peq.  weyhan,  moon, 
Stiles);  vuske  nepauzsae,  new  moon  (yd 
ocquitteunk,  a  new  moon;  paushesui,  a 
half  moon;  wequashim,  a  light  moon, 
R.  W. ) .  Dimin.  from  nepduz,  the  sun,  = 
nepauzese  (?). 

moose,  maos,  pi.  moosdog  (for  ‘fallow 
deer’,  1  K.  4,  23)  (“The  Elke,  which 
the  Salvages  call  a Mose  ”,  Morton,  N.  E 
Canaan.  “Moos,  a  beast  bigger  than  a 
Stagge”,  Smith,  Descr.  of  N.  England, 
1616.  mods,  pi.  moosuog,  ‘the  great  ox, 
or  rather  a  red  deer’,  R.  W.  Abn. 
m8s,  pi.  m8s8k,  ‘orignal’,  Rasies.) 

more,  dnue  (the  sign  of  the  compara¬ 
tive):  dnue  umnnegen,  better;  dnueonk 
nen,  more  than  me;  dnue  onk  warne, 
more  than  all.  aneu,  anueu,  he  is  more 
(than  another),  he  is  superior  ( nuttan - 
nuwun,  I  overcome  or  conquer,  C. ); 
suffix  an.  progr.  wut-aneukouh ,  he  is 
better  than  he,  i.  e.  superior  to  him, 
Prov.  12,  9.  From  the  suppos.  aneit 
(noli  aneit,  he  who  is  above  or  superior), 
with  the  indefinite  prefix,  comes,  per¬ 
haps,  manit  [in’ aneit],  a  god,  something 
superior.  “  There  is  a  general  custom 
amongst  them  at  the  apprehension  of 
any  excellency  in  men,  women,  birds, 
beasts;  fish,  etc.,  to  cry  out  Manittdo, 
that  is,  it  is  a  god,  as  thus  if  they  see  one 
man  excel  others  in  wisdom,  valour, 
strength,  activity,  etc.,  they  cry  out 
Manittdo,  a  god”,  R.  W.  111.  The 


more — continued. 

progr.  form  wutaneukouli,  he  is  better 
than  he,  is  used  in  Prov.  12,  9,  mean¬ 
ing  he  is  superior,  is  better  off.  Com¬ 
pounds:  dnuwodt  [dnue-woh-adt],  more 
than  enough,  too  much;  dnupde,  over¬ 
flowing;  anuivutchuwan,  anitchuan,  it 
overflows,  nano  (a  sign  of  the  compar¬ 
ative),  more  and  more, 
moreover,  wonk,  again,  moreover,  also, 
morning,  rnohtompan  (mautabon,  R.W. ). 
See  day. 

morrow,  saup  (satiop,  R.  W. ;  setup,  C. ; 
Abn.  seba,  Rasies) ,  tomorrow.  nom- 
podeu,  on  the  morrow  (i.  e.  early  next 
morning);  suppos.  nompuk,  nompuh- 
keik,  na  nompunk,  ( when  it  was)  morn¬ 
ing,  next  morning  [from  nornpie,  again], 
morsel,  chogq,  kodchuhki.  See  piece;  spot, 
mortar,  togguhwlionk ,  toguhwonk,  togwonk 
(tdcunck  or  wiskunck,  their  pounding 
mortar,  R.  W. ),  a  mortar  or  place  for 
pounding  corn;  ut  togguhwhonganit,  in 
a  mortar,  in  mills,  Sum.  11,  8.  From 
tackhiimmin,  to  grind  corn,  R.W. ;  tog- 
guhhum,  he  grinds,  C.  [ togkau ,  he 
strikes,  pounds]. 

mother,  okasoh,  his  mother,  the  mother 
of  (okdsu  and  witcliwhaw,  a  mother, 
R.  W. ;  wdtchehwau,  her  mother,  C. ); 
ndkas,  ncokas,  my  mother  (nokace,  nich- 
whaw,  R.W.) ;  kdkas,  kcokas,  thy  mother; 
rvcime  okasuoh,  she  was  the  mother  of 
all  (living),  Gen.  3,  20;  indef.  wutoka- 
sin  (wuttookasin,  C.),  a  mother,  i.  e.  any 
mother,  the  mother  of  anyone;  collect. 
dkasinneunk,  mothers,  collectively  or  as 
a  class,  all  motherhood.  From  the 
same  root  as  dhke,  the  earth,  com¬ 
pounded  with  Gdas,  animal,  animate 
being,  or  with  -ussu,  the  verb  of  ani¬ 
mate  activity,  the  producing  animal, 
the  animate  producer;  but  the  form  is 
that  of  the  verb  6ka.su,  she  produces; 
dkasoh,  she  produces  him  or  her;  oka- 
suoli,  she  produces  them.  Cf.  com,  he 
goes  or  proceeds  from;  wutcheu,  he  be* 
gins,  comes  from  or  out  of;  coshoh, 
dshoh,  father,  etc.  urdtcliehwau  is  evi¬ 
dently  the caus.  an.  (irutchehhuau)  from 
wutcheu,  he  proceeds  from  or  originates 
from. 

mountain,  v'ndrhu  (leadcliii,  ('.);  in  com¬ 
position  -adchu:  misadchu  [ missi-adchu ] 


298 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


mountain— continued . 

kcth  iradchu,  ‘mountain  and  hill’,  Luke 
3,  5;  pi.  wadchuash;  dimin.  uiadchue- 
mes,  a  small  mountain,  a  hill;  wadchue-  ' 
kontu  (among  the  mountains),  ‘in  the  : 
hill  country’,  Josh.  13,  6  ( ntaquat - 
chuwaiimen ,  I  go  up  hill;  taguatchdwash, 
go  (thou)  uj>  hill;  R.  W. ;  Del.  wachts-  I 
chunk-,  on  the  hill;  wachtschunk  n’da,  I 
am  going  up  the  hill,  Hkw. ). 

mourn,  man,  he  cries (mduo,  to  cry  and 
bewail,  It.  W. ;  nen  nummou,  I  bewail, 
C. );  vbl.  n.  mauonk,  maonk,  a  crying 
( mooonk ,  moumoonk,  C. ).  Freq.  maue- 
mau,  he  mourns  for  (him) ;  vbl.  n.  maue- 
mcoonk,  a  mourning  ( moumoonk ,  weep¬ 
ing,  C. );  v.  i.  maumuttam,  he  mourns 
( nummomuttam ,  I  lament,  C. ).  See 
cry. 

mouse  (?),  mishabpuhquas,  mishabohquas, 
‘the  mouse’,  Lev.  11,  29;  Is.  66,  17. 
Cf.  maltabpusques,  the  bat;  Abn.  8an- 
big8ses8,  ‘souris’;  111.  acmsicoa,  rat. 

mouth,  muttcon,  a  mouth;  nuttcon,  my 
mouth;  kiUtcon,  thy  mouth  (Peq.  cutto- 
neege,  mouth,  Stiles) ;  umttcon,  his  mouth 
( wuttbne ,  R.  W.). 

move,  mamonchu,  he  moves  or  is  in  mo¬ 
tion  (denoting  voluntary  motion  by 
animate  agency);  suppos.  mamonchit, 
when  he  moves:  nishnoh  oaas  noli  ma¬ 
monchit,  ‘everything  .  .  .  that  mov- 
eth  ’ ;  freq.  from  monchu,  he  goes. 
mamontunnum,  he  moves,  i.  e.  imparts 
motion  to  (it),  he  puts  (it)  in  motion: 
momontunnum  nippe,  he  moves  the 
waters,  John  5,  4;  suppos.  mamontunuk, 
when  he  moves  (his  lips),  Prov.  16,  30. 
ontohteau,  ontaht.au,  (it)  is  moved  (from 
place  to  place),  it  is  removed;  pish  on- 
talitauun,  it  shall  be  removed,  ontattau, 
he  moves  (it)  from  its  place,  he  re¬ 
moves  (it);  ontattaush,  ontatoush  kus- 
seet,  remove  thy  foot;  noh  onlattunk,  he 
who  removes  (it),  ontashau,  he  moves 
(him),  removes  (him)  from  one  place 
to  another,  ontappu,  he  is  moved  (from 
his  former  place  to  a  place  where  he  is 
now  at  rest),  he  remains  moved:  God 
noeu  appu,  rnatta  pish  ontappu,  ‘  God  is 
in  the  midst  of  her,  she  shall  not  be 
moved’;  onlapush,  ontsapish,  be  thou 
removed.  Cf.  ontham,  he  puts  out,  ex¬ 
tinguishes;  ohtaco,  uldea,  it  goes  out. 


move — continued. 

See  stir,  popomshau,  he  moves  about, 
Gen.  1,  2;  freq.  from  pomushau,  he 
walks. 

mow,  manlssimmin,  to  cut  or  mow  grass, 
R.  W. 

much,  mcocheke,  an  intensive  used  to  ex¬ 
press  degrees  of  comparison,  El.  Gr.  15: 
anue  mcocheke,  much  more;  mcocheke  onk 
nen,  more  than  I;  mcocheke  mcocheke, 
very  much,  exceedingly;  noh  mcocheke 
anumauut,  ‘to  whom  much  is  given’, 
Luke  12, 48.  muttae,  very  (valde) :  mut- 
tae  mcocheke,  exceeding  much;  muttae 
wunnegen,  exceeding  good,  anuwodt 
[anue-woh-adt  ?] ,  too  much,  more  than 
enough.  See  how. 

mud,  pissag,  pissagquan,  mire,  mud  ( pis- 
sugk  ut  toumayog,  dirt  in  the  streets, 
C. );  pisseogquayeuonk,  a  miry  place; 
pisseogqusheau,  it  is  sticky,  it  sticketh, 
adhereth.  Cf.  puppissi,  dust,  dirt. 

multitude,  muttdancoog,  mult&anwog, 
(they  are)  very  many,  a  great  many 
persons;  vbl.  n.  muttannunk,  persons 
collectively,  the  many;  suppos.  maltaa- 
nukeg,  (when  they  are)  very  many,  the 
multitude. 

mummychog,  moamitteaug  (pi.),  ‘a little 
sort  of  fish  half  as  big  as  sprats,  plenti¬ 
ful  in  winter’,  R.  W.  mohmoettinne- 
aog,  pass,  and  recipr.  of  molimoeog,  they 
gather  themselves  together;  schoolfish. 
The  fish  described  is  doubtless  the 
smelt  (Osmerus  eperlanus),  but  the 
name,  in  a  corrupted  form,  has  been 
transferred  to  another  species. 

murder,  nushehteau,  nashteau,  he  is  a 
murderer,  he  commits  murder;  n.  agent. 
nushehteacn-in,  a  murderer  ( shehteden , 
‘bloody  man’,  Ps.  5,  6);  vbl.  nusheh- 
teaonk,  shehtedonk,  myrdering,  murder 
( nun-nishteam ,  I  kill,  C. ).  Intrans. 
subjective  form  of  nushau,  he  kills. 
kernineiachick,  murderers,  R.  YV.  [as- 
assins?  From  kemeu,  in  secret  ?] ;  kuks- 
kemineantin,  you  are  the  murderer, 
ibid. 

murmur,  mcomcoskcowau,  mcomcoskquenau, 
he  murmurs  ( mcomcosquenooivonate ,  to 
mutter;  mcomcoskoowonale,  to  murmur; 
num-mcomcoskbbicam,  I  murmur,  C. ); 
an.  moomcokomau,  he  murmurs  at  or 
against  (him);  inan.  mcomcosqneuttwn, 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


299 


murmur — continued. 

he  murmurs  at  (it);  vbl.  n.  moomatskco- 
waonk,  a  murmuring;  moomcoskomma- 
onk,  muttering,  murmuring, 
musical  instrument,  puhpequon,  pi. 
- \-nsh ;  puhpequau,  he  makes  music;  mo- 
nopuhpeg,  a  trumpet  ( puhpeeg ,  a  trum¬ 
pet  or  music,  C. ).  Cf.  puhpeg ,  a  dance, 
an  instrument  of  music,  Ps.  144,  9. 
From  puhpuhki,  hollow, 
muskrat,  musquash  ( musquassus  (pi. ), 
Smith’sDescr.ofN. England,  1616.  “The 
musJceivashe  is  a  beast  that  frequenteth 
the  ponds”,  Morton’s  N.  E.  Canaan. 
Abn.  mSskSessS,  Rasies),  Fiber  zibethi- 
cus  [musqui-6dds,  red  animal], 
must,  mos,  shall  or  must,  auxil.  Eliot 
gives  “mos,  pish,  shall  or  -will”,  as 
words  ‘  ‘  signifying  futurity,  added  to  the 
indicative  mode  to  express  the  time  to 
come”,  El.  Gr.  20;  but,  strictly  Speak¬ 
ing,  mos  expresses  obligation  or  neces¬ 
sity,  pish  simple  futurity:  mos  nun- 
nup,  1  must  die,  Deut.  4,  22;  ne  mos 
n’nih,  it  must  needs  be  so,  Mark  13,  7 
( moce ,  mesh,  R.  W. ;  mesh  nmnchem  pe- 
yaum,  I  could  not  come;  moce ,  instantly; 
m&ish,  even  now,  ibid.),  mcoche,  it 


must — continued. 

shall  or  must  be,  expressing  obligation 
or  necessity  for  future  action  [for  mos- 
wutche  or  mo-colche~\ :  mcoche  kenpannup- 
u’usham,  etc.,  thou  art  to  pass  over 
through,  etc.,  i.  e.  it  must  be  that 
thou,  etc.,  Deut.  2,  18;  mcoche  nut- 
tabuttantamaudmun  Gocl,  we  are  bound 
to  thank  God,  2  Thess.  1,  3.  nont,  used 
by  Cotton,  sometimes  for  the  verb  to 
be,  sometimes  apparently  as  a  mere  ex¬ 
pletive,  was  sometimes  employed  to  ex¬ 
press  conditional  obligation  or  necessi¬ 
ty — should  or  must — in  a  conditional  or 
conjunctive  proposition:  noh  kodtantog 
aiuskoiantamunat  .  .  .  nont  woh  nuk- 
kodtam,  he  who  would  repent  must 
forsake  (his  sins),  C.  kisnont,  kusnunt, 
are  similarly  used  by  C.  Mather  (Notit. 
Ind.  55)  and  in  the  title  of  the  Indian 
Laws.  Cotton’s  Vocabulary  gives  pish 
nunnup,  I  shall  die;  nont  pish  nunnup- 
pitmun,  ‘you  [we]  must  die’;  mukkit- 
chogquisog  nont  qjulipuog,  boys  will 
play. 

myself,  nuhhog  [n’hogk],  my  body,  my 
person,  myself.  Cf.  Del.  n'hakey,  my 
body,  myself,  Zeisb.  See  body. 


1ST 


nail,  kenuhwheg,  pi.  +a.s/i  [for  kenehheg, 
kenaiheg,  that  which  is  sharp?],  ken - 
uhtugquonk,  keneh-uhtug,  sharp  wood,  a 
wooden  pin.  Cf.  wdnkontug,  ‘apin’ to 
hang  things  on,  Ezek.  15,  3,  but  lit. 
a  wooden  hook  ( wonkiuhtug ,  crooked 
stick).  See  pin. 

muhkos,  muhkas,  the  nail  of  a  man, 
the  hoof,  claw,  or  talon  of  an  animal; 
pi.  muhkossog;  ivuhkossog,  wuhkassog,  his 
nails  ( mokassuck ,  nails,  R.  W.)  \_uhk- 
ussu,  the  an.  form  of  uhquaeu,  (it  is) 
pointed.  Cf.  uhquon,  a  hook;  uhque, 
extreme,  etc.  See  end], 
naked,  poskeu,  (he  is)  naked;  v.  i.  an. 
poskissu,  poskussu,  (he  is)  naked,  i.  e.,  is 
stripped,  made  bare,  is  become  naked 
( pauskesu ,  suppos.  pi.  pauskesitcheg, 
‘naked  men  and  women’,  R.  W.); 
nupposkis  ( nippdskis ,  R.  W.),  I  am 
naked;  qjoskis  kuhkont,  ‘make  bare  thy 
head’,  Is.  47,  2;  poskissegk,  make  your- 


naked — continued. 

selves  bare;  vbl.  n .  poskisseuonk,  jmskis- 
suonk,  nakedness  (a  making  bare).  j)os- 
kinum,  he  uncovers,  makes  (it)  bare: 
poskinum  wuhpit,  he  makes  bare  his 
arm ,  an.  poskmau,  posekinau,  he  makes 
(him)  bare,  strips  (him)  naked;  hence, 
he  buries  (him).  See  bury,  poskis- 
sehheau,  he  causes  (him)  to  be  naked, 
makes  (him)  naked. 

name,  wesuonk  (El.,  R.  W.,and  C.),  the 
name  of  a  man;  oowesuonk,  his  name; 
ncowisuonk,  my  name;  koowesuonk,  thy 
name(vbl.  n.  from ussowessu,  heis called, 
he  is  named;  lit.  a  calling,  appellatio). 
See  call  by  a  name  (nominare). 
namely,  nahnane,  namely,  ‘viz’;  nene, 
‘id  est’,  C. 

narrow,  pemayogok,  pednogok  (of  a  path 
or  way,  Matt.  7,  13,  14;  peemdyagdt,  a 
little  way,  R.  TV.),  tottodchi  aiyeuonk, 
1  narrow  compass  ’ ,  C.  (?). 


300 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


nation,  wutohtimoin  ( wuttohtimoin ,  C. ); 
pi.  -mdneash;  n.  collect,  wutohtimoin- 
neunk,  the  nations,  collectively  or  cor¬ 
porately. 

naught.  See  bad;  no. 
navel,  menwee;  veenwee,  his  navel  [m’en 
n6eu,  the  middle  or  center], 
near,  pasao,  pdhsu,  (it  is)  near  ( paswu , 
‘lately’,  El.  Gr.  21;  paswese,  soon,  in  a 
short  time,  C. ) ;  pasooche,  a  little  way 
off  (after  verb  of  motion)  \pasm-coche]: 
monchu  pasooche,  he  went  to  a  short 
distance,  a  little  way  off.  paswohteau,  it 
is  near,  it  draws  near;  pasootappu,  he  is 
near,  i.  e.  he  remains  near;  suppos.  noh 
pascotappit,  noh  paswopH,  he  who  is 
near;  pi.  neg  pascotapitcheg,  neg  paswo- 
pitcheg,  they  who  are  near.  pasaotshau, 
he  comes  near  (quickly,  suddenly,  or 
with  violence) ;  pctsaotshaush,  come  thou 
near,  pasaosukau,  he  is  going  near;  noh 
pasukog,  he  who  is  coming  or  going 
near;  pasoosukiitch,  let  him  come  near, 
let  him  approach,  pascoau,  he  brings 
(him)  near  to;  suffix  up-pasco-uh,  he 
brought  him  near  to  him;  pasook,  bring 
ye  (them)  near;  cf.  paudtau,  he  brings 
it  near. 

nearly,  ncihen,  almost,  nearly  ( ndhen , 
C. ) :  ndhen  nuppco,  he  is  ‘  at  the  point 
of  death’,  Mark. 5,  23. 
necessary,  needful,  quenauet,  it  is  nec¬ 
essary,  Exp.  Mayhew,  MS  ( nooncit  or 
quenauat,  ‘  to  be  wanting  or  defective  ’ , 
C. ;  quenciuadte,  necessarily,  ibid.). 
pasuk  ne  woh  aunag,  ‘one  thing  is  need¬ 
ful’,  Luke  10,  42,  i.  e.  one  thing  which 
must  be  so.  nawhonk,  ‘it  is  needful’, 
Acts  15,  5.  See  want, 
neck,  mussittipuk  ( missittelppeg ,  C. ;  sitchi- 
puck,  R.  W.);  wussittipuk,  his  neck;  pi. 
-\-anash. 

need.  See  necessary;  want, 
needle,  ahdrnaquesuuk,  uhamogquesuuk 
( ohhamaquemuk ,  C. ;  maumichemanege, 
R.  W. ) ;  adj.  ahdrnogquesue,  made  by  the 
needle,  needle-worked, 
neglect,  mishananlam,  he  neglects,  C. 
See  despise. 

neighbor,  wetateamung-anin,  a  neighbor; 
nelatteamung  ( netohteamonk ,  C.  Mather), 
my  neighbor;  weetatteamung,  his  neigh¬ 
bor;  pi.  -dog. 


nest,  mulsh,  xvadtch,  a  (bird’s)  nest: 
wutch  oowadshat,  from  her  nest.  Cf. 
ooch,  proceeding  from;  wutche,  from; 
wadchu,  he  comes  or  proceeds  from, 
net,  hashab,  hashabp,  a  net  for  fish,  pri¬ 
marily  vegetable  fiber  or  fibrous  ma¬ 
terial;  pi.  -\-pog  {dshdp,  dshdppog,  C. ; 
ashdp,  R.  AY. ;  Del.  achqudneman,  a 
bushnet,  Hkvv. ).  quomphunk  (some¬ 
thing  to  dip  up  with),  a  scoop  net  (?). 
new,  wuske,  weske,  young,  new:  wuske 
teag,  a  new  thing;  wuske  monak  ( wuska - 
nuit,  R.  \V. ),  new  cloth;  wuskoshim, 
wuskishim,  a  young  animal;  weske  kut- 
chissik,  in  the  beginning,  Gen.  1, 1,  i.  e. 
when  (what  is)  nearly  began.  Related 
to  asq,  ashk,  etc. 

news,  unnaunchemookau,  he  tells  news; 
'vbl.  n.  unnaunchemookaonk,  aunchemook- 
aonk,  news,  tidings  ( achmooonk ,  unnuh- 
tamcoonk,  C. )  an.  aunchemookauau,  he 
tells  (him)  news  ( aaunchemdkmv ,  tell 
me  your  news;  aunchemokauhettittea,  let 
us  discourse  or  tell  newsj  tockettaun- 
chirn,  what  news?  R.  AY. ;  nuttindnchim , 
I  tell,  C. ) ;  nuttinaunchemookauonaoh 
u'unnaunchemmkauonk,  ‘  I  communicat¬ 
ed  to  them  the  gospel  ’ ,  i.  e.  I  told  them 
good  news,  Gal.  2, 2.  See  inform;  speak, 
night,  nukon  ( nukkon ,  C.) ;  pi.  -f-as/i;  nuk- 
kon&eu,  nohkog,  by  night,  in  the  night 
( nddkocks ,  nokanndwi,  R.  AAL ):  ne 
nohkog,  on  that  night.  From  nookeu, 
he  descends  or  goes  down  (?),  or  from 
nukkonau,  he  leaves,  deserts  (?).  See 
day. 

night-hawk,  peeksq,  Lev.  11,  16;  Deut. 
14,  15. 

nine,  paskoogun,  jwsukcogun  (-\-tohsd  or 
tahshe,  pi.  an.  tnlisuog,  inan.  talishin - 
ash),  paskoogun  tahshinchag,  ninety. 
nabo  paskoogun,  nineteen, 
no,  not,  matta,  mat,  matchaog,  ‘  adverb 
of  denying’,  no;  “also  mo  sometimes 
signifieth  no”,  El.  Gr.  21;  matteag, 
matta  teag,  moleag,  monteag,  nothing; 
ohtoou  moteag  (Prov.  13,  4),  ohtoou  mat¬ 
chaog  (Prov.  13,  7),  he  has  nothing 
( machdug ,  no  or  not;  machdge,  nothing, 
not  so;  mdtta  nowduwone,  I  knew  noth¬ 
ing;  matta  nickquehick,  I  want  it  not;  ma- 
chage  nickquehikomina,  I  want  nothing; 
mat  endno,  it  is  not  true;  mat  noleaatigo. 


TKUMBULLj 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


301 


no,  not — continued. 

I  have  no  money,  R.  W. ;  Narr.  vicit- 
tuks,  no,  Stiles;  mutta,  no,  not;  nuit- 
nequt,  not  at  all  [not  one,  mat  nequt ]; 
mntta  uie.be,  not  only,  C.;  Del.  makhta, 
tah,  Zeisb. ;  rndtta,  no;  td,  no  (a  lazy 
no);  tagu,  no,  not;  afta,  ta,  no,  no;  tak- 
tani,  taktdani,  1  don’t  know,  Hkw. ). 
wanne,  without,  destitute  of:  wanne 
nippeno,  there  was  no  water  in  it; 
wanne  wutmshe,  without  a  father,  hav¬ 
ing  no  father;  wanne  hoivane,  there  was 
no  one  (left),  Num.  21,  35.  ahque,  do 
not  (refrain  from,  leave  off),  ‘adverb 
of  forbidding’,  El.  Gr.  21.  See  do  not. 
The  negative  verb  is  formed  from  the 
affirmative  by  interposing  the  diph¬ 
thong  cd  betwee  the  radical  and  the 
syllable  following,  as  mwadchanumun, 
he  keeps  it;  mwadchauumamn,  he  does 
not  keep  it.  It  is  usually  accompanied 
by  mat  or  matta,  forming  a  double  nega¬ 
tive.  The  2d  pers.  sing,  of  the  im¬ 
perative  negative  is  formed  in  -dhkon  or 
-uhkon  (from  ahque,  do  not),  as  kum- 
mwtuhkon,  ‘thou  shalt  not  steal’,  etc. 
Strictly  this  is  the  imperative  of  pro¬ 
hibition  or  dehortation  rather  than  of 
simple  negation. 

noise,  wadtauatonkqussuonk  (vbl.  n.,  the 
making  of  a  sound,  a  voice),  noise. 
See  voice. 

noon,  pohshequaeu,  (it  is)  noon;  pohshe- 
qude,  at  noon  ( paushaquaw ,  pawesha- 
quaw,  R.  W.;  pohshequae,  C. ).  From 
pohshe,  half.  See  day. 

north,  ndnumiyeu,  nannummiyeu,  nan- 
nummau,  to,  from,  or  at  the  north, 
northward;  nanumit,  the  north  wind 
( nandmmatin  and  mnnddin,  R.  W.). 

northeast  wind,  chepewhsin,  R.  W. ;  sd- 
chimoachepewissin,  a  strong  northeast 
wind,  ibid.  Is  this  from  cheepie-ussu, 
caused  by  the  evil  spirit,  as  contrasted 
with  sowanishew,  the  southwest  wind, 
‘the  pleasingest,  warmest  wind  in  the 
climate’,  from  sovrwaniniu,  the  south¬ 
west,  where  ‘the  Gods  chiefly  dwell’ 
(R.  W.  83)? 

northwest,  wutcheksuau,  northwestward, 
Acts  27,  12  (ctekesu,  ‘the  northwest 


northwest — continued. 

[wind]’,  R.  AV. ;  chekesitch,  when  the 
wind  blows  northwest,  ibid.;  Chekesu- 
wand,  the  Western  God,  ibid.;  puh- 
tadtuniyeu  and  maquamitt inniyeu ,  from 
the  west,  Mass.  Ps. ) ;  wutcheksuayeu, 
westward,  to  or  from  the  west,  Gen. 
13,  14. 

nose,  mutchan,  a  nose,  the  snout  of  an 
animal;  kutchan,  thy  nose;  wutchan,  his 
nose;  pi.  -{-ash  (Peq.  wuchadn,  the  nos¬ 
trils;  kuchijage,  [your]  nose,  Stiles; 
mutchon,  a  nose,  C. ) . 
not.  See  do  not;  no. 
notwithstanding,  onch,  yet,  notwith¬ 
standing.  See  yet. 

nourish,  assamau,  he  gives  food  to  (him) ; 
sohkomau,  he  nourishes,  continues  to 
feed  (him).  See  feed, 
now,  yeuyeu  (by  redupl.  from  yeu,  this), 
number.  See  count, 
numerals. 

[Note. — Not  completed.  See  one,  two,  three, 
etc.] 

nurse,  nanowetea,  a  nurse  (a  keeper,  over¬ 
seer),  R.  AV.  [ ndndwehteou ,  he  keeps 
( nunndnaueehtoo ,  I  keep,  C. )]. 
nut,  annachim,  pi.  -\-inash,  nut,  nuts,  C. ; 
cf.  anducheminneash,  acorns,  R.  AV. 
Del.  quirn,  ‘  a  nut  growing  on  a  tree  ’  ( ? ) ; 
wunachquim,  an  acorn,  Hkw.,  who  fan¬ 
cifully  derives  it  ‘from  wunipach  [ wun - 
nepog'],  a  leaf,  nach,  a  hand,  and  quirn, 
a  nut  growing  on  a  tree  ’ ,  meaning  ‘  the 
nut  of  the  tree  the  leaves  of  which  re¬ 
semble  a  hand’  (Corresp.  407).  pad- 
teateaminash ,  nuts,  Gen.  43, 11.  Abn.pct- 
gahn,  pi. -raw,  noix,  Rasies.  Del.  m’sim, 
hickory  nut  [ moosi-min ,  smooth  nut]; 
ptuequim,  walnut  [ petukqui-inin ,  round 
nut];  wapim,  chestnut  [wompi-min, 
white  nut];  schauwemin,  beech  nut 
[ noshinne-min ,  angular  nut?],  Hkw. 
Virginian  sagatamener,  osamener,  pum- 
muckoner,  ‘kind  of  berry  like  unto  an 
acorn’,  used  to  make  bread  and  for  oil; 
sopummener,  ‘kind  of  berry  like  unto 
an  acorn’,  ‘of  this  sort  they  make 
bread’;  mangummenauk,  ‘the  very 
acorn  of  their  kind  of  oak’,  boiled  with 
fish  or  flesh,  Tracts  app.  to  Brereton, 
3  M.  H.  C.  viii,  120. 


302 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


o 


oak  tree,  naitimis  pi.  ncotimisseash  (pau- 
gatemisk,  R.  W. ;  pohkuhtimL i,  white  oak; 
wesattimis,  red  oak;  wesokkunk,  (red?) 
oak  wood,  C. ;  Abn.  anaskarnesi,  oak 
which  bears  acorns,  Rasies), 
oath,  chadchekeyeuwAonk  (vbl.  n.  from 
chadchekeyeuau,  he  swears  or  vows;  lit. 
bespeaks  vehemently,  El.  Gr.  21). 
obey,  noosivetau,  he  obeys  (him),  pri¬ 
marily  he  follows  (him);  noosweetash, 
obey  thou  ( him ) ;  ncosweetcok,  noswehtok, 
obey  ye  ( ken  ncoswetah,  obey  thou  me; 
ncoswehtau  Manit,  obey  God,  C. ) ;  with 
inan.  obj.  ncoswetam,  ndswehtam,  he 
obeys  (it,  as  a  command,  a  law,  etc.); 
ncoswetamook,  obey  ye;  vbl.  n.  naoswehta- 
mdonk  ( ncoswetamcoonk,  C. ),  obedience, 
an  obeying;  mat  ncoswehtamdonk,  diso¬ 
bedience.  From  ncosweu,  he  serves,  he 
yields,  wunnamptauau  (he  believes, 
trusts  to ) ,  he  obeys  (him) .  “  This  word 
they  use  just  as  the  Greek  tongue  doth 
that  verb  mdreveiv,  for  believing  or 
obeying,  as  it  is  often  used  in  the  N. 
Testament:  coan&umatous,  I  believe  you 
or  I  will  obey  you”,  R.  W.  From  I 
vmnnamptam,  he  believes, 
object,  tedg  (thing,  q.  v.). 
odor,  ammungquot,  asumunkquok,  smell, 
odor;  matchemungquot,  a  bad  smell; 
weetimungquot,  sweet  smell,  perfume; 
matchemungqussuonk,  a  bad  smell  pro¬ 
ceeding  from  or  caused  by  an  animate 
being;  so  wuttismmunkqusmonk,  ‘his 
smell’,  Gen.  27,  27. 

offer,  pummunum,  pumminnum,  he  offers, 
devotes  (it)  to  a  superior;  freq.  pciu- 
paumunau,  he  offers  or  presents  (him); 
suffix  uppaupaumenuh,  he  offers  them. 
Eliot  uses  this  word  to  express  the 
offering  or  consecration  of  objects  to 
God,  not  sacrificial.  Cf.  “Purnpom, 
a  tribute  skin  when  a  deer  is  killed 
in  the  water.  This  skin  is  carried  to 
the  sachem  or  prince  within  whose 
territory  the  deer  was  slain”,  R.  W. 
rnagou,  he  offers;  ummagun,  he  offers 
it;  see  give,  sephausu,  he  offers  sac¬ 
rifice  ( seephausu ,  it  is  offered  or  sacri¬ 
ficed);  sephausineau,  he  offers  (it)  in 
sacrifice,  he  sacrifices  (it);  sephausauau, 


offer— continued. 

he  sacrifices  (him,  an.  obj.)  to:  nag 
sephauscoog  wunna  u  monaoh  .  .  .  nuit- 
tannittooh,  they  sacrificed  their  sons  to 
devils,  Ps.  106,  27 ;  vbl.  n.  sephausuonk, 
an  offering,  sacrifice;  n.  agent,  sephau- 
suaen,  one  who  makes  offerings,  a  sacri- 
ficer,  a  priest;  sephamauau,  he  offers 
sacrifice  to,  or  he  sacrifices  (it,  inan. 
obj.)  to.  ompontinnum  magooonk,  he 
sends  an  offering  ( i.  e.  a  gift  or  a  tribute ) 
[ ompwunnau ,  he  is  tributary  to] . 
offspring;,  neechanog  (pi.);  n.  collect. 
vmnneechdnmnk,  offspring  collectively, 
all  children,  Rom.  9,  8.  See  child, 
often,  nohnompit  [when  it  is  repeated; 
suppos.  from  nohnompu] ,  oftentimes. 
mcochekit  nompe,  when  it  is  many 
times  (mcochekit,  nompe,  often,  C.;  kon- 
kitchea,  ayatche  (for  adtahshe),  as  often: 
ayatche  nippeeam,  I  am  (come)  often 
here,  R.  W. ).  adtashe,  ahhut  tahshe,  at- 
twche,  uttcoche,  as  often  as,  as  many 
times  as  [ adt  tahshe], 
oil,  pummee  ( pummee  or  samme,  C. ). 
From  pummoh,  the  sea,  i.  e.  pumm&e, 
of  the  sea. 

ointment,  sussequionk  (anointing;  vbl. 

n.  from  sussequn,  he  anoints), 
old,  kehchis,  kutehissu,  (he  is)  old,  an  old 
man;  pi.  kehchisog,  kutchisog,  old  men, 
elders,  seniores.  The  inan.  form  is  some¬ 
times,  though  rarely,  used,  as  kehchi- 
yeue  ketasscot,  an  old  king;  pi.  kehchiog 
(an.  inactive),  the  old,  the  ancients 
( kitchize ,  R.  W.;  kehchius,  C. ;  Del. 
kigeyi  lenno,  an  aged  man,  Hkw.  “Chise 
is  an  old  man,  and  kiehchise  a  man  that 
exceedeth  in  age”,  E.  Winslow’s  Re¬ 
lation,  1624.  kutchinnu,  a  middle-aged 
man  ( ? ) ,  R.  W. ) .  kehchisqua,  kutchisqua, 
an  old  woman  ( tvenise,  pi.  -suck,  R.W. ; 
Del.  gichtochqueu,  an  aged  woman; 
chauchschlsis,  a  very  old  woman,  Hk  w. ) . 
hdmes,  pi.  -suck,  an  old  man,  old  men, 
R.  W.  mahtauntam,  mohtantam,  (he  is) 
old;  nummolitantam,  I  am  old;  suppos. 
mahtauntog,  when  old  ( mattaUntam , 
‘very  old  and  decrepit’,  R.W.  Del. 
mihilusis,  ‘  an  old  man  worn  out  with 
age’,  Hkw.)  This  word  has  nearly 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


303 


old — -con  t  i  nued . 

the  same  relation  to  kehchis  as  tha 
Latin  senium  to  senectus:  mohtantam 
primarily  signifies  he  fails,  decays, 
is  passing  away  (Ger.  ein  alter  Greis; 
Fr.  un  vieillard,  un  barbon,  Notes  to 
El.  Gr.  xvii;  see  fade;  decrepit); 
kehchissu,  an.  of  kehche,  chief,  superior, 
denotes  age  entitled  to  respect,  a  su¬ 
perior  by  reason  of  age.  sepepomantam, 
(he  lives  long,  is  long  lived)  he  is 
grown  old,  ‘stricken  in  .years’,  Gen. 
24,  1.  nukkukquiyeu,  he  is  old,  with 
reference  to  a  measure  of  duration  ( toll , 
unnukkoohquiyeu  noh  nonksq,  how  old  is 
that  girl?  C. ).  nukk&ne  ( =negonne , 
first),  old,  ancient  (of  inan.  obj.): 
nukkone  seip,  ‘ancient  river’;  nukkone 
mayash,  theoldwavs;  nenegonneayeucoh, 

‘  that  which  waxeth  old  ’ ;  yeush  nuk- 
kdneyeuukish ,  ‘these  (are)  ancient 
things’.  Cf.  nukkonau,  he  leaves,  for¬ 
sakes,  he  is  left,  is  forsaken,  eatawus, 
‘it  is  old’  (cloth),  R.  W. ;  eatadbana, 
old  traps,  ibid. 

old  age,  kehchiyeuunneat  and  kehchiseun- 
neat  (to  be  old;  infinitive  for  noun),  old 
age:  ut  kukkehchiyeuunneat,  in  thy  old 
age;  ut  wunne  kutchiseunneat,  in  a  good 
old  age,  Gen.  25,  8.  mahtauntamoonk 
(vbl.  n.  from  mohtantam),  old  age,  de¬ 
crepitude,  senium,  nukkukquiyeuonk, 
old  age. 

oldwife  (Anas  glacialis).  See  duck. 

on.  See  stand. 

once,  pasukqut.  See  one  ( pasuk ). 

one,  nequt  (pasuk,  nequt,  C. ;  nquit,  R. W. ; 
Peq.  nuqu'dt,  St. ;  Muh.  ngwittah,  Edw. ; 
Del.  gutti,  n’gutti,  pasuk  [for  peasuk, 
a  diminutive?]  ( pdwsuck ,  R.  W. ; 

“nequt,  a  thing  that  is  past;  pasuk, 
a  thing  in  being”,  C. ;  pdschuk,  “a 
true  Mohicanni  word  for  one,  and 
so  I  suppose  nequt  to  be,  in  its  proper . 
place”,  Hkw. ;  Abn.  pezekS;  Chip. 
paizhik;  Cr ee  pSyak,  one;  piuk,  ten). 
See  Hecke welder’s  observations  on 
nequt  (n’gutti),  pasuk,  and  other  Dela¬ 
ware  words  for  one,  in  Notes  on 
Eliot’s  Grammar,  xlv.  The  distinc¬ 
tion  indicated  by  Cotton  does  not  seem 
to  have  been  observed  by  Eliot,  Wil¬ 
liams,  or  other  early  writers  of  the  lan- 


one — continued. 

guage,  yet  it  is  not  improbably  well 
founded. 

one  by  one,  nanaseu  (an.),  nandse. 

onion,  weenwdsog  (pi.). 

only,  webe:  ken  webe  nussu,  thou  only; 
matta  ne  webe,  (not  that  only)  not  only 
so.  nont(l):  u-ebe  nont  God,  ‘but  [ex¬ 
cept]  God  only’,  Mark  2,  7;  pasuk  7iont 
God,  ‘there  is  but  one  God’,  one  God 
only,  Ind.  Primer  (pasuk  naunt  Man  it, 
there  is  only  one  God,  R.  W.).  nuk- 
quttegheon,  only  son,  Luke  7, 12;  9,  38. 

open  (adj.),  wdshwi,  (itis)  open;  wdshwoh- 
tae  (woshwohteau,  it  is)  open,  i.  e.  made 
or  become  open,  opened:  wdshwohtde 
muttcon,  open  mouth;  suppos.  part,  wosh- 
wohtag,  (when  it  is)  open:  woshwohtag 
ivisq,  an  open  vessel,  i.  e.  a  vessel  when 
open;  woshwetashine,  opened,  open,  as 
a  door  or  gate,  Rev.  3,  8.  pohquaeu, 
(it  is)  open,  manifest,  clear;  adv. 
openly;  pohquadchit  (pucquatchick, 
R.  W. ),  in  the  open  air,  out  of  doors. 
See  clear. 

open  (v.),  wohshinum,  woshwunnum,  he 
opens  (it) :  woshwunnummk  kenogkaneg, 
open  the  window;  woshwunnum  squont, 
=  wohsMtanum,  he  opens  the  door  (nco- 
woshumnum,  I  open,  C.);  suppos.  woh- 
shinuk,  woshinug,  when  he  opens  (it); 
caus.  inan.  wohshitanum,  woshwetanum, 
he  opens  (a  door,  gates,  etc.),  i.  e.  he 
makes  it  open :  wohshitanush  or  wohshi- 
tanush  squont,  open  thou  the  door;  an. 
wohshitanumau,  he  opens  the  door  to 
(him)  (pauquanamxinnea,  open  me  the 
door,  R.  W.). 

opposite,  anaquabit,  (when  he  is)  oppo¬ 
site;  anaquohtag,  (when  it  is)  opposite; 
see  before,  piuhsuke,  over  against, 
opposite  to;  freq.  papiuhsuke,  recipro¬ 
cally  opposite,  over  against  each  other; 
see  against,  awque,  acoliqueu,  ayeu- 
queu,  (he  is)  opposite,  on  the  other 
side,  he  opposes:  howan  aooquef  ‘who  is 
my  adversary?’  Is.  50,  8;  suppos.  part, 
pi.  nag  ayeuqueagig,  ‘our  adversaries’, 
opponents,  Neh.  4,  11;  hence  ayeuuh- 
konau,  he  opposes,  goes  on  opposing, 
makes  war  upon,  fights  with;  neg  nut- 
tayeuuhkonukquog,  dcohkonukueog,  our  - 
enemies;  see  against;  war;  cf.  nuh— 


304 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN'  25 


opposite — continued. 

quaeii,  he  looks  toward,  faces,  —  n’awh- 
quaeu  (?). 
or,  amh. 

order  (n. ),  kuhkuhwaonk  (order of  succes¬ 
sion  or  position). 

order  (v. ).  See  command;  shape, 
orderly,  in  order,  hohtdiu,  hohtoeu, 
‘from  time  to  time’,  Ezek.  4,  10,  11; 
‘in  order’,  ex  ordine,  Acts  11,  4.  kuh- 
kenauwe,  kuhkcowae,  in  order,  orderly 
[ kuhkenaihheau ,  freq.  from  kenaihheau, 
kenauwehheau,  he  shapes,  forms,  fash¬ 
ions], 

ordure.  See  dung. 

orphan,  touies,  touwies,  tauvnes  [toueu- 
ussu,  he  is  deserted,  left  alone;  or 
dimin.  from  toueu] ;  pi.  -kog  ( touiuwock , 
fatherless  children,  R.  W.).  See  de¬ 
serted. 

other.  See  another;  other  side, 
other  side,  ongkomae,  ogkome,  on  the 
other  side  of  (beyond):  ogkomae  pum- 
meneutunkanit,  on  the  other  side  of  the 
wall  ( acdwmuck  ndteshem,  ‘I  came  over 
the  water  ’ ,  I  came  from  the  other  side 
[pgkomut\,'R.~\\T . ;  acawmenoakit  [ ogkome - 
oh  kit ] ,  ‘  from  the  land  on  the  other  side  ’ , 
England,  ibid.),  onkoue  ( onkkdue ,  C. ), 
beyond,  behind,  on  the  other  side  of. 
otter,  rikeke,  pi.  nkequock,  R.  IV. ;  nke- 
quashunck,  an  otter-skin  coat,  ibid.; 
Alg.  nikik,  Lahontan.  From  nekikau, 
nenekikau,  he  tears,  scratches, 
ours,  nuttaihnn,  it  is  ours  (partic.  pi. ); 
kuttaihivn,  it  is  ours  (gen.  pi.)  ( nenauun , 
ours,  C.). 

out.  See  draw  out;  pour  out;  put  forth; 

spread  out;  stretch  out;  wear  out, 
out  of,  wutche.  See  from, 
out  of  doors,  pohquadchit.  See  clear; 
open. 

outside,  pohquodchiyeu,  (it  is)  on  the 
outside  of,  in  an  open  place;  see  clear. 
vmkeche,  without,  outside  of:  woskeche 
.  .  .  wunonk,  qut  anomut,  ‘the  outside 
of  the  dish,  but  within’,  Matt.  23,  25, 
26;  and  woskeche  .  .  .  anomut ,  out¬ 
wardly  .  .*.  within,  v.  28. 


over.  See  above;  other  side, 
overcome,  sohkom,  he  overcomes,  con¬ 
quers  (it);  an.  sohkau,  he  overcomes 
(him).  See  conquer, 
overflow,  anuwutchuwan,  anitchuan,  it 
overflows;  anitchuwanne,  overflowing. 
See  flow. 

oversee.  See  overseer;  govern, 
overseer,  nanowetea,  ‘  an  orderer  and 
ruler  of  their  worship’,  R.  W. ;  neen- 
nanomvunnemun,  I  oversee  it,  ibid. ; 
nan6uwetea,  ‘  a  nurse  or  keeper  ’ ,  ibid, 
overwhelm,  nilhkuhkom,  it  covers,  over¬ 
whelms  (it) ;  wun-nuhkukkom-un,  it  cov¬ 
ered  it,  Ex.  24,  15,  16.  From  ncokeu, 
it  descends,  goes  down, 
owe,  nconamontukquohwhau,  he  owes 
(him),  lit.  he  is  owed,  unnontukquah- 
whau,  he  owes,  is  in  debt;  suppos.  part. 
anuntukquohwonche,  one  who  owes;  (oh 
kittinnontukquohhuk,  how  much  dost 
thou  owe  to  (him)?  ( kuttinnohtukquahe , 
I  am  in  your  debt,  C. ;  vbl.  n.  nummon- 
tuhqualni'huttuonk,  a  debt,  ibid.;  vbl.  n. 
pass,  nohtuhquahwhittuonk,  debt,  ibid.; 
kunnmnamqutuckquaush,  I  will  owe  it 
to  you,  R.  W. ;  nonamautuekquaheginash 
(pi.),  debts,  ibid.).  See  debt, 
owl,  oohcomaus  ( oh&mous ,  R.  W.),  kcoh- 
kaokhaus;  kitcheicewes,  kehche  kmhkcok- 
haus,  a  great  owl  (Strix  virginiana?) ; 
wewes,  the  screech  owl. 
own,  wadchanum,  he  owns  (it),  he  pos¬ 
sesses,  has  in  keeping.  See  keep, 
owner,  suppos.  noh  waddchumit  wadchu, 
‘the  owner  tf  the  hill’,  1  K.  16,  24; 
noh  wadtaiJieunitche,  he  who  owns  (an. 
obj.);  suppos.  noh  imdtnihet,  noh  wadti- 
heit,  the  owner  of  (an.  obj.);  pi.  nag 
wadtiheitcheg,  the  owner.  See  belong  to. 
noji  ohtunk  (he  who  possesses;  suppos. 
part  from  ohtau ) ,  the  owner  of  (it) ;  pi. 
neg  ohtunkeg,  the  owners.  See  have  ( v. ) . 
oyster,  chunkco,  apwonnah,  C. ;  oppone- 
vaiihock  (pi.),  oysters,  R.  W.;  Narr.  uh- 
ponuhpug,  Stiles;  Peq.  a’ punnyhaug, 
Stiles.  From  apwonau,  he  roasts,  and 
hogk,  shellfish :  the  shellfish  which  are 
for  roasting. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


305 


I* 


paddle  (n .),ivuttuhhunk  ( vr&tkunck,  R.TV.; 
patitous  ne  ndtehunck,  bring  hither  my 
paddle,  ibid.,  =paudtash  noottuhhunk) . 

paddle  (v. ),  chem&u,  he  paddles  or  rows; 
menuhke  chemaog,  they  were  ‘toiling  in 
rowing’  (rowing  hard),  Mark  6,  48; 
suppos.  part.  pi.  wame  nohtoe  chema- 
cheg,  ‘  all  that  handle  the  oar  ’  (who  are 
skillful  rowers),  Ezek.  27,  29  (imper. 
chemosh,  paddle  or  row;  pi.  chemeck, 
paddle,  R.  W. ). 

pain,  onkquanumcoonk,  unkquamimcoonk, 
vbl.  n.  from  unkquanumau,  he  suffers  or 
is  in  pain;  elsewhere  ongquomomco,  he 
is  in  pain ;  nut-onkquomom,  I  am  in  pain ; 
vbl.  n.  onkquommomwonk,  pain,  torment; 
from  unkque,  sore,  grievous,  extreme. 
See  extreme,  nchesammam,  nchesam- 
mattam,  I  am  in  pain,  R.  W.  See  sore; 
torment. 

paint  (n.),  wunntlm,  ‘their  red  painting 
which  they  most  delight  in’,  R.  TV. 
From  wunne,  handsome. 

paint  (v.),  wussuckwhommen,  to  paint, 
R.  W.,  whence  “  vmssucktvhonck,  a  let¬ 
ter,  for  having  no  letters,  their  painting 
comes  the  nearest”;  vmssuckhdsu,  (he 
is)  painted,  ibid.  anogku,  he  is 
painted,  he  paints  himself  ( aunaktsu , 
he  is  painted;  pi.  aunakenck,  they  are 
painted,  R.  W. ;  nut-annogkmum,  I 
paint,  C. ). 

pale,  wompekujshonat,  to  be  pale;  wompe- 
kushau,  he  is  pale;  wuskemk  wompeku- 
shano,  his  face  grows  pale  ( wompekish - 
eede  wosketomp,  a  pale  man;  ncowomp- 
pohkisham,  I  am  pale;  wompishkauonk, 
paleness,  C. ).  From  wompi,  white, 
k’  progressive,  with  -ish  denoting  a  bad 
quality.  Cf.  gray. 

palsied,  nanunkqussu,  ndnunkkussu,  (he 
is)  palsied,  has  a  palsy;  suppos.  noli 
nanunksit;  pi.  neg  nanunksitcheg,  they 
who  have  the  palsy.  From  nunnuk- 
kunum,  freq.  of  older  form  nukkunum, 
he  shakes,  with  an.  active  ussu.  Cf. 
nukkemoo,  it  is  shaken;  nunnukshau,  he 
trembles,  quakes. 

pant,  mehmehshanomau,  he  pants;  num- 
mehmehshanomup,  I  did  pant,  Ps.  119, 
131. 


parched  corn,  appnminneonash  (pi. ),  up- 
pum-  ( aupummineanash,  R.  TV.;  aupu- 
minea-nawsailmp,  ‘the  parched  meal, 
boiled  with  water,  at  their  houses, 
which  is  the  wholesomest  diet  they 
have’,  R.  TV. ).  From  apwau,  min:  he 
roasts  or  bakes  corn  or  other  fruit, 
pardon.  See  forgive, 
parents,  oochetuonguh,  vmlchetuonguh 
(gen.  construct),  the  parents  of,  his 
juarents:  kootchetuonganoooog,  your  par¬ 
ents  ( wutchettuongdnog ,  ancestors,  C. ). 
From  wutcheu,  wadchiyeu,  suppos.  wad- 
chit,  he  comes  from.  See  come  from, 
part,  navmtche,  some,  a  part;  opposed  to 
wame,  all,  the  whole,  chippi,  chippe,  a 
portion,  part,  division; .  suppos.  inan. 
chippag  (when  it  is  divided  or  parted): 
yaue  chippi,  yaue  chippag,  a  fourth  part; 
piukque  chippe  (or  chippag ),  a  tenth 
part;  adv.  chippeu,  partly,  in  part, 
partridge,  pahpahkshaas,  pohpolihissu 
( paupock ,  pi.  paupocksuog,  R.  TV.;  Peq. 
papoquateece,  quail;  cutquauss,  partridge, 
Stiles.  In  Ex.  16,  13,  Eliot  has  chw- 
chcowciog,  quails;  but  quailsog  (obj .  quail- 
soh)  is  transferred  in  Num.  11,  31;  and 
pcohpcohquttog  is  used  for  quails,  Ps. 
105,  40.  Muh.  pahpahcogh,  Jeff.;  L.  I. 
apacux,  partridge;o/(oco<ces,  quail,  Wood; 
Del.  pabhacku,  pheasant;  popocus,  par¬ 
tridge  (i.e.  quail),  Hkw. ). 
pass  away,  mahtsheau,  mahsheau,  it  fails, 
fades,  passes  away.  See  fade, 
pass  by,  pomsheau,  it  is  passed,  it  passes, 
‘is  over  and  gone’,  Cant.  2,  11;  ‘is 
past’,  Jer.  8,  20.  paumushau,  pamu- 
shau,  he  passes  by;  paumukauau,  he 
passes  by  (him);  up-paumukauoh,  he 
passes  by  him,  he  goes  by  him  ( pomu- 
sliau,  he  walks,  he  goes  onward).  See 
walk. 

pasturage,  tannadtuppcoonk,  pasturing, 
a  pasture,  vbl.  n.  from  tannadtupjxnog, 
they  feed  or  graze, 
patch,  meshashshidnat,  to  patch,  C. 
path,  may,  a.  way,  a  path  ( mayi ,  R.  TV.): 
ayim  may,  he  made  a  way;  neen  may, 
I  am  the  way;  kishke  mayut,  by  the 
wayside  ( mayno ,  is  there  a  way?;  mat 
mayanunno,  there  is  no  way;  tounishin 


B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25- — 20 


306 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


path — continued. 

meyif  where  lies  the  way?  R.  W. ). 
From  au,  he  goes  to,  am,  he  goes,  with 
m’  indefinite.  “From  aan,  ‘to  go’,  is 
derived  eyaya,  ‘  whither  I  go  ’  ”  (Chip.), 
Schoolcraft. 

patient,  manunnissu,  he  is  patient;  vbl.  n. 
manunniyeuonk,  patient,  being  patient; 
maninnissuonk,  patience  in  exercise, 
acting  patiently.  See  slow, 
pay,  dadtuhkau,  he  pays  (him);  6ad- 
tuhkah,  pay  thou  me  ( oadtuhkah  eyeu, 
pay  me  now,  C. );  inan.  oadtehteau, 
coadtehteaou,  he  pays  (it),  as  money, 
tribute,  a  vow,  etc.,  he  makes  pay¬ 
ment  of  (it);  odtehteash,  pay  thou;  pish 
kutuadtehteam,  thou  shalt  pay  (it)  (vbl. 
n.  oadtehteaonk,  payment,  C. ).  kun- 
naiimpatous,  kuk-keiskwhush,  I  will  pay 
you;  keeskwhim  teaugmesin,  pay  me  my 
money,  R.  W.  p&um,  he  pays,  “a 
word  newly  made  from  the  English: 
cuppdimish,  I  will  pay  you”,  R.  W.  El¬ 
iot  gives  a  paradigm  of  this  verb  in  the 
suffix  an.  form  (Gram.  28-58):  kup- 
paumush,  I  pay  thee;  nuppayum,  I  pay 
him,  etc. 

peace,  ciqubne,  R.  W. 
peag.  See  wampum, 
peak,  kussohkdi,  kussohkdiyeu,  on  a  high 
peak  or  summit, 
pekan.  See  fisher. 

pen ,  mequn  (a  feather)  (meek,  a  pen,  C. ) ; 

mequnehquog,  a  penknife, 
penny,  ompskot  ( dmpscat ,  R.W.;  ompskod, 
C. ):  nequt-ompskot  ( nequtomskot ,  Matt. 
20,  2),  one  penny  ( nequittdmpscat ,  R. 
W. ),  i.  e.  one  penny’s  worth  of  wampum 
(=a  span?).  Cf.  nees-aumscat,  two 
pence;  nees-aumscussayi,  two  spans  (of 
wampum),  R.  W. 

people,  ninnimissind/wock,  ‘folk  or  peo¬ 
ple’,  R.  W.  See  man  ( misdn ).  chip- 
pissuog,  a  people,  a  tribe  (they  who 
are  separate  or  by  themselves),  from 
chippe,  separate,  and  act.  an.  ussu.  Cf. 
chippanmonk ,  a  tribe  (collectively), 
perform.  See  do. 

perhaps,  paguodche,  pagivodche  (pogqudt- 
che,  C. ),  it  may  be,  perhaps,  marni&t, 
‘it  may  be  that’,  Gen.  16,  2  ( ammiat , 
perhaps,  it  may  be;  ammiate  matteag, 
maybe  not,  C. ). 


periwinkle,  meteatihock,  ‘the  periwinkle 
[Pyrula  carica  or  P.  canaliculata] ,  of 
which  they  make  their  wdmpan  or 
white  money’,  R.  W.  The  wdmpan 
was  made  from  “the  stem  or  stock  of 
the  .  .  .  meteauhook,  when  all  the  shell 
is  broken  off”.  Possibly  from  mehtd- 
uog,  ear,  and  hogk,  shell:  ear-shaped 
shell;  possibly  from  muttde,  abundant, 
as  distinguished  from  the  rarer  black 
peag  or  mckauhock. 
permission,  um mugkamaittuon k,  C. 
permit,  unnantam,  he  wills,  intends, 
purposes  (it);  an.  unnanumau,  he  per¬ 
mits  (him);  suppos.  unnanumit,  if  he 
permit  (him);  inan.  unnardog,  if  he  per¬ 
mit  (it),  i.  e.  if  he  will  ( unayumeh , 
permit  me,  C.).  See  think, 
person,  howan,  anybody,  any  person, 
somebody;  see  any.  N.  collect,  mut- 
tannunk,  persons  (as  distinguished  from 
cattle,  animals,  or  inanimate  objects) ; 
an.  pi.  mutt&ancoog  (they  are  many),  the 
multitude,  many  persons, 
persuade,  nupweshanau,  he  persuades 
(him);  suffix  wun-nepweshan-uh ,  he 
persuaded  him  ( nunnupweshan ,  I  per¬ 
suade,  C. ) ;  act.  an.  nupweshasscoau, 
he  exercises  or  uses  persuasion  (nup- 
weshashscoonat,  to  persuade,  C.);  vbl. 
n.  nupweshassoowaonk,  persuasion, 
perverse,  panneu,  (it  is)  out  of  the  way, 
contrary ;  suppos.  noh  panneont,  ‘  he  who 
is  perverse’,  who  goes  out  of  the  way, 
Prov.  14,  2.  See  astray;  different, 
pestilence,  enninnedonk,  pestilence,  con¬ 
tagious  or  infectious  disease,  weesau- 
slidonk  ( wesauashadonck ,  the  plague, 
R.W. ;  vbl.  n.  from  wesauashadi,  he 
hath  the  plague,  ibid.),  wesdshaonk, 
‘a  fever’,  John  4,  52;  from  wesaui, 
weesoe,  yellow,  with  -ish  of  derogation 
or  bad  quality.  See  fever, 
pestle,  quinalisin:  nashpe  quinahsinnunk, 
‘with  a  pestle’,  Prov.  27,  22  [i.  e.  a 
‘long  stone’,  qunni-assun\. 
physic,  maskehtu,  moskehtu  ( maskit,  R. 

W. ),  i.  e.  herbs.  See  medicine, 
physician,  ponaskehtuaen,  one  who  gives 
medicine  [from  ponam,  he  puts,  ap¬ 
plies;  maskehtu,  medicine] ;  ponaskehtu- 
women,  one  who  is  giving  medicine,  a 
physician  in  practice  [ ponam-maskeht - 
•ussu]. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


307 


pickerel,  qundsuog  (pi.),  ‘a  fresh  fish 
which  the  Indians  break  the  ice  in 
fresh  ponds,  when  they  take’,  R.  W. 
(Peq.  quunnoose,  ‘pickerel  or  long- 
nose’,  Stiles;  Abn.  k8n8se,  pi.  -sak, 
brochet,  Rasies).  From  qunnosu,  he  is 
long. 

piece,  kodchuhki,  a  piece,  portion,  or 
fragment  of  ( kodchuhki  weyaus,  a  piece 
of  meat,  C. ) :  kodchuhki  ohteuk,  a  part 
of  afield,  Gen.  33,  19,  =  kodchuhkeohke, 
Josh.  24,  32;  kodchuhkeu  petukqunnunk, 
a  piece  of  bread,  Prov.  6,  26.  chogq,  a 
bit,  a  small  piece  or  fragment,  ‘a  farth¬ 
ing’,  Matt.  5,  26  ( cliohki ,  a  minute  of 
time,  C.) 

pierce.  See  prick. 

pigeon,  vjuskuhwhun-an  (wusk&whdn, 

R.  W.). 

pike,  Alg.  kinonge,  Lah.,  whence  vms- 
kelonge.  See  pickerel. 

pillow  (?),  appuhquassumoo,  uppuhq-.  Cf. 
dbuhquosik,  uppohquos,  a  covering; 
abockquosinash,  mats  used  for  covering 
the  wigwams,  R.  W. 

pin,  kenunkwhonk,  Jdnnunkwhonk;  pi.  -on- 
gash,  (wooden  ?)  pins  (cf.  kenuhwheg, 
a  nail,  from  kenai,  it  is  sharp;  also 
Abn.  kai'iSis,  kaiiSiak,  epine,  Rasies). 
ohliomaquesunk  (for  ohkom-  ?),  a  pin  or 
needle,  C.  wdnkontog,  a  pin  (to  hang 
things  on),  Ezek.  15,  3;  lit.  a  crooked 
stick  [wonki-ulitug']  or  wooden  hook. 
In  Num.  3,  37,  and  4,  32,  the  English 
word  pin  is  transferred,  uppinnumooash. 

pine  tree,  kco,  kanva  ( cowaw ,  R.  W. ;  co- 
ivaivSsuck,  young  pines,  ibid.;  kcowds, 
pine  tree,  C.  Abn.  k8e;  Del.  cuwe; 
L.  I.  cw,  Jeff.). 

pipe,  hopuonck,  R.  W. ;  uhpuconkash, 
pipes,  and  uhpcoonk,  tobacco,  C.  Cf. 
kogkehooponat,  to  be  drunk,  C. ;  uppco, 
he  feeds,  eats.  See  eat.  wuttdmma- 
gon,  a  pipe,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  wuttummunc, 
Stiles.  Cf.  wuttamduog,  tobacco,  R.W. 
See  smoke;  tobacco. 

pit,  passohtheg,  pussohtheg,  passahtheg  ( pas - 
sdhtamwog,  they  dig  a  pit) ;  wonogq,  a 
hole  ( petshonat  ogqunat,  to  fall  into  a 
pit,  Matt.  12,  11).  See  hole. 

pitcher,  poothansh :  uppoothansh,  ‘her 
pitcher’,  Gen.  24,  15,  20;  adj.  pcolhon- 
chue  nippe,  a  pitcher  of  water,  Mark  14, 
13.  Elsewhere  ‘pitcher’  is  rendered 


pitcher — continued. 

by  wisq,  uiskq  (see  vessel),  and  wuttuh- 
huppaitch,  Eccl.  12,  6  (see  draw  water). 
See  Rasies,  s.  v.  cruche:  “potaiitsS, 
espece  de  cruche  d’ecorce,  ronde  en 
haut”,  etc. 

pity,  kitteamonteanum,  he  pities.  See 
mercy. 

place  (n. ),  ayeuonk:  kutayeuonk,  thy 
dwelling  place;  ayeuonganit,  to  the 
place.  Vbl.  n.  from  ayeu,  he  is  located, 
he  is  in  this  or  that  place.  See  dwell; 
high  place. 

place  (v. ),  ponum,  ponam,  he  puts  (it); 
upponamun ,  he  puts  it;  nupponam  ( nup - 
poonum,  C. ) ,  I  put;  ponsh,  put  thou  (it) ; 
poncok,  put  ye  (it) ;  an.  ponau,  he  puts 
or  places  (him);  suffix  upponuh,  he  puts 
him;  poneh,  put  thou  me;  kuppon  kuh- 
hog,  thou  placest  thyself,  Ps.  139,  5. 
Cf.  appu,  he  sits,  rests,  is  placed  (?). 

plague.  See  pestilence. 

plain  (adj.),  pahke,  clear,  manifest.  See 
clear. 

plain  (n. ),  mukkoshqtd.  See  meadow. 

plant,  ohkehteau,  ohketeau,  he  plants  (v. 
i.  and  t.  inan.  obj.):  ohketcaog  ohteu- 
kdnash,  they  plant  the  fields  ( aukee - 
teadmen,  qutt&unemun,  to  plant  corn; 
aukeeteadmitch,  planting  time,  R.  W. ; 
nutohkeehteam,  I  sow  or  plant,  C. ) ; 
pish  kutohketeam,  thou  shalt  plant; 
suppos.  part.  pass,  ahketeamuk,  when 
it  is  planted,  hence  a  plant;  n.  agent. 
ohkeliteaen-in,  a  planter,  one  who  plants. 
ohteuhkonau,  he  plants  a  field.  See 
field. 

play,  pauocliau,  he  plays,  he  is  play¬ 
ing;  pauochadog,  they  are  playing,  R. 
W.;  nippauochdumen,  we  are  dancing, 
ibid.  Cf.  neg  poacheg,  they  who  make 
merry,  Jer.  30, 19.  See  merry,  pompu, 
pohmpu,  he  plays;  pompuog,  pohmpuog, 
they  play  ( puhpuog ,  C. ;  nuh-puhpum, 
I  play,  ibid.);  vbl.  n.  pohmpuonk,  pom- 
puonk,  play,  sport  ( pompooonk ,  recrea¬ 
tion;  puhpuonk,  playing,  C. ;  pohmpoo- 
onlc,  Ind.  Laws),  nuk-kissauous,  I  play, 
C.,  i.  e.  I  play  at  a  game,  I  gam¬ 
ble;  akesuog,  ‘they  are  at  cards,  or 
telling  of  rushes’;  n’takesemin,  ‘I  am 
telling  or  counting;  for  their  play  is  a 
kind  of  arithmetic’,  R.  W.  wunnaug- 
onhommin,  ‘to  play  at  dice’,  i.  e.  by 


808 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


play — continued. 

throwing  painted  plum  stones  ( asauan - 
ash)  into  a  tray  ( wunndug ),  R.  W. 
please  (?),  vnissekitteahkudnat,  C. ;  ncosse- 
kittedh,  I  please,  ibid,  wekontam,  he  is 
pleased.  See  glad. 

Pleiades,  asishquttauog,  Job  38,  31; 

Amos  5,  8;  but  Roger  Williams  gives 
this,  shwishciUtowwduog,  as  the  name  of 
‘the  golden  mete-wand’  (i.  e.  the  belt 
of  Orion),  and  chipp&puock,  ‘the  brood 
hen’  (or  Pleiades).  The  latter  is  more 
probably  correct,  since  shwishcuttow- 
wduog  or  asishquttciog  seems  to  be  de-  j 
rived  from  shwe,  three,  and  xqutta,  fire 
( shwishcuttaw ,  a  wigwam  with  three 
fires,  R.  W.  46),  and  chippdpuock 
( =chipappuog ,  El.)  means  they  keep 
apart,  are  by  themselves,  are  separate,  j 
plenteous,  mussegen,  missegen,  (it  is) 
plenteous,  abundant:  missegene  ohke,  a 
plentiful  land;  suppos.  ne  rnasegik,  that 
which  is  plenteous  or  abundant,  abun-  j 
dance  or  plenty  (as  of  a  harvest,  etc.).  ! 
plenty.  See  abound;  abundance, 
plough,  anaskham,  he  digs.  See  dig. 
pluck,  pahpasinum  misxunkquarninneash, 
he  plucks  ears  of  corn  ( pohsunkquenum , 
Matt.  12,  1).  kodtuhkom,  he  plucks; 
mik-kodtuhkom,  I  pluck,  C.  (?).  Cf. 
kodtinnum,  he  draws  or  plucks  (it)  out, 
as  a  sword  from  the  sheath,  etc.;  an. 
kodinneh,  pull  me  out,  Ps.  31,  4;  kodnaok 
nootauut ,  pull  ye  (them)  out  of  the  fire,  j 
Jude  23. 

plunder.  See  rob. 

point,  uhquaeu,  uhqu&e,  at  the  point  or 
extremity  of;  rad.  uhk ,  uhq,  a  sharp 
extremity,  a  point,  the  point  of.  See 
end;  extreme,  naiyag  (when  it  is  an¬ 
gular  or  cornering),  an  angle,  corner,  or 
point  (e.  g.  of  land).  See  angle, 
poison,  uhquoskeht,  uhquoshket,  unkquas-  \ 
ket,  poison  (of  serpents,  Ps.  140,  3;  of  j 
arrows,  Job  6,  4):  unkque  unkquoshket, 
‘cruel  venom’,  Dent.  32,  33.  From 
.  unkque ,  cruel,  sore,  grievous, 
pole,  qunnuhtug  \qunni-uhtug,  a  long 
stick] . 

polished,  kussenaume,  Is.  49,  2. 
pond,  nippisse,  nips  [dimin.  of  nippe, 
water],  a  small  body  of  water,  a  pool  or 
pond,  often  compounded  with  ’pog, 
’pctug:  nippissepog,  nippissipag,  nuppissi- 


pond — continued. 

png;  eu  nippissepagivut,  into  the  lake, 
Luke  8,  33;  ydai  nippissepagivut,  on  one 
side  of  the  pool,  2  Sam.  2,  13;  nuppisse 
nippe,  water  of  the  pool,  Is.  22,  11; 
nips,  a  pool,  John  5,  2,  4,  7  ( nippis ,  Mass. 
Ps. ;  nips,  pond,  pi.  nlpsash,  R.  W. ; 
Peq.  nuppsawaug,  pond,  Stiles) ;  nuppis- 
sepag,  ‘standing  water’,  Ps.  107,  35,  i.  e. 
nuppme-appog,  suppos.  inan.  from 
appu,  he  sits,  remains  in  a  place.  See 
water. 

poor,  matcMku,  (he  is)  poor;  pi.  matche- 
kuog  ( matchSkue,  poor;  noh  matchekoo, 
he  is  poor;  num-matchek  ( num-macheke , 
R.  W. ),  I  am  poor,  C. ) ;  vbl.  n.  matcheku- 
onk,  poverty.  From  matchuk,  when  it 
is  bad,  or  matche,  bad,  with  ’k  progress¬ 
ive,  he  is  going  on  badly  (?). 
poplar  tree,  meetive,  metwe. 
porgy,  misliciip,  pi.  mishcuppadog, 
‘bream’,  R.  W.,  corrupted  to  ‘scup’, 
‘scuppaug’,  and  ‘porgy’  or  ‘paugee’ 
(Pagrus  argyrops,  Linn,  and  Storer). 
The  name  is  derived  from  the  large, 
close  scales,  mishe-kuppi. 
porpoise,  tatackomrndilog,  porpoises, 
R.  W.  ( tatagkom ,  he  strikes  repeatedly, 
keeps  striking  or  beating;  freq.  from 
togkom,  he  strikes). 

possess,  ohtau,  he  has.  See  have  (v. ). 
vadchanum,  he  has  in  possession,  he 
keeps  (it).  See  keep, 
possible,  woh  unnag  (if  it  may  be  so), 
if  it  be  possible;  wame  teanteaqudsinash 
woh  n’ nihyeuash,  all  things  are  possible 
(may  be  so),  noskonongquot,  noshko- 
nunkquodt,  (when  it  is)  impossible,  an 
impossibility;  maita  noshkonunkquodti- 
no,  it  is  not  possible, 
post,  nepattuhquonk,  neepatunkquonk,  a 
post,  pillar,  stake,  standing  upright. 
From  nepattau,  it  stands  upright. 
See  stand. 

posteriors.  See  behind;  hind  parts, 
j  pot.  See  vessel. 

pottage,  sdbaheg,  sebaheg,  sabaMg  [sup¬ 
pos.  inan.  from  saupdeu,  sabde,  it  is  soft, 
thin,  melting,  when  it  is  made  soft  or 
thinned], 
pound.  See  beat. 

pour  out,  sokenum,  sokanum,  he  pours 
(it)  out;  nussokin,  nussokun,  I  pour 
(it)  out;  sohkenush,  pour  thou;  sokencok, 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


309 


pour  out — continued. 

pour  ye;  suppose  noh  sohkenuk  nippe, 
Tie  who  pours  water;  suppos.  part, 
inan.  sobering  (that  which  is  poured 
out),  ‘ a  heap  of  corn ’ ,  R.  W.;  sokenip- 
pash  (for  sokenush  nippe),  pour  thou 
out  water;  an.  sokenumauau,  he  pours 
(it)  upon  (him).  From  sokanon,  it 
pours,  it  rains.  See  rain, 
poverty,  match ekuonk.  See  poor, 
powder,  sohquag  (suppos.  inan.  from 
sohque),  when  it  is  made  fine  or  like 
dust;  sohquiyeu,  sukquiyeu,  in  powder, 
powdered.  See  fine,  sa/Opuck,  It.  W., 
sabuck,  C.,  gunpowder, 
pox,  mamaskishaCii,  he  hath  the  (small?) 
pox,  R.  W. ;  mamaskisliaCionck,  the  pox, 
ibid. ;  inamaskishaumitch,  the  last  pox, 
ibid. 

praise,  waeenau,  he  praises;  suffix  an. 
woweenomduh,  they  praised,  commend¬ 
ed  him;  waeenomau,  he  praises  (him); 
ivaeenodtum,  woweenodtum,  he  praises 
(it).  See  flatter. 

pray,  peantam  ( peeyauntam ,  R.  W. ),  he 
prays;  nuppeantam,  I  pray;  peanla- 
mcok,  pray  ye;  an.  peantamauau,  he 
prays  to  (him);  suffix  kuppeantamoush, 
I  pray  (to)  thee;  vbl.  n.  peantamdonk, 
praying,  prayer;  suppos.  part,  nohpean- 
tog,  he  who  prays. 

precious,  mishoadtue,  mogoadtue  [of  great 
price,  mishe-oadtdae,  mogke-oadtdae ] ; 
pi.  waon&gugish,  wdanegugish,  precious 
things;  nompakou,  a  jewel,  a  precious 
thing,  a  treasure;  pi.  -f -unash.  See 
treasure. 

predict,  quoshodtum,  he  prophecies  (v.  i. 
or  v.  t.  inan.  obj.),  he  foretells  or 
predicts,  he  promises;  vbl.  n.  quoshodtu- 
onk,  a  prophecy,  a  promise,  prediction; 
n.  agent,  quoshodtumwaen-in,  one  who 
predicts,  a  prophet  ;  suppos.  noh  quosh- 
odtuk,  he  who  predicts.  See  promise, 
pregnant,  wompequaeu,  wompequdou,  she 
is  pregnant  ;  aclj.  wompequde  (wompequo, 
C. ),  pregnant,  with  child;  vbl.  n.  ivom- 
pequauonk,  -vudonk,  conception,  preg¬ 
nancy.  See  conceive, 
prepare,  nanashicunnum,  he  prepares  (it), 
makes  it  ready;  v.  i.  nanashweu,  he  pre¬ 
pares,  makes  ready;  nanashwish,  pre¬ 
pare  thyself;  v.  t.  an.  and  inan.  nana- 
shwetamau,  he  prepares  (it)  for  (him): 


prepare — continued. 
nunnanashwetamau  coweetuonk,  I  prepare 
him  a  habitation,  Ezek.  7,  14.  quosh- 
auwetam,  quoshamhtam,  he  makes  (it) 
ready  beforehand,  he  prepares  (it) ;  freq. 
quogquoshwehtam,  quagwaswetam,  qua- 
quoshwehtam,  he  prepares  (it);  quag- 
quoshwehtamook  ummay,  prepare  ye  his 
way;  an.  quoshauweheau,  he  prepares 
(him),  makes  him  ready.  See  ready, 
prepuce,  uhqudeu,  uhqp.de  woduhquab. 
presently,  teanuk,  immediately,  quickly 
( tedno ,  R.  W). 

prevail  over,  omskauau,  he  prevails 
over  (him),  he  puts  (him)  to  flight; 
suffix  wut-omskau-oh ,  he  puts  him  to 
flight;  v.  i.  act.  omskdsu,  he  prevails,  is 
the  conqueror.  See  conquer, 
prey,  tohqunnumdonk  (vbl.  n.  from  toh- 
qunnum,  he  seizes,  lays  violent  hold  on), 
price,  oadtehteaonk,  payment  ( vbl.  n.  from 
6adtehtecm,  he  makes  payment), 
prick,  konittequom  (konnittihqaom,  0. ) ,  he 
pricks  (it);  konnuksheau,  it  pricks  or 
pierces;  suppos.  kanukkashunk,  kanuk- 
shank,  when  it  pricks  or  pierces,  pierc¬ 
ing,  penetrating;  v.  t.  an.  and  inan. 
causat.  konukkihtahwhau,  he  causes  (it) 
to  prick  or  pierce  (him),  he  pierces 
(him)  with  (it):  ukkdnukkehtahwhoh 
ukqunmlhtugk,  he  pierced  him  with  his 
spear. 

priest,  pauwau  (a  wizard,  witch,  magi¬ 
cian,  etc.,  in  Eliot’s  translation),  pi. 
pauwauog  ( powwaw ,  a  priest;  pi.  pow- 
watiog,  R.  W.  “These  priests  they 
(the  Indians  of  Cayenne)  call  peoayos,- 
we  call  them  sorcerers.” — De  Vries, 
Voy.  to  Guiana) .  Roger  Williams  gives 
taupounw,  ‘a  wise  speaker’;  pi.  taupo- 
wauog,  ‘their  wise  men  and  old  men  (of 
which  number  their  priests  are  also) 

.  .  .  they  make  solemn  speeches  and 
orations  or  lectures  to  them  concerning 
their  religion,  peace  or  war’,  etc.  (p. 
112).  F  or  kehtepoivwuog,  chief  priests  (?). 
prisoner,  kupshagkinau,  he  puts  (him)  in 
prison;  suffix  ukkupshagkinuli,  he  puts 
him  in  prison;  pass,  kupshagkinau,  he 
is  in  prison,  and  kupshagkinausu,  he  is 
a  prisoner;  suppos.  part,  noh  kohshag- 
kinuk,  he  who  is  in  prison,  one  im¬ 
prisoned;  neg  kobshagkinutcheg,  they 
who  are  in  prison,  and  kobshagkinaus- 


310 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


prisoner — continued. 

utcheg,  prisoners;  vbl.  n.  pass,  kobshag- 
Innnittuonk,  imprisonment  (being  im¬ 
prisoned)  ;  vbl.  n.  act.  intrans.  kobshag- 
hineaumonk,  imprisonment  (being  pris¬ 
oner).  From  kuppogki,  it  is  closed, 
thick,  impenetrable,  with  ’sh  of  forced 
or  violent  action,  i.  e.  be  is  forcibly 
shut  up. 

proceed,  wadcheu,  ivutcheu,  wutchiyeu, 
he  proceeds  from,  i.  e.  originates  in  or 
is  caused  by;  inan.  pi.  nish  wutchiyeu- 
ash  Godut,  these  things  are  God’s,  i.  e. 
belong  to  him,  proceed  fromhimas  their 
origin  or  source;  suppos.  noh  tvajhit, 
noh  wadchiit,  he  who  proceeds  from  ( noh 
wajhet  mittamwossissit,  he  that  is  ‘  born 
of  a  woman’,  Gal.  4,  4).  See  from. 
ontieu ,  he  proceeds  from,  is  the  offspring 
of :  wanne  ontseu,  he  is  ‘  without  descent  ’ , 
Heb.  7,  3;  nutonsem  kahncom  Godut,  ‘I 
proceeded  forth  and  came  from  God’, 
John  8,  42;  vbl.  n.  umt-onseonk,  (his) 
descent  or  lineage,  ohhontseu,  he  pro¬ 
ceeds  or  moves  onward  from  one  thing 
to  another:  ohhontsedg  wutch  uiacliuk  en 
machukut,  they  proceed  from  evil  to 
evil.  Cf.  ontappu  ( ontsappu ),  he  is  re¬ 
moved  (nut-antsZap ,  I  move,  C. ); 
onthamun,  it  is  put  out  (as  fire  or  a 
candle),  it  is  extinguished;  ontattau,  he 
moves  (it);  ontashau,  he  moves  (him); 
dontomuk,  the  matrix,  kutchittdushau, 
he  proceeds  onward,  goes  forward. 
See  begin;  come  from;  go;  move. 

procure  (?),  nut-ahchuueehteom,  I  pro¬ 
cure;  nut-ahchoowehteomun,  we  procure, 
C.  Cf.  adchaeu,  he  hunts  (nutahcliun, 
I  hunt,  C.) 

produce,  umtcheken,  wutchegen,  it  pro¬ 
duces,  bears,  yields,  brings  forth  (inan. 
obj. ) :  vmtchegen  meechum,  it  bore  fruit. 
adtannegen,  dtannegen,  tannegen,  it 
brings  forth  or  produces  (as  the  earth 
plants,  or  a  tree  fruits):  vmtchegen 
sonkuk  onk  dtannegen  meechum,  the 
blade  sprung  up  and  brought  forth 
fruit,  Matt.  13, 26;  na  pish  tannegen  .  .  . 
mehtugquash,  there  shall  grow  .  .  . 
trees,  Ezek.  47,  12;  imperat.  dtannekej 
ohke  moskeht,  let  the  earth  bring  forth 
grass,  Gen.  1,  11.  ummeechumunnm,  it 
produces  fruit;  vmnn-ummeechumunnco, 
it  produces  good  fruit;  matt-ummeechum- 
unnoo,  it  produces  bad  fruit,  Matt.  7, 18. 


profit,  teag  noochiin,  what  am  I  profited?; 
oochiin,  it  profits,  it  is  profitable.  From 
wutcheu,  it  comes  from  ( wanne  teag 
wutchieu,  it  profiteth  nothing,  Job  34, 
9,  i.  e.  nothing  comes  from  it).  Cf. 
cotcheun,  he  made  from  (it),  Gen.  2, 
22.  aneuham,  he  gains  (it);  suppos. 
part.  inan.  aneuhhamuk,  that  which  is 
gained,  profit;  pi.  nish  aneuhhamugish, 
things  gained,  profits;  vbl.  n.  aneuha- 
mauaonk,  gaining,  profiting,  profit, 
progress.  See  come  from;  go;  proceed, 
promise,  quushau,  qu6shoau,  he  promises 
(kcone  quoshowdmwoo,  you  promise  well, 
C. );  an.  quoshomau,  suffix  ukquoshau- 
moh,  he  promises  him;  kukquoshom, 
thou  promisest  (it ) ;  vbl.  n.  quoshbm&onk, 
quoshadmuwdonk,  a  promising,  promise; 
quoshodtuonk,  promising  something,  the 
subject  of  a  promise,  the  matter  or  thing 
promised.  From  quoshde,  (it  is)  before¬ 
hand,  in  advance  or  anticipation.  So 
quoshde  naum,  he  foresees  (it), 
pronounce,  matta  ivussampwe  mussohha- 
mooun,  he  does  not  pronounce  it  right, 
Judg.  12,  6.  sampwoliquattumunat,  to 
pronounce  right;  imttinnohquatumooon- 
kdnnoo,  their  manner  of  pronounc¬ 
ing,  C. 

proper  (?),  ne  unfit,  that  is  proper  or 
right;  nenih  or  sampvn,  right,  C. ;  but 
lit.  ne  unni,  that  which  is  so  or  such  as. 
property.  See  goods, 
prostitute.  See  fornication;  harlot, 
prostrate  one’s  self,  punneu,  he  falls 
prostrate.  See  fall, 
protuberance.  See  swell, 
proud,  pehtudnumau,  he  is  proud;  suppos. 
nohpehtuanumvnt,  he  who  is  proud;  vbl. 
n.pehtudnumcoonk,  pride.  Seehaughty. 
prove.  See  try. 

provoke,  mcosquelieau,  mcosqheau; 
freq.  and  intens.  mwmcosqheau,  he  pro¬ 
vokes  (him)  to  anger,  causes  him  to  be 
angry  {num-m&mmsqueh,  I  provoke;  mm- 
moosquehhdonal,  to  provoke,  C. ) ;  suffix. 
ummcomoosqheouh,  they  provoked  him. 
Caus.  from  musquanumau,  he  is  angry 
with  (him)? 

pudendum  virile,  ukkosue  pompuhchaei- 
yeum;  ukkdsuonk. 

pull.  See  pluck. 

punish,  samatahwhau:  freq.  and  in¬ 
tens.  sassamatahivhau,  he  punishes  or 
chastises  (him);  fiussassamatoh,  I  pun- 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


311 


punish — continued, 
ish  him  ( nussohsam&toh ,  I  chastise;  nus- 
sdsamitahhdoam,  I  punish,  C. );  vbl.  n. 
pass,  sasamdtahwhutteaonk,  punishment 
received,  chastisement,  being  punished; 
n.  agent,  .s asamatuhhuwaen,  one  who 
punishes  or  inflicts  punishment, 
pure,  pohki,  pahke  (it  is)  clear,  open,  pure; 

an.  act.  pahkesu,  he  is  pure.  See  clear, 
purify,  pahkheau,  he  purifies  (him), 
makes  him  pure ;  pahketeau,  he  purifies 
(it)  [caus.  from  palike] . 
purple,  sdcki,  black,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  ’suggyo, 
dark  or  black,  Stiles;  but  the  suckau- 
hock,  1  black  money  ’  was  in  fact  ‘  black 
inclining  to  blue’,  R.  W.  (‘of  a  violet 
colour’,  Morton,  N.  E.  Canaan),  made 
from  the  purple  margin  of  Venus  mer- 
cenaria,  the  round  clam, 
purpose,  kesontam,  kesantam,  he  purposes, 
intends;  nukkesontam,  I  purpose;  vbl.  n. 


purpose — continued. 

kesantamoonk,  purpose,  unnantam,  he 
intends,  thinks,  purposes,  wills.  See 
think,  pakodtantam,  he  purposes  (re¬ 
solves,  determines) ;  vbl.  n.  pakodtanta- 
mcoonk,  purpose,  determination, 
pursue.  See  follow, 
put.  See  place  ( v. ) . 
put  away.  See  cast  away, 
put  forth,  sohwunum  wunnutcheg,  he  put 
forth  his  hand;  an.  sohhoowunau,  he  puts 
(him)  forth,  thrusts  (him)  out  ( kus - 
sawhoki,  do  you  put  me  out  of  doors? 
tawhitch ,  kussawhokiian,  why  do  you  put 
me  out?  R.  W.).  sonkehteau,  it  puts 
forth,  springs  out,  as  buds  or  leaves  from 
a  plant. 

put  into,  petau,  he  puts  (it)  in  or  into; 
suppos.  inan.  petunk  (when  it  is  put 
into),  a  bag. 

put  to  flight.  See  prevail  over. 


Q 


quahaug.  See  clam, 
quail,  Peq.  pauishoons,  meadow  quails 
(meadowlarks),  Stiles.  See  partridge, 
quarrel,  rnekonau,  he  quarrels  with 
(him);  recipr.  mekdnittuog,  they  strive 
together,  they  quarrel;  suppos.  part. 
noli  mekonont,  he  who  strives  or  quar¬ 
rels  ( mecaMea ,  a  fighter;  ivepl  kummi- 
cautch,  you  are  a  quarreller,  R.  W.). 
See  fight,  miskisaiiwaiv,  a  quarrelsome 
fellow,  R.  W. 

queen,  sonkisq,  sonksq  ( saunks ,  R.  W. ), 
kehche  sonksq,  kehchissunkisq.  See  mis¬ 
tress. 

quench,  ontham  ncotau,  he  quenches,  ex¬ 
tinguishes,  puts  out  the  fire;  ontha- 
mun,  it  is  quenched,  extinguished.  Cf. 
ncotau  uhtea,  the  fire  goes  out,  Prov.  26, 
20.  See  extinguish.  dhtappadtamunoo, 
it  is  quenched,  extinguished;  pass.  part, 
neg.  matta  woh  dhtappattau&muk,  (the 
fire)  shall  not  be  quenched,  Mark  9, 


quench — continued. 

46,  48;  ncotau  matta  ulitapattodun,  the 
fire  is  not  quenched,  v.  44  ( tahtippad - 
tawCmat,  to  quench;  nuttahtdppddtou,  I 
quench,  C. ;  cf.  tahtippadtou  nenan,  he 
cools  my  tongue,  Luke  16,  24). 
question,  natcotomauau,  he  questions 
(him),  asks  him  a  question;  natcoto- 
muhkau,  he  continues  to  question, 
makes  inquiries  [’  k  progressive] ;  vbl. 
n.  natootomuhteaonk,  a  question  ( natlco - 
lumwehteaonk,  C. ) .  See  ask. 
quickly,  tednuk.  See  immediately;  pres¬ 
ently. 

quiet,  chequnappu,  he  is  silent,  he  is  still 
( nut  cheqdnnap ,  I  am  silent,  C. ).  via- 
nunnappu,  he  is  quiet,  gentle,  patient, 
still,  etc.  See  silent;  slow. 

quiver,  petan;  kuppetan,  thy  quiver;  up- 
petanwonut,  in  his  quiver.  From  petau, 
he  puts  it  into;  cf.  petunk,  a  bag. 


312 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25- 


Ft 


rabbit,  Peq.  tupsads,  Stiles.  See  coney, 
raccoon,  ads up  ( ausupp ,  Wood),  pi. 
-\-pdnuog  ( for  pauuog  ? ) ,  R.  W. ;  mohe- 
wonck,  a  raccoon-skin  coat,  ibid, 
rage,  nun-nishquet,  I  rage,  C.  Cf.  nash- 
quttin,  nmhqult,  a  tempest,  violent 
storm. 

rain,  sokanon  ( sokenun ,  anaquat,  R.  W. ; 
scokSnon,  C. ;  onndhquat,  raining,  ibid. 
Peq.  sohghecm,  Stiles;  Abn.  sSgherann; 
Del.  sokelaan,  Hkw. ) ;  mogkinnon,  much 
rain;  mishinnon,  a  great  rain  ( nogkosse 
scokenon,  a  shower  of  rain,  C. ) ;  nisken- 
non,  nishkenon,  vapor,  fog,  mist  ( scoken - 
dnni ,  it  rains,  C. ;  sun  scoMnon?  does  it 
rain?  ibid.).  Lit.  sokanon,  sokenon, 
impers.  verb,  it  rains,  it  pours  out  (act. 
sokenum,  he  pours  (it)  out:  sokanum 
ncotau,  he  rained  fire,  Gen.  19,  24;  nus- 
sokun  .  .  .  mussekon,  I  cause  it  to  rain 
hail,  Ex.  9,18.  See  pour  out).  N.  col¬ 
lect.  sokenunk,  rain;  nishkeneunk,  ‘small 
rain’,  mist,  Deut.  32,  2. 
rainbow,  ukquanogquon,  Rev.  4,  4;  10, 1. 
raise,  i vaapenum,  waapunum,  he  raises 
(it)  up,  he  lifts  (it)  up;  suppos.  ivaapi- 
nuk  wunnutcheg,  when  he  raised  up  his 
hand;  an.  waapenau,  he  raises  (him), 
lifts  (him)  up  [from  wadbeu,  wadpu,  it 
rises,  goes  up],  tahshinum,  he  raises  ' 
(it),  lifts  (it)  up;  tohshinush  kenutcheg,  \ 
lift  up  thy  hand;  suppos.  tahshinuk ,  1 
when  he  raises  (it)  up;  an.  tahshinau,  \ 
he  raises  or  lifts  ( him )  up,  and  pass,  he  I 
is  raised  or  lifted  up;  nutahshin,  I  lift  up 
myself;  tahshin  kuhhog,  lift  up  thyself;  ; 
suppos.  tahshinont,  lifting  or  raising 
(him)  up;  pass.  part,  suppos.  tahshini- 
muk,  when  lifted  up.  The  radical  or 
primitive  form  tahsheu,  tahshe,  he  lifts 
up,  is  employed  in  forming  the  numer¬ 
als  from  five  to  nine  and  their  deriva¬ 
tives,  denoting  the  number  of  fingers 
‘held  up’,  omohkinau,  he  raises  (him) 
up,  causes  (him)  to  rise.  See  rise, 
ransom,  manmliam,  he  redeems  or  ran¬ 
soms  (it) ;  manoohuk  ohteuk,  if  he  re¬ 
deem  the  field,  Lev.  27,  19  ( cummand - 
liaminf  have  you  bought  it?  cummano- 
hamotish,  I  will  buy  it  of  you,  R.  W.) ; 
an .mancowhau,  he  ransoms(him) ;  suffix 


ransom — continued. 
um-manam'houh,  he  ransoms  him;  vbl.  n. 
manaowhaonk,  a  ransom.  Cf.  wunnoo- 
whau,  he  values  (him),  fixes  a  value  on 
(him);  wunnarwau,  he  makes  an  agree¬ 
ment  with,  he  covenants  with, 
rap,  chuhchunkquttahhxtm,  he  raps  or 
knocks  (at  the  door),  Rev.  3,  20  (nut- 
chohchunkquttahham,  I  knock,  C. ). 
rather,  teaogku,  ‘rather,  unfinished,’ El. 
Gr.  21. 

rattlesnake,  sesek,  R.  W.  ( sesekq ,  sesegk 
‘adder’,  ‘viper’,  El.;  pi.  sesequdog). 
raven.  See  crow. 

raw,  aske  ( askeu ),  (it  is)  raw,  not  ready 
for  use,  immature  ( askiln ,  R.  W., 
askin,  C.,  it  is  raw;  Abn.  sk'iSi.,  eminent, 
4tant  cru,  non  cuit,  Rasies);  related  to 
ashq,  asq,  asquam,  not  yet,  before;  wuske, 
new,  young;  askeht,  grass;  askosque, 
green),  ciskeyaus  \aske-iveyaus~\,  raw 
flesh;  ashkehtamunneau,  he  eats  it  raw. 
Cf.  Ex.  12,  9,  -osketamuk,  in  compound 
words,  ‘a  raw  thing’  (i.  e.  to  be  eaten 
raw),  C. :  moonoskeMmuk,  cucumbers, 
‘or  a  raw  thing’,  etc.,  C.  See  squash, 
read,  ogketam,  he  reads,  i.  e.  he  counts 
(the  letters);  suppos.  noh  ogketog,  he 
who  reads  (nuttogketam,  I  read;  sun 
v:oh  kuttogketam ,  can  you  read?  C. ). 
ready,  quoshappu,  he  is  ready  \_(pioshae- 
appu\ ;  quoshohteau,  it  is  ready  [quoshae- 
ohteau ];  quoshinum,  he  makes  (it) 
ready,  prepares  (it);  caus.  an.  quo- 
shauweheau,  and  freq.  quaquashauweh- 
heau,  he  makes  (him)  ready,  puts 
him  in  readiness,  prepares  him;  caus. 
inan.  quosuiehtam,  quaquoshu’ehtam,  he 
makes  ( it )  ready,  nanashweu,  he  makes 
ready,  prepares;  nanashiounnum,  he 
makes  (it)  ready.  See  prepare;  wait, 
reason,  unnomdi,  ennomai  ( unnommai ,  en- 
nomaiyeuonk,  C. ;  enornaiyeue,  reasona¬ 
ble,  ibid.),  a  reason. 

rebellion,  chekelammonk  ( cheketamue ,  re¬ 
bellious,  C.). 

receive,  attumunnum,  attamunnum, 
he  receives  (it);  suppos.  part.  inan. 
attumunumuk:  ahquompi  ne  alihut  attu- 
rnunumuk,  ‘time  for  receiving’,  2  K. 
5,  26. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


313 


recompense,  repay,  onkquattantam, 
onkquacUantam,  he  recompenses  or 
rewards  (it);  an.  onkquattou,  onkquat- 
teau,  he  recompenses,  rewards  (him), 
he  pays  (him)  wages  or  hire;  kutonk- 
quatoush,  I  will  give  you  hire;  kuppa- 
pasku  onkquatoush,  I  will  render  to  you 
double  (kuttauneckquittaunch ,  I  will  pay 
you,  R.  W. ) ;  vbl.  n.  onquatunk  ( onquat - 
onk,  C. ) ,  a  recompense,  a  reward,  wages, 
recover  (from  sickness),  keteau  (he 
revives,  is  made  to  live),  he  recovers: 
sun  woh  nuk-keteamf  ( pitch  n’  keeteern  ? 
R.  W.),  shall  I  recover?  asq  kongketeau? 
is  he  (yet)  well?  asq  keteau,  he  is  well, 
Gen.  29,  6  ( nickeetem ,  I  am  recovered; 
kongkeetedug ,  they  are  well,  R.  W. ) .  See 
live;  well. 

red,  musqui,  mishgue,  msqui,  (it  is)  red; 
suppos.  masquag,  mashquag,  mishquag, 
when  it  is  red  (msqui,  R.  W.;  mishque, 
C. ;  Peq .mesh’ piou,  Stiles) .  Fromacaus. 
form,  m’ squehheau,  it  makes  red,  comes 
the  verbal  noun  musqueheonk,  m’squi- 
heonk,  blood. 

refrain,  ahqueteau  ( ahquehtou ,  C.),  he 
refrains,  leaves  off,  desists.  See  do  not 
( ahque ). 

refuge,  usphcoicaonk,  ushphmwdonk,  spuh- 
hoowdonk,  etc.,  a  refuge  (vbl.  n.  from 
uspuhhcoivau,  he  flies  to  for  refuge); 
adj.  uspuhhmwde  ayeuonk ,  a  place  of 
refuge.  See  fly  (v. ). 
refuse,  sekenam,  sekeneam,  (1)  he  refuses, 
rejects;  (2)  he  hates,  jishantam,  (1)  he 
despises,  abhors;  (2)  he  rejects,  refuses. 
See  hate. 

reins,  muttoounussog  (pi. ),  the  kidneys, 
the  reins.  See  kidneys, 
rejoice,  wekontam,  he  is  pleased,  he 
rejoices.  See  glad,  muskouantam,  mus- 
kauanatam  (mishkouantam,  C. ),  (1)  he 
rejoices  greatly,  is  very  glad;  (2)  he 
boasts,  makes  his  boast  of  ( intrans.  mus- 
koau,  he  boasts;  vbl.  n.  miskoaonk,  boast¬ 
ing)  ;  muskouantash,  rejoice  thou;  wekon- 
tamcok  kali  ahche  muskouantamook,  ‘re¬ 
joice  ye,  and  be  exceeding  glad’,  Matt. 
5,  12. 

relation.  See  cousin;  kinsman;  uncle, 
release,  ompeneau,  ompinneau ,  he  releases 
(him),  looses  (him).  See  loose, 
remain,  appu,  he  remains  or  rests  in  a 
place.  See  sit.  sequnau,  sequnneau,  he 


remain — continued, 
remains,  he  is  left,  sequnnum,  he  leaves 
remaining:  sequnnum  sequnittuonk,  he 
leaves  a  remnant;  sequttdhwhau,ashqueh- 
tahwhau,  sequtteau,  he  remains  (is  a 
remainder  or  remnant)  of;  suppos.  part, 
pi.  neg  sequttahwhut  cheg,  ashquehiahw- 
hutcheg,  they  who  remain,  they  who  are 
left  ( others  being  gone ) ;  ne  sequttedmuk, 
that  which  remains,  the  remnant  or 
remainder.  See  left,  nussequnneau, 
nussequnau  [ nussu-sequnnau\ ,  he  remains 
alone;  nenwebenussequnit,  I only  remain, 

1  K.  18,  22. 

remember,  mehquantam,  he  remembers; 
mehquantcish,  remember  thou;  vbl.  n. 
mehquantamooonk,  remembrance  of  inan. 
objects;  an.  mehqudnumau,  he  remem¬ 
bers  (him);  suffix  kummehquanumoush, 

I  remember  thee;  nummequanumeh,  re¬ 
member  thou  me  ( mehquanumeh ,  C. ; 
mequaunam'nnnea,  R.  IV.;  kummequ&w- 
namef  do  you  remember  me?  ibid.); 
vbl.  n.  mehqudnumdonk,  remembrance 
of  persons,  a  memorial, 
remnant.  See  remain, 
removed,  ontapjm,  he  is  moved  (from  his 
former  place  to  one  where  he  now  re¬ 
mains);  ontohteau,  it  is  moved;  ontah- 
tau,  he  removes  (it)  from  its  place.  See 
move. 

rend.  See  tear. 

repair,  onchteau,  one.heteaii,  he  mends, 
repairs  (it);  onchteauunat  wek,  to  repair 
his  house;  suppos.  part,  noli  onchteunk, 
he  who  repairs  or  mends;  vbl.  n.  onch- 
teoonk,  a  repairing.  In  the  title  of 
Rawson’s  revision  of  Eliot’s  translation 
of  The  Sincere  Convert,  oncheteauun 
is  used  for  corrected  or  revised, 
repay.  See  recompense, 
repeatedly,  nompe,  again,  after  a  nu¬ 
meral,  serves  to  express  repetition,  as 
nishwudt  nompe,  three  times,  i.  e.  to  the 
third  time;  so  mcochekit  nompe,  often¬ 
times.  The  primary  meaning  of  nompu 
appears  to  be  he  repeats,  it  repeats: 
noh  nompe  git  ne  teag  ( suppos. ) ,  ‘  he  who 
repeateth  a  matter’,  Prov.  17,  9.  Sec¬ 
ondarily,  it  means  he  is  in  the  place  of, 
substituted  for:  sunnennunnompin  God? ' 
‘am  I  in  the  place  of  God?’  Gen... 
30,  2;  50,  18. 


314 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


repent,  aiuskoiantam,  lie  repents;  nutaius- 
koianlam,  I  repent  ;  aiuskoidntash,  repent 
thou,  El.  and  C. 

reply,  nampcoham,  he  answers,  he  re¬ 
plies;  an.  nampoohamau,  he  replies  to 
(him)  ( nunnampcnham ,  I  answer,  C. ); 
suffix  wun-nampcoham-au-oli,  he  replied 
to  him. 

reprove,  auuskontam,  he  reproves  (it) ;  an. 
auuskomau,  he  reproves  (him),  he  chides 
(him) ;  vbl. n.auuskoxduonk, reproof, cor¬ 
rection  ;  auuskomuwaonk,  aushkdmuwa- 
onk,  reproving,  reproof  administered; 
n.  agent  auuskomuaen,  aushkomuaen-in, 
a  reprover,  one  who  gives  reproof, 
request,  wehquetum,  he  requests  (it) ;  vbl. 
n.  weliquctumaoonk  (asking  for),  a  re¬ 
quest,  a  supplication.  See  ask  for. 
rescue,  iomheau,  he  rescues  (him).  See 
deliver. 

resemblance,  ogqueneunk,  agqueneunk; 
an.  ogqueneunkqussu,  he  is  made  like  to; 
vbl.  n.  ogqueneunkqussuonk  (the  making 
a  resemblance  or  likeness) ,  a  similitude, 
a  parable. 

rest,  anwdhsin,  he  rests,  takes  his  rest 
( nuttannihvossumweh  nuhliog,  I  ease  my¬ 
self,  C.);  anwdhs-inook,  rest  ye;  vbl. 
n.  anwdhsindonk,  a  resting,  rest.  See 
remain;  sit. 

restore,  nompenum,  he  restores  (it), 
renders  it  back  [nompu,  it  is  in  the 
place  of]. 

return,  qushkeu,  he  goes  back,  he  returns, 
turns  back;  nukqushkem,  I  turn  back 
(nukquishkeem,  I  return,  C.);  vbl.  n. 
qushkeonk,  a  turning  back,  return 
(Cree  kew-ayoo,  he  returns,  Howse  81). 
nippittakunnamun,  I  must  go  back; 
piltuckish,  go  (thou)  back;  pittucketuck, 
let  us  go  back,  R.  W. 
revenge,  anncotau,  he  revenges,  takes  re¬ 
venge  ( nultanriaitome ,  I  revenge,  C. ;  kvi- 
tanndtous,  I  will  revenge  you,  R.  W. ) ; 
an.  annootauau,  he  takes  vengeance  on 
(him);  vbl.  n.  ancotaonk  ( annotaonk , 
C. ),  revenge, 
revive.  See  recover, 
reward.  See  recompense, 
rib,  muhpeteog,  muhpeteag,  a  rib  ( peteaii - 
gon,  R.  W. ;  m ehpeteak,  C. ) ;  vmhpeteog, 
his  rib;  pi.  vmhpeteagash,  uhpeteagash, 
his  ribs.  See  side. 


rich,  rvmamvetu,  (he  is)  rich  ( weenauwetu , 
C. ;  “a  Winnaytue,  that  is  a  rich  man,  or 
man  of  estimation,  next  in  degree  to  a 
Sachem  or  Sagamore”,  Morton,  N.  E. 
Canaan,  book  1,  xix);  vbl.  n.  wenauwe- 
tuonk,  riches,  wealth.  Cf.  umnnetu,  (he 
is)  good,  excellent;  wunnetuonk,  good¬ 
ness;  weenauwetu,  for  wunne-welu, 
well  housed  (?). 

riddle,  nupwo&onk  ( nupwdwaonk ,  a  prov¬ 
erb,  C. ) .  siogkmwaonk,  a  riddle,  a  prov¬ 
erb,  from  siogke,  it  is  hard  or  difficult. 

ride,  i.  e.  be  borne  or  carried.  See  bear 
(v.);  horse. 

right  (rectus),  sampwi,  (it  is)  straight, 
right,  just  (safimpi,  R.  YV.;  sampwi,  C.): 
ayimmk  sampwi  may asli,  make  straight 
the  paths;  sampweyeu  epJiah,  ‘a  just 
ephali’,  Ezek.  45,  11;  act.  an.  samp- 
wesu,  (he  is)  straight,  upright,  right¬ 
doing  ;  vbl.  n.  sampweus- 

seonk,  right  doing,  uprightness,  right¬ 
eousness;  n.  agent,  sampweusstaen-in,  a 
right  doer,  one  who  acts  justly  or  up¬ 
rightly;  caus.  inan.  sampwehteau,  he 
makes  (it)  straight  or  right;  caus.  an. 
sanipwenehheau,  he  makes  (him)  right, 
causes  (him)  to  be  just  or  right,  justi¬ 
fies  him;  suppos.  noh  sampwenehheont, 
he  who  makes  right  or  justifies;  noh 
sampwenehit,  he  who  is  justified;  vbl.  n. 
pass,  sampwen&hhittuonk,  the  being  made 
right,  justification;  caus.  act.  an.  samp- 
weusseahheau,  he  causes  (him)  to  do 
right,  makes  him  righteous;  sampweog- 
quanumau,  he  accounts  (him)  right  or 
just,  i.  e.  he  justifies  (him),  from  og- 
quanum,  he  counts  or  reckons. 

right  hand,  wuttinnolikdu,  (his)  right 
hand;  nuttinnolikdu,  my  right  hand  (yd 
mtunnock,  to  the  right,  R.  W. ) ;  kuttin- 
nohkdu  pish  nukkogk6unuk,  (freq. )  ‘thy 
right  hand  shall  hold  me’,  Ps.  139,  10; 
wutch  niultinnokduneiyeue,  from  the  right 
side  of  (it),  2  Chr.  23,  10.  From  k6un- 
um,  he  carries;  noh  kdunuk,  he  who  car¬ 
ries;  ne  k6unuk,  that  which  carries  (but 
k6u  belongs  to  an  earlier  intransitive 
form  of  this  verb). 

ring,  pehtehhennutchab,  peteliennitchab,  pi. 
-\-eash.  From  petau,  pehtauun,  (it  is) 
put  into,  and  nutch,  hand,  wayedag, 
wohwayebag,  pi.  -\-ish,  rings.  Cf.  woweau- 
shin,  it  winds  about.  See  bracelets. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


315 


ripe,  kesancohteau  ( kesannmta ,  C. ),  it  is 
ripe  (?);  suppos.  inan.  kesanoohtag,  ke- 
sanaotag,  when  it  is  ripe ;  pi.  nish  negonne 
kesancotagish,  those  which  are  first  ripe. 
anncotag  [suppos.  inan.  from  annoh- 
teau  ?],  when  it  is  ripe:  figsash  negonne 
anncotag,  when  figs  are  first  ripe,  Nah. 
3, 12.  adtuhtag :  negonne  adtuhtag  weno- 
minneash,  when  first  (was  the  season  of) 
ripe  grapes;  kesadtehtaash,  ripe  (grapes) , 
Gen.  40,  10.  kdkenumunne  meechum- 
muonk,  ripe  fruit,  Mic.  7,  1;  kdkeneu- 
muneash,  the  first-ripe  fruits,  Num.  18, 
3  (cf.  keneumunneash,  first  fruits,  Lev. 
2,  12,  14).  kepenumcoonk  kesukun,  the 
harvest  is  ripe,  Rev.  14,  15,  i.  e.  is  fully 
grown,  mature.  See  grow,  unnun- 
nauont,  the  harvest  is  ripe,  Joel  3,  13; 
cf.  nunnomva,  harvest  time,  R.W.,  from 
nun&eu,  it  is  dry  (?). 
rise,  wadpeu,  wabeu,  he  rises,  goes  upward 
( without  regard  to  the  mode  or  act  of 
rising);  inan.  subj.  waapemco,  it  rises: 
nippeasli  waapemcoash,  the  waters  rise 
up  ( ncowdbeem ,  I  rise,  C. ).  omohku,  he 
rises,  gets  up  ( nuttomulikem ,  I  arise,  C. ) ; 
suppos.  noli  omohkit  nompode,  he  who 
rises  early;  inan.  subj.  omohkemoo,  it 
arose,  neepau,  he  rises  to  an  erect  posi¬ 
tion,  stands  up.  See  stand, 
rising  sun.  See  sunrise, 
river,  sip,  seep,  siip,  sepu,  pi.  sepuash  \_se- 
peu,  it  is  long,  extended]  (siip,  R.  W.; 
Peq.  sepe,  sebe,  Stiles) ;  ut  sepuut,  at,  to, 
or  by  the  river;  nashaue  sepuwehtu,  in 
the  midst  of  the  rivers;  sepupog,  a  river 
of  water,  Ps.  119,  136;  Rev.  22,  1.  tuk- 
kco,  tuk  (not  found  in  Eliot  except  in 
compound  words),  a  broad  river,  as 
distinguished  from  a  long  river  (sep). 
Its  primary  signification  nearly  corre¬ 
sponds  to  the  Latin  fluctuosus,  rising  in 
waves,  and  the  pi.,  tukkcoog,  is  used 
by  Eliot  for  waves.  The  radical  verb 
tukkco  may  be  translated  by  fluctuat, 
it  flows  in  waves  (so  Rasies  has 
teg8,  pi.  tegS'ak,  flot,  for  the  Abnaki). 
Heckewelder  says  that  the  Del.  liit- 
tuck,  ‘  ‘  when  placed  at  the  end  of  a  word 
and  used  as  a  compound”,  means  “a 
rapid  stream”,  as  in  Lenapevhliittuck, 
the  river  of  the  Lenape  (Delaware 
river),  and  Mohicannittuek,  river  of  the 
Mohicans  (Hudson  river),  Hist.  Ac- 


river — continued. 

count  33.  noahtuk,  ndohtuk  [ndeu-tuk], 
in  the  middle  of  the  river;  ut  kishketuk, 
at  the  bank  of  [ kishke ,  by  the  side  of] 
the  river;  kehteihtukqut  [kehte-tukut] ,  to 
the  great  river. 

roar,  chequttumwog,  they  roar  (as  lions), 
Jer.  51,  38.  onquontcowau,  ogquontcoau, 
he  roars  (as  a  wild  beast),  conco,  he 
howls  or  yells  (as  a  beast), 
roast.  See  bake. 

rob,  mukkmkinnau,  he  robs,  spoils,  plun¬ 
ders;  ahque  mukkcokin,  do  not  rob 
(them) ;  suppos.  noli  mukkookinont,  one 
who  robs;  pi.  neg  mukkcokinoncheg,  mag- 
gcokmoncheg,  they  who  rob,  ‘spoilers’; 
n.  agent,  mukkcokinnuwaen-in,  a  rob¬ 
ber  (suppos.  mukkcokinnwaenuit,  ‘if  he 
rob’,  i.  e.  if  he  be  a  robber,  Ind.  Laws, 
xvi).  From  mukkukki,  hq  is  bare, 
stripped  bare;  cf.  mukkookeg,  strip  your¬ 
selves,  Is.  32,  11.  chekeheau,  he  uses 
force  to  (him),  he  compels  (him)  by 
violence  (freq.  impers.  chechequnittin, 
there  is  a  robbery  committed;  an.  aquie 
chechequnnuwasJi,  do  not  rob  me;  che- 
chequnnuwdchick  (neg  chechekunuacheg) , 
robbers,  R.  W. ) ;  neg  chechekqunukquea- 
neg  pish  chechequnaog,  ‘they  that  prey 
upon  will  I  give  for  a  prey’  (they  shall 
be  preyed  upon  or  despoiled) ,  Jer.  30, 
16.  From  chikee,  by  force,  violently; 
cf.  chichegin,  a  hatchet,  R.  W. 
robin,  Peq.  quequisquitch,  Stiles, 
rock.  See  stone. 

rod,  pogkomunk,  a  rod,  a  stick  [suppos. 
inan.  from  pogguhham,  qiogham,  he  beats 
or  threshes(?);  cf.  pockhommin,  to 
thresh  or  beat  out  com,  R.  W.] 
roll,  unnequanum,  he  rolls  (it),  moves 
(it)  by  rolling:  unnequanumcok  mogke 
qussukquanash,  roll  ye  great  stones. 
tatuppequanum,  he  rolls  (it);  pass.  part. 
tatuppequanumuk  ( that  which  is  rolled ) , 
a  wagon  or  cart,  ompcochenat,  to  roll,  C. 
room,  taubapimmin,  there  is  room 
enough,  R.  W.  [tdpi,  taupi,  there  is 
enough] .  mohchoi  week,  is  there  room 
in  the  house?  Gen.  24,  23  [ mohchiyeu ,  it 
is  empty]. 

root,  ivadchdbuk,wutchaubuk  [ wutch-appu ] 
(umtchdppehk  or  wottapp,  C. ;  wattap, 
R.  W. ).  In  composition  -adchdbuk, 
- adchaubuk :  unadchdbukaog,  they  take 


316 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


root — continued. 

root,  Is.  37,  31,  —oowadchabukcoog,  Jer. 
12,  3;  pish  nukkodtahchabpuhkondog,  I 
will  pluck  them  up  by  the  roots,  2  C-hr. 
7,  20;  kodohchabuhkohham,  he  roots  (it) 
up.  wutchuhquom  (and  wutchonquom) 
niatugqut,  at  the  root  of  the  tree,  Matt. 
3,  10;  Luke  3,  9;  i.  e.  to  the  lowest  part, 
the  base  [wutchdmqut,  to  the  bottom] . 
rotten,  and  (when  it  is  corrupted,  ‘it  is 
putrefied’,  R.  W. );  adj.  anittue,  cor¬ 
rupt,  rotten.  See  corrupt, 
rough,  kdshki,  kushke,  (it  is)  rough:  kushke 
hogkcoonk,  a  rough  garment  ( koshkeyiue, 
‘roughly  (a  coat  not  soft),’  C. ). 
round,  petukqui,  petuhki,  puttukqui,  El. 
and  C. 

round  about.  See  around, 
row  ( n. ) ,  pumohtaash  ( pi. ) ,  inanimate  ob- 
jects  in  a  row  or  rows;  an.  pumikkom- 
poog ,  (they  stand  in)  a  row.  See  walk, 
row  (v.).  See  paddle  (v.). 
rub,  umukquinum-unat,  to  rub,  C. 
rule  (n. ),  kuhkeliheg,  pi.  -\-ash,  a  rule, 
rules,  C.  [ kuhkuhheg ,  a  bound,  a  limit; 
kuhkham,  he  marks  (it)  out], 
rule  (v. ),  nanaanum,  he  rules  or  governs. 
See  govern. 

ruler,  nanaanuivaen,  nanuwunnuivaen, 
nananuaen,  a  ruler  or  governor;  neg 
nana&noncheg,  nanawunoneheg,  they 
who  rule  (nananuacheg,  magistrates, 
rulers,  Ind.  Laws),  atauskawaw,  a  lord 
or  ruler,  R.  W. ;  pi.  atadskawauog.  See 
master;  sachem. 


rump,  wadtan,  wodtan. 

run,  quogqueu,  he  runs;  quogquish  ( qua - 
quish,  R.  IV.;  Peq.  koquish,  Stiles), 
run  thou;  quogqueti,  let  me  run  (nug- 
quogqueem,  I  run,  C. );  adj.  or  adv. 
quogquewe  ( quogquiewe ,  C. ),  running. 
ussishau,  he  runs  to,  hastens  to  or 
toward  a  place  or  persons,  he  goes 
swiftly  or  in  haste  to  (it  or  him).  The 
primary  signification  is  to  make  violent 
exertion,  from  ussU,  he  acts,  with  ’sh  of 
violent  or  rapid  motion:  nd  ussisshash, 
nd  us  hash,  fly  thou  thither,  escape 
thither,  Gen.  19,  22;  Num.  24,11;  ahad- 
sukque  ussishaog,  ‘they  run  to  and  fro’, 
Joel  2,  9;  nussishau  (nusseu-ussisiuiu*), 
he  runs  alone  or  by  himself;  mousliauog 
( moeu-ussishau *) ,  they  run  together; 
negonshau  ( negonne-ussishau*) ,  he  runs 
first  or  in  advance;  n.  agent,  negon- 
shaen-in,  a  leader.  These  two  verbs, 
quogqueu  and  ussishau,  distinguish  the 
action  from  the  act  of  running.  The 
former  denotes  merely  the  mode  of  lo¬ 
comotion  or  the  physical  action;  the 
latter,  the  action  as  means  to  an  end  or 
a  voluntary  act  as  referred  to  the  ani¬ 
mate  actor  or  agent. 

*  [Note. — “  Perhaps  these  compounds  may  be 
properly  referred  to  au,  he  goes  to,  with  ’sh  of 
swift  or  violent  motion  prefixed:  nusseu-' sh-au, 
etc.”] 

run  (as  water).  See  flow. 

rushes.  See  flags. 


s 


sacbem,  sagamore,  sdchim,  a  king;  pi. 
-\-auog,  R.  W. ;  sachimduonck,  a  king¬ 
dom,  ibid.;  Narr.  saunchem,  Stiles; 
Peq.  sunjum,  Stiles;  Del.  sakimau,  he  is 
a  chief,  Hkw.  Related  to  sohkom,  he 
has  the  mastery;  sohkau,  sonkqhuau,  he 
prevails  over  or  has  the  mastery  of 
(them);  or  to  sagkompanau,  he  leads 
(them);  n.  agent,  sagkompagunuaen,  a 
leader.  Cf.  sonksqua,  a  queen,  soh- 
komau  and  sonkqhuau  are  easily  cor¬ 
rupted  to  sagamore  and  to  saunchem. 
sacrifice,  sephausu,  he  offers  sacri¬ 
fice;  sephausineau,  he  sacrifices  (it); 


sacrifice — continued. 
sephausauau,  he  sacrifices  (him)  to; 
sephamauau,  he  sacrifices  (it)  to;  n. 
agent,  sephausuaen,  one  who  sacrifices, 
a  priest.  See  offer. 

safe,  nanowiyeue,  in  safety  [ nandeu ,  he 
is  safe?]  ( ndnauwiyhie ,  safely,  C. );  cf. 
nanauantamde,  careful,  C. ;  nanaanum, 
he  oversees,  keeps,  rules  over,  etc.  pd- 
panne,  safely  (?),  Prov.  31,  11  (papane, 
wholesome,  C. ).  pashque,  safely,  Acts 
27,  44. 

sail  (n. ),  sepdghunk  (sepakhunk,  C. ;  sepa- 
kehig,  R.  W.) ,  a  sail;  suppos.  part.  inan. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


317 


sail  (n. ) — continued. 

from  sepagham,  he  sails,  lit.  he  goes  by 
spreading  out,  from  sepe,  suppos.  sepal', 
when  it  is  spread  out  or  extended 
(sepagehommatita,  let  us  sail,  R.  W. ; 
seppaghamunat,  to  sail,  C. ) . 
sail  (v. ) ,  pummohham,  he  goes  by  sea,  as 
distinguished  from  going  in  a  boat  or 
by  oars  or  paddles;  hence  n.  agent,  pi. 
pummohhamwaenuog,  mariners,  J onah 
1,  5,  those  who  go  on  the  sea  [ pummoh - 
com]. 

salmon,  mishquammaiXquock  (pi. ),  red- 
fish,  salmon,  R.  W.  \musqui,  red;  am- 
maugq] ;  Abn.  meskSamegS,  pi.  -\-ak, 
Rasies. 

salt.  The  English  word  is  transferred 
by  Eliot,  the  Indians  not  having  then 
learned  the  use  of  salt.  In  a  single  in¬ 
stance  ‘salt  water’  (James  3,  12)  is 
rendered  seippog,  i.  e.  sour  water  \_see- 

’ pog ]• 

same,  nan;  inan.  nenan,  ne  nan,  that 
same;  pi.  ne  nanoash;  an.  noh  nan,  the 
same  (person);  neane,  so,  in  the  same 
manner  as  (nenan,  nnih,  nont  ne,  the 
same;  mat  nahnane,  not  the  same,  C. ). 
See  as;  like;  such, 
samp.  See  soft. 

sand,  nagunt,  nagont,  sand,  a  sandy  place; 

nagontu,  in  the  sand, 
sassafras  tree,  sasaunckpdmuck,  R.  W. 
satisfy,  tdpi,  taupi,  there  is  sufficient, 
enough;  tapantam,  tapanatam  [ tdpi - 
antam] ,  he  is  satisfied,  is  satisfied  with 
(it);  tapehteau,  he  satisfies  (him)  with 
(it);  tapheauau,  he  satisfies  (him), 
makes  (him)  satisfied;  suppos.  noh 
tapheunt,  he  who  satisfies;  tapeneau,  he 
is  satisfied  with  (him).  See  accept; 
comfort;  enough,  tapepu,  he  is  sat¬ 
isfied  with  food,  he  eats  enough.  See 
eat. 

saucy,  aimkeyiue,  saucily,  C. ;  mat  qua- 
quttammoo,  (he  is)  saucy,  ibid. (?). 
save,  tomheau,  he  saves  (him);  tom- 
wehteau,  he  saves,  rescues,  or  delivers 
(it)  [caus.  an.  and  inan.  from  torneu, 
he  saves  himself,  escapes].  See  deliver. 
wadchanum,  he  keeps  (it)  safe,  he  saves 
(it);  an.  wadchanau,  he  keeps  or  saves 
(him),  pass,  he  is  saved;  n.  agent. 
wadchanuwaen-in,  one  who  saves,  a 
savior. 


saw  (n .) ,  poksunkquonk,  tussonkquonk. 
say,  wussin,  he  says,  he  speaks;  nus- 
sin,  I  say;  kussin,  thou  sayest;  nussim, 
if  I  say,  when  I  say;  uttoh  asean,  what¬ 
ever  thou  mayest  say  ( teagua  kissim? 
what  do  you  say? ;  nissimun,  we  say,  C. ) ; 
nag  us,  say  thou  to  them,  tell  them; 
nussip,  I  said,  I  did  say.  See  think. 
ivuttinuh,  he  says  to  him;  nutlin,  I  say 
to  (him);  suffix  kuttinsh,  I  say  to  thee, 
I  tell  thee;  wuttiwmh,  they  said  to  him 
( nuttinnoowap ,  I  said,  C. ;  teagua  n'tun- 
nawen  or  ntSawem ?  what  shall  I  sp>eak? 
R.W.).  noowau,  he  says;  ncowaog,  they 
say;  noowash,  say  thou;  nanuagk,  say  ye; 
nooadt,  if  he  say;  ncowop,  he  did  say; 
vbl.  n.noowaonk,  a  saying,  noowau  intro¬ 
duces  a  quotation  or  has  regard  to  the 
thing  said  (noowau,  ‘Sibboleth’,  Judg. 
12,  6);  wussin  and  wuttinuh  to  the 
speaker  or  the  person  spoken  to:  he 
says,  he  says  it  to  him.  annconau,  un- 
nunau,  he  says  with  authority  to  (him), 
he  commands,  directs,  or  speaks  as  a 
superior  to  an  inferior,  noowau  .  .  . 
Jehovah  toll  anukque,  ne  nussin,  ‘he  said 
.  .  .  what  the  Lord  saith  to  me  that 
will  I  speak’  (or  tell),  1  K.  22, 14.  See 
command;  send;  speak, 
scab,  mukkee.  Cf.  mogquen,  a  swelling; 

mogki,  (it  is)  relatively  great, 
scabbard.  See  sheath, 
scales  (of  a  fish),  wuhhogkiasli  (pi.);  neg 
wuhhogkiitcheg,  those  (fish)  which  have 
scales  [ wuhhoglri ,  it  covers  the  body  or 
it  is  covered,  from  hog,  body;  hogkco,  it 
is  clothed;  cf.  shell], 
scare,  kus-siashkkasheh,  thou  scares!  me 
( with  dreams) ,  Job  7,  14. 
scatter,  sedhham,  he  scatters  (it);  caus. 
an.  seahwhau,  he  scatters  (them); 
suffix  wus-seahwhoh ,  he  scatters  them; 
pass,  nag  seahwhoog,  they  are  scattered; 
caus.  inan.  seauhteau,  he  scatters  (it), 
i.  e.  he  causes  it  to  scatter;  suppos.  part, 
inan.  seauhteamuk,  ( when  it  is)  scattered, 
sprinkled;  an.  progr.  seaulikau,  he  scat¬ 
ters  (them)  in  flight  or  disperses  them 
(seauhkdnat,  to  scatter;  seaohkonnat,  to 
sprinkle;  nussewauhtearn,  I  sprinkle,  I 
scatter,  C. ).  seawhoog,  (they  are)  scat¬ 
tered  (sawhoog,  saivli6sachick,  loose 
beads  (wampum  unstrung),  R.W. ; 
elsewhere  collect,  seawan,  sewan,  loose 


318 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


scatter — continued, 
beads),  naswde,  naswayeue  scattered 
[ne  siahwhau,  or  ne  seaheuT]. 
scold,  auuskomau,  he  reproves  (him); 
see  reprove,  nunnishquewam,  I  chide  or 
scold ;  nunnishquet,  I  rage,  C. 
scornful,  maman&wantam,  he  is  scorn¬ 
ful,  a  scorner  [ momontauau ,  he  mocks 
(him)]. 

scratch,  nehnekinau,  he  tears  or  scratches 
(an.  obj.)  as  a  wild  beast;  suffix  wun- 
nehneJcin-uh,  he  tears  him  ( neehnekin - 
nudnat,  to  scratch;  nunnegunum,  I  tear, 
C. ).  nukkitchkeem,  I  scratch,  C.  (?). 
scum,  pehtom.  See  foam, 
scuppaug,  mishciXp,  pi.  —padog.  See 
porgy. 

sea,  keihtoh,  kehtoh,  keitoh  ( kUthan  and 
tvechekum,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  kikhonnohk, 
Stiles;  Del.  kitahican,  Hkw.) ;  pi.  keh- 
tahhanash;  n6eu  kehtahhannit,  in  the 
midst  of  the  sea;  kishke  kehtahhannit,  by 
the  sea;  keechippam  kehtahhannit,  on  the 
seashore  (=ut  oliquanupam) ;  kehtah- 
hannuppog,  the  water  of  the  sea  [keh- 
too,  it  is  very  great,  vast].  See  chief. 
pdmmoh,  pdmmoh,  paumco,  a  name  of 
the  sea  which  is  not  found  except  in 
compound  words.  It  is  probably  de¬ 
rived  frornpd,  the  particle  of  indefinite, 
undirected,  or  variable  motion  or  activ¬ 
ity.  From  it  are  derived  pummohham, 
he  goes  on  the  sea;  p u rnm 6 h hamwa en ,  a 
mariner;  woskechepam  ( wosketupam ,  Is. 
18,  2),  the  surface  of  the  sea  (cf.  wos- 
keche  rnoanoi,  Gen.  1,  2);  ohquanupam, 
the  shore  or  border  of  the  sea  [ uhquae , 
on  the  edge  or  margin  of] ;  kehchippam, 
keechepam,  on  the  shore  [ kutche-pam , 
where  the  sea  begins],  John  21,  4;  Gen. 
22,  17;  paumpdgussit,  ‘the  Sea  God,’ 
R.  TV.;  pummee,  oil  [pummde,  of  or 
from  the  sea];  pumupsq,  pumipsk,  a 
rock  in  the  sea,  a  sunken  rock,  etc. 
wechSkum  (R.  W.)  was  perhaps  a  name 
given  by  the  Indians  of  the  sea  coast 
to  the  ocean  as  the  great  ‘producer’ 
(wutcheken,  it  yields,  produces)  of  their 
staple  food,  fish. 

search,  for,  natinneham,  he  seeks  (it), 
searches  for  (it);  natinnehammk,  search 
ye  for  (it)  (natinnehas,  search  thou; 
teaqua  cunndtinne?  what  do  you  look 
for?;  ntauhaunanatinnehdmmin,  I  can 


search  for — continued, 
not  look  or  search,  R.  TV. ;  nun-nat- 
tinneahteam,  I  search,  C. );  an.  natinne- 
awhau,  he  seeks  for  (him) ;  vbl.  n.  natin- 
neahteaonk,  search  (for  inan.  obj. ).  See 
look. 

season.  See  time. 

seasonably,  uttcoche,  alihuttcoche  [u<- 
a>che~\,  in  due  season,  seasonably;  uttoo- 
cheyeum,  there  is  a  season,  time,  or  op¬ 
portunity. 

seasons.  There  was  no  division  of  the 
Indian  year  exactly  corresponding  to 
our  somewhat  arbitrary  assignment  of 
the  months  to  four  seasons  of  equal 
length.  A  comparison  of  the  several 
vocabularies  gives  the  following  ar¬ 
rangement  as  probably  correct:  Seed¬ 
time,  aukeetearniteh,  spring,  R.  W.  [im- 
perat.  of  aukeeteadmen,  R.  TV. ,  quttdune- 
mun,  ohketeam,  El.:  let  him  plant]. 
Early  summer,  sequan,  spring,  R.  TV. 
and  C. ;  summer,  El.  Summer,  nepun 
(nepinnde,  C. ),  El.,  C.,  and  R.  TV.;  qua- 
qusquan,  R.  TV.  Harvest  time,  nunnowa 
and  annodant,  R.  TV.;  ’ ninnauwaet,  fall, 
C.  [from  nundeu,  it  is  dry] .  Fall  of  the 
leaf,  taqudnck,  R.  TV.  Winter,  pdpon, 
El. ;  papdne,  R.  TV. ;  poponde,  C. 
seat,  appuonk,  vbl.  n.  from  appu,  he  sits. 
See  sit. 

seawan.  See  scatter, 
second,  naholitdeu  [next  after,  next  in 
order,  ne  hohtdeu ]  ( ndhohtdeu ,  C. );  noh 
adtdekit,  the  second  (son  or  daughter) 
in  order  of  age,  the  next  to  the  eldest 
or  first  born. 

secret,  kemeu,  (it  is)  secret,  private; 
kerne,  secret  ( kemeyeue ,  secretly,  C. ); 
suppos.  inan.  ne  kemeyeuoouk,  kemeyeuuk, 
that  which  is  secret,  a  secret;  nisli  ke- 
meoogish,  secret  things, 
see,  ndum,  he  sees,  he  sees  (it);  nun - 
naurn,  I  see  ( sun  kendumf  dost  thou 
see?  C. );  suppos.  naik,  nag,  when  he 
saw;  naumog,  if  we  see;  nanmdg,  if  ye 
see;  naish,  see  thou;  naumook,  behold 
ye  ( chuhnamuk !  behold!  C.);  an.  ndau, 
he  sees  (him)  ( kunnunni ?  have  you 
seen  me?;  kun-nunnous,  I  have  seen 
you,  R.  TV.);  n6k,  see  ye  (him);  vbl. 
n.  naumcoonk,  a  seeing,  sight, 
seed,  VMskannem,  (its)  seed;  u-uskannern 
mustard,  a  mustard  seed;  pi.  wuskan- 


Trumbull] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


319 


seed — continued. 

nemuneash,  skannemunash,  seeds  (seed 
corn,  Gen.  47, 19, 23, 24) .  weepammuwae 
wuskannem,  semen  virile, 
seek.  See  look;  search  for. 
seethe.  See  boil  (v. );  immerse, 
seize,  tohqunum,  he  seizes,  lays  hold 
of  (it);  tohqunau,  he  seizes  (him);  vbl. 
n.  tohqunumdonk,  prey,  that  which  is 
caught  or  seized.  See  catch;  stay;  take, 
seldom,  chekewe,  C.  (?). 
select.  See  choose, 
self,  hog,  body.  See  body;  myself, 
sell,  magco,  magou  (he  gives),  he  gives 
in  exchange  for  money  or  other  things 
(num-mag,  I  sell;  mdgunat,  to  give  or 
sell,  C. ).  See  give,  kodtauwcimpasu, 
kodtauwompasu ,  he  sells  or  barters;  kod- 
tauwompash,  sell  thou  (it);  suppos.  noh 
kodtauwompasit,  he  who  sells;  n.  agent. 
kodtauompasuen-in,  a  seller  ( cuttattada- 
mish,  I  will  buy  this  of  you,  R.  IV.). 
See  buy;  trade. 

send,  annmnciu,  he  sends  (him),  i.  e. 
gives  him  an  order,  command,  or  mes¬ 
sage;  prim,  he  commands  (him),  em¬ 
ploys  (him);  nut-anncon,  I  send  (him); 
annconeh,  send  thou  me;  kut-annconum- 
woo,  I  send  you  (kut-annconsh ,  I  will  hire 
you,  R.  W.) ;  inan.  anncotam,  he  sends 
(it).  See  command;  hire;  messenger. 
negontcoau,  he  sends  to  (him);  lit.  he 
sends  in  advance  or  beforehand  [ne- 
gonne ]  ( nekonchudnat ,  to  send;  nun- 
ntk&nchuam ,  I  send,  C. );  cf.  negonshau, 
he  runs  before  or  in  advance;  negon- 
shaen,  a  leader. 

sentence,  doom,  pogkodchimau,  he  sen¬ 
tences,  condemns  (him);  suppos.  noh 
pakodchimit,  he  who  sentences.  From 
pcikodcheu,  he  finishes,  makes  an  end  of 
it.  See  condemn;  judge, 
separate,  chippi,  cheppi,  it  is  separate  or 
apart;  chippinum,  he  divides  or  sepa¬ 
rates  (it);  v.  i.  act.  chippachdusu,  he 
makes  a  division  or  separation.  See 
divide. 

servant,  wuttinndm  (he  serves),  a  servant 
( wuttinnumin ,  wuttinninumin ,  a  servant, 
C. ) ;  nuttinnineum.,  nuttinneum,  my  serv¬ 
ant,  i.  e.  one  who  belongs  to  me;  nut- 
tinnum,  my  servant,  i.  e.  one  who 
serves  me  or  does  me  service;  wuttin- 
neum,  constr.  widtinneumoh,  his  servant, 


s  e  r  v  ant — con  tinued. 
the  servant  of  (him),  who  belongs  to 
him;  wuttinnum,  constr.  wuttinnumoh, 
his  servant,  the  servant  of  (him),  who 
serves  him  {wuttinninnumoh,  his  serv¬ 
ant,  C. );  anconaen  wuttinnumun,  a  hired 
servant;  n.  collect,  wuttinnumunneunk, 
the  servants,  collectively,  Ex.  21,  7; 
xmttinneumUnneunk,  owned  servants, 
collectively,  Eph.  6,  5. 

serve,  annconau  [pass,  of  cinnoonau,  he 
sends  or  commands  or  employs],  he 
is  employed,  he  is  hired;  n.  agent,  an- 
noonden-in,  one  who  serves  for  hire. 
naoswetau,  noswehtau,  he  obeys  or  serves, 
primarily,  he  follows  (him);  ncosweet- 
ash,  serve  thou  (him) ;  ncosweetcok,  obey, 
serve  ye.  Seeobey.  wuttinum,  he  serves, 
he  is  a  servant;  imttinnumunneat,  infin. 
to  be  a  servant;  v.  i.  act.  progr.  uut- 
tinmlmuhkausu  (he  continues  to  act  a 
a  servant),  he  does  service  habitually 
(wuttinimimekossinat,  to  serve,  C. );  vbl. 
n.  wuttinneumuhkauaonk,  (his)  service, 
a  serving  (him);  wuttinndmuhkausuonk, 
service  performed,  the  doing  of  service. 
From  wuttinnum,  (his)  servant,  he 
serves  (him). 

set  free.  See  deliver;  loose. 

seven,  nesdusuk  tahshe  ( nesasuk ,  C. ;  enada, 
R.  W. ;  Del.  nischoasch,  nischasch,  Hkw. ; 
Alg.  nissouassou,  ninshivassoo;  Peq.  nez- 
zdugnsk,  Stiles);  an.  nesausuk  tahsuog 
( enaddtasuog ,  R.  W. ).  nctbo  nesausuk 
adtahshe,  seventeen  ( piuck-nab  inada, 
R.  W. ;  Peq.  piugg-naubut  shv:ansk, 
Stiles),  nesausuk  tahshinchag  -)-  -kodtog 
(an.),  -kodtash  (inan.),  seventy. 

sew,  asequamcD,  ushquamoo,  he  sews;  ase- 
quam,  ushquam,  he  sews  (it);  kut-ush- 
quam,  thou  sewest  (it)  up  ( ushquamu - 
nat  monag,  to  sew  one’s  clothes,  C. ); 
v.  i.  an.  act.  usquontosu,  he  is  sewing; 
pass,  usquosin,  it  is  sewed;  matta  usquo- 
sinooh,  (it)  was  without  seam,  not  sewed, 
John  19,  23.  Cf.  usquont,  squontam,  a 
door. 

shad,  Abn.  magahaglie,  pi.  -gak,  ‘bar’; 
ketameg8,  pi.  -g8dk,  ‘gros’,  Rasies.  Cf. 
SarahagM,  a  scale,  ‘£caille’. 

shadow,  onkauohteau,  onkauoht,  onkau- 
woht;  onkouohtde  mehtugquash,  shady 
trees  [ onkhum ,  it  covers,  and  ohteuu,  it 


320 


BUREAU  OP'  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


shadow — continued. 

is  a  covering  or  it  ia covered].  Cf.  onk- 
quequohhou,  a  veil;  onkwheg,  a  cover. 

shake,  nukkunum,  freq.  nunnukkunum, 
he  shakes  (it),  causes  it  to  shake  or 
tremble;  inan.  suhj.  nukkemco,  nunnuk- 
kemco,  it  shakes,  it  is  shaken;  derog. 
nunnuksheau,  nannuksheau,  he  shakes, 
trembles;  vbl.  n.  nunnuksh&onk,  trem¬ 
bling.  See  tremble,  nenemuhkonau,  he 
shakes  (him);  pish  ke.nenemulikonish,  I 
will  [shake  you,  C.  tattauunum,  he 
shakes  (it):  lattautinum,  vmthogkuoonk, 
he  shakes  his  garment;  caus.  inan.  tat- 
tauwohteau,  tadtauohteau,  etc. ,  he  shakes 
(it),  makes  it  shake;  tattauwohteash  kuh- 
hog,  shake  thyself;  tattciuwohteagk  pup- 
pissi,  shake  off  the  dust,  Mark  6,  11 
(=jxxpauohteagk  puppissi,  Matt.  10,  14; 
Luke  9,  5)  ( tcit&gganish ,  shake  this, 
R.  W.). 

shall,  aux.  rnos.  See  must. 

shallop,  wunnauandtinuck;  dimin.  wun- 
nauanounuckqiiese,  a  skiff,  R.  W.  “Al¬ 
though  they  themselves  have  neither, 
yet  they  give  them  such  names,  which 
in  their  language  signifieth  carrying  ves¬ 
sels.  ” 

shallow.  See  ford. 

shape,  kulikenauwehteau,  he  shapes, 
fashions,  forms  (it) ;  kuhkenauweheau,  he 
forms  (him).  Caus.  an.  and  inan.  from 
kuhkham,  he  marks  it  out,  or  kuhken- 
auwe,  placed  in  order:  he  causes  (it  or 
him)  to  be  made  in  order  or  by  rule. 
nussu,  unnussu,  he  is  shaped  or  formed. 
See  form. 

sharp,  Icenai,  keneh,  (it  is)  sharp;  suppos. 
lcenag,  (when  it  is)  sharp,  that  which  is 
sharp:  wussetunk  .  .  .  kenag,  the  haft 
.  .  .  the  blade  (of  a  knife),  Judg.  3,  22; 
kenehquog  ( keenneehquog ,  C. ),  a  sharp 
knife;  kenompsk  (keneh-ompsk) ,  a  sharp 
stone.  See  edge;  point. 

sharpen,  kehtadtau,  kehtattau,  he  sharp¬ 
ens;  kehtadtauomm,  it  sharpens;  pass, 
part,  kehladtauun,  (it  is)  sharpened 
( keekodtauunat ,  to  whet  or  make  sharp, 
C.). 

shave,  nmsum  (he  smooths  (it),  makes 
(it)  smooth),  he  cuts  or  shaves  the  hair: 
mcomm  ummesunk,  he  shaves  off  his  hair; 
moosuk,  when  he  shaves  his  head  ( moo- 
somunat,  to  shear,  C. );  an.  mooswau 


shave — continued. 

vmhhogkuh,  he  shaves  himself.  From 
mcDiti,  it  is  smooth,  peeghumunat,  to 
shave;  nuppeegham,  I  shave;  sun  woh 
kuppeegwhitteamwco?  will  you  be  shaved? 
C.  chequodtweyaheau  [caus.  an.,  che- 
quodtwahheau'],  he  shaves  (him);  che- 
quodwehham,  he  shaves  (his  head,  his 
face,  etc.)  inan.  obj.;  suppos.  inan. 
chequotweydaheg,  that  which  shaves,  a 
razor,  Is.  7,  20  ( =chequodtweeohhou , 
Ezek.  5,  1;  chequddweehquog,  C. ). 

she.  See  he. 

sheath,  scabbard,  pecliehquogkunk,  pec- 
hequogwonk. 

shell  (?),  wuhhogki  [it  covers;  or  is  it 
causative,  makes  a  covering?  From  hog- 
kco,  it  clothes,  covers],  a  shell  (woh- 
hogke,  a  shell,  C.) ;  pi.  -) -ash,  scales  (of 
fish) ,  suckaiihock,  R.  W.  [ silcki-vmhhogki , 
black  shell],  ‘black  money’;  poquaH- 
hock  \kuppogki-wuhhogki,  thick  shell?], 
‘a  little  thick  shellfish’,  R.  W.  (the 
round  clam);  meteatihock  [- wuhhogki ], 
‘the  periwinkle’,  R.  W.  (Pyrula). 
anna,  a  shell,  C. ;  andwsuck,  shells;  suc- 
kauanadsuck,  the  black  shells,  R.  W. 
(bivalves?). 

shield,  ogqunneg  [when  it  covers;  sup¬ 
pos.  inan.  from  ogkm,  hogkco,  it  covers, 
clothes,  is  worn  on  the  person],  mut- 
tukkit  ( muttugk-it ,  on  the  shoulders),  a 
shield  or  ‘  target  ’  hung  on  the  shoulders. 

shin,  mississlkoshk,  C. 

shine,  wohsum,  he  shines,  emits  light 
( nepauz  wohsum,  the  sun  shines,  C. ); 
wohsumcomoo,  sohsumoomoo,  it  shines; 
wequai  sohsumcomao,  the  light  shineth; 
suppos.  inan.  wequananteg  wohsumoo- 
mcouk,  a  candle  when  it  shineth;  adj. 
and  adv.  w6hsumde,  sohsumwae,  shining, 
light-giving  ( wossumdoe ,  C. ) ;  vbl.  n.  woh- 
sumooonk,  sohsumc6onk,  a  shining  forth, 
light  emitted;  cowohsumcoonk wequanan¬ 
teg,  the  light  of  a  candle,  pumohsum,  it 
shines,  emits  light  about  it.  tvohsittau, 
it  shines,  is  bright:  nrntau  wohsittau, 
‘the  fire  is  bright’,  Ezek,  1,  13.  woh- 
sippohteau,  it  shines,  glitters,  reflects 
light;  adj.  wohsippoht&e,  v;6supohtde, 
bright,  glittering,  as  a  sword,  Nah., 
3,  3;  a  stone,  1  Chr.  29,  2,  etc.;  inan. 
cum. wohsuppahtum,  he  makes  (it)  shine, 
he  furbishes  or  polishes  (it). 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATBCK  DICTIONARY 


321 


ship,  kehtconog,  kulitamog  ( kitonuck,  R.  W. ; 
■dimin.  kitdnuckquese,  a  little  ship,  ibid. ). 
From  kehtoh-com,  kehtohham,  he  goes  by 
sea;  kehtohhan-wag,  when  he  goes  by 
sea(?).  But  see  shallop.  Is  kehte-6unuk 
a  great  ‘carrying  vessel’? 
shoe,  mokus,  mokis,  mokkussin;  pi.  mok- 
kussinash,  moxinash  ( rnocussinass  and 
mockussinchass,  shoes  ‘made  of  their 
deerskin  worn  out’,  R.W. ;  Peq.  mucka- 
sons,  Indian  shoes,  Stiles);  ummokus, 
his  shoe;  kummokus,  thy  shoe, 
shoot  (with  a  bow  or  gun),  pummu, 
he  shoots;  freq.  pepummu,  he  shoots 
often  or  repeatedly  ( pepemdi ,  ‘he  is 
gone  to  fowl’,  he  is  shooting,  R.  W. ); 
pummuog,  freq. pepummuog, pepumwaog, 
they  shoot;  pumsh  ( pumm ,  R.  W. ), 
shoot  thou;  qmmmcok  ( pummoke ,  R. 
W.),  shoot  ye;  noh  pepemit,  one  who 
shoots;  neg  pepemutcheg,  they  who 
shoot;  n.  agent,  pepumwaen,  pepummu- 
waen,  a  shooter,  an  archer;  an.  pepurn- 
muau,  pepumwau,  he  shoots  at  (him); 
suffix  up-pepumw6uh,  they  shoot  at  him. 
See  fly  (v.) ;  gun. 

shore,  kehchippam,  keechepam  [ kutche - 
pummoli ] ,  where  the  sea  begins,  the  sea 
shore,  ohquanupam  \phquanu-pummoh\ , 
the  sea  margin,  the  edge  of  the  sea; 
ohquanu  kehtahhcmit,  on  the  sea  shore, 
Mark  2,  13.  See  bank;  haven, 
short,  tiohqui,  tiuhque,  (it  is)  short  (tioh- 
kmsue,  (he  is)  short,  C. ;  tiaquonkqussu, 
low  and  short,  R.  W.). 
shorten  tiohqutteau,  tioquehtteau,  he 
makes  (it)  short,  he  shortens  (it)  [caus. 
inan.  from  tiohqui,  short] . 
shortly,  teanuk,  soon,  quickly, 
shoulder,  mohpegk,  muhpeg,  the  shoul¬ 
der;  uppegk,  uhpegk,  his  shoulder  ( up - 
peke,  pi.  uppequbek,  R.  W.);  uhpequan, 
Gen.  49,  15:  nanashaue  ohpequanit,  be¬ 
tween  his  shoulders,  Deut.  33,  12.  mut- 
tugk,  m’tuk,  the  shoulders,  i.  e.  the  up¬ 
per  part  of  the  back:  ut  nuttukeet,  ut 
nuttugkit,  on  my  shoulders;  wuttugkit, 
wuttukit,  on  his  shoulders  ( mittik ,  a 
shoulder,  C. ). 

shoulder-blade,  lipimon  (?):  wutch  nut- 
tipimonit,  from  my  shoulder-blade,  Job 
31,  22. 

shout,  mishontco,  mishontoowau,  he  shouts, 
cries  out  with  a  loud  voice;  vbl.  n. 

B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25 


shout — continued. 

mishontcDwaonk,  a  shouting,  a  loud 
noise  ( mishadntowash ,  speak  (thou)  out, 
R.  W. ;  mishontooonat,  to  roar,  C. ) .  See 
howl. 

show,  ndhtinau,  he  shows  (it)  to  (him); 
suffix  wunnoMinduh,  wunnohtinouh , 
he  showed  (it)  to  them;  kenahti- 
nush,  I  show  it  to  you;  nohtus,  show 
thou;  natusseli,  show  to  me  ( nunnohtin , 
I  show;  nahtusseh  keek,  show  me  your 
house,  C. ).  Caus.  from  naum,  he  sees, 
ndau,  he  sees  him ;  ndehiinau,  lie  causes 
him  to  see  it;  so,  naehtau,  show  thy¬ 
self  to  (him),  1  K.  18,  1.  See  inform; 
teach. 

shower,  nephnon,  C.  natiadtinon,  ‘there 
cometh  a  shower’,  Luke  12,  54.  pdpdd- 
tinunk,  showers,  rain  in  showers  (n. 
collect,  droppings).  See  rain, 
shrill,  sashkontcowaonk,  a  shrill  tone  or 
voice,  C. 

shut,  ydnittanum,  he  shuts  (it),  as  a 
door,  gate,  or  the  like,  to  or  together; 
often,  he  shuts  the  door  (without  squont 
expressed):  yaniitanumwog,  they  shut 
the  gate,  Josh.  2,  7  ( yeaush ,  shut  the 
door  after  you,  R.  W. ).  ydnunum, 
he  shuts  (it,  as  the  hand,  the  eye, 
etc.):  yanunush  wuskesukcooash,  shut 
thou  their  eyes;  hence,  ydnequohhov,  a 
veil. 

shut  up.  See  close, 
sick,  mahchinau,  he  is  sick  ( nurnmah - 
cheem,  nummohtchlnum,  I  am  sick; 
numviattumwus  mohchinnai,  my  wife  is 
sick,  C. ;  numrnctuchnem ,  I  am  sick; 
mauchinaui,  he  is  sick,  R.  W.);  num- 
machinam,  nen  mcochinam,  I  am  sick; 
suppos.  neg  mahehinacheg,  the  sick;  vbl. 
n.  mahchindonk,  sickness.  See  fade; 
have  (auxil.);  old;  pass  away, 
side,  muhpeteag,  rib,  side;  uppeteagunit, 
uppeteoganit,  to  his  side,  sussippoeu,  sus- 
sippoe,  (it  is)  on  the  side  of:  sussippoeu 
vmdchu,  on  the  side  of  the  mountain; 
nequt  sussippm,  on  one  side;  kus-sussip- 
poiyeum,  on  thy  side;  susdpponkomuk, 
sussuppongkorn.uk  \_sussippoeu-korm  ik~\, 

the  side  of  the  house.  VMtuhshame  .  .  . 
ongkoue,  on  this  side  of  .  .  .  beyond  or 
on  the  other  side  of:  wutuhshame  sepuut, 
on  this  side  of  the  river  ( wuttoshimm - 
yen,  on  this  side,  C. ).  yoaeu,  yodi,  yode, 


■21 


B(7KEAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


322 


side — continued. 

un  nne  side  of:  pttsuk  ydcwu  .  .  .  onka- 
tuk  ogkotndeu,  one  on  one  side  .  .  .  an¬ 
other  on  the  other,  Ex.  17,  12.  ncaw- 
mendakit,  ‘from  the  land  on  the  other 
side’;  acdwmuek  ndteshern,  ‘I  came  over 
the  water’,  R.  W.  [ogkomaeu-ohke]. 
See  other  side,  aeetawe,  aeetaue,  ehtdi, 
on  both  sides  of;  eht&ikenag,  two-edged, 
sharp  on  both  sides;  aeetaue  seep,  on 
both  sides  of  the  river. 

sight,  naumcoonk,  a  seeing,  sight;  vbl.  n. 
from  naum,  he  sees. 

silent,  chequnappu  (he  remains  quiet),  he 
is  silent,  he  stands  still;  chequnapsh ,  be 
thou  quiet,  be  silent  ( nutehequnnap ,  I  am 
silent,  C. ). 

sin,  matchuk  (evil),  rnatcheseonk  (evil  do¬ 
ing).  See  bad. 

since,  nddteuh  ( nateah ,  lately,  C. ):  nad- 
teuh  ne  kesukok,  since  that  day. 

sinew,  mutchoht,  mutchaht,  a  sinew;  pi. 

-) -ash. 

sing,  unncoham,  ancohom,  he  sings  (songs, 
etc.);  anaohomcok,  sing  ye;  suppos.  part. 
noh  ancohomont,  he  who  sings,  he 
singing;  vbl.  n.  unncoham&onk,  a  song. 
ketcohomom,  he  sings;  nukketcohomom 
( nukkutlrijMtrnorn,  C.),  I  sing;  ketcoho- 
rn/ok,  sing  ye  ( sun  kenauau  kukketcohum- 
omwoo?  can  you  sing?  C.) ;  vbl.  n.  ketoo- 
liomaonk,  a  singing;  n.  agent,  ketoaham- 
waen-in,  a  singer. 

sink,  qut.taueu,  he  sinks,  it  sinks,  as  in 
water,  in  mud,  etc. :  kuhtoonogquash  kod 
quttauw&og,  the  vessels  were  ready  to  sink 
(on  the  point  of  sinking) ,  Luke  5,  7 ; 
quttaueu  ■  ut  pisseogquanit,  he  sinks  in 
the  mire,  Jer.  38,  6.  Cf.  quttuhham,  lie 
weighs  (it).  With  particle  of  deroga¬ 
tion  or  disaster,  qutlauushau,  quttuh- 
shuu:  quttuhshauog  onatuh  qussuk,  they 
sank  to  the  bottom  like  a  stone,  Ex. 
15,  5.  See  dip. 

sip.  See  sup. 

sister,  weetahtu-oli,  her  brother  or  sis¬ 
ter.  weeto-mpas,  wetompassu,  his  or  her 
brother  or  sister.  See  brother,  wee- 
tuksquoh,  wetukishquoh,  her  sister;  ue- 
tukkusq,  my  sister  ( weticks ,  a  sister, 
R.  W. ).  ummisses,  urnmissies,  his  or 
her  sister;  ummissSsoh,  the  sister  of 
(him  or  her),  nummissis,  my  sister, 
kummissis,  thy  sister,  ummissiesiu  (the 


sister — continued. 

sister  of  any  one),  a  sister;  weemmussoh, 
hisorheryoungersister,  Judg.  15,  2  (v'ee- 
summis,  a  sister,  R.  W. ;  Muh.  n’mace, 
my  elder  sister,  Edw. ).  Abn.  nitsekessS, 
ma  sceur,  ait  mulier;  nebdenemSm  {-Sn 
s.  v.  parentde),  ait  vir,  Rasies.  See 
younger  brother  or  sister, 
sit,  appu,  he  sits,  primarily  he  abides, 
remains  in  a  place,  is  at  rest,  he  is 
or  remains  inactive;  hence  with  an. 
subj.  often  used  to  express  passive 
existence,  ‘he  is’,  as  itssu  (agit)  ex¬ 
presses  active  existence  or  animate  be¬ 
ing  with  potential  or  implied  activity, 
and  ohteau  (it  has  itself) ,  inanimate  pas¬ 
sive  existence,  ‘it  is’;  nuttap,  I  sit; 
nuttappin,  I  sit  here  or  there,  I  am  sit¬ 
ting;  xvutappin,  he  sits  here  or  there,  he 
is  sitting;  appuog,  they  sit;  apsli,  sit 
thou;  yen  ctpegk,  yea  apek,  sit  ye  here, 
abide  in  this  place;  suppos.  noh  apit,  he 
who  sits  (yo  dppitch  ewb,  let  him  sit 
here;  mat  apeu,  he  is  not  at  home,  R. 
W. ;  ne  appinneat,  to  tarry;  appu,  he  sit- 
teth,  C. ) ;  vbl.  n.  appitonk,  a  seat,  nurn- 
matuppu,  he  seats  himself,  he  sits  down; 
nummatapsh,  sit  down  ( nun-nummuttap , 
I  sit;  nummattdpunat,  to  sit,  C. ;  mdt- 
tapsh,  sit  thou  down :  mdttapsh  yoteg,  sit 
by  the  fire,  R.  W. ;  pish  mattapuog,  they 
shall  sit,  be  seated,  Ind.  Laws  xii). 
weetappu,  he  sits  down  with  (him); 
without  object  expressed,  weetappemo, 
Luke  22,  55  ( wetapwduwwas ,  ‘sit  down 
and  talk  with  us’,  R.  W. ).  kislikappu 
[ kishke-appu ],  he  sits  near  or  by  the 
side  of  (him),  quenappu,  he  sits  on  or 
upon  (it),  he  rests  on  (it)  (vbl.  n.  quen- 
appuonk,  a  chair  or  stool,  C. ). 
skin,  mattd,hquab\m’  adt-uhquae-appu,  that 
which  is  on  the  outside  or  the  extreme 
exterior],  the  skin  of  man;  wadluhquab, 
his  skin,  vmskon,  fiskon,  askon,  a  raw 
hide  or  undressed  skin  (of  an  animal) ; 
wutaskon,  his  skin  (oskdn,  a  hide,  C. ); 
n.  collect,  oskunk,  skins  sheepsoskunk, 
(undressed)  sheepskins,  Heb.  11,  37. 
From  iruske,  new,  or  askun,  it  is  raw,  un¬ 
prepared  for  use,  see  raw.  olikarn,  a 
skindressed  or  prepared  for  use  as  cloth¬ 
ing  ( acdh ,  a  deerskin  worn  as  clothing, 
R.  W. );  adj.  ohknonie,  made  of  skins 
(cf.  onkhum,  tie  covers  or  hides;  og- 


t 


TRl'MBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


323 


skin — continued. 

kunneat,  to  be  clothed;  ogkoo,  he  is 
clothed;  vbl.  n.  ogkooonk,  hogkcoonk, 
clothing).  N.  collect,  ohkooanunk, 
skins. 

skull.  See  head. 

skunk,  Peq.  ausounch,  a’ssownsh,  Stiles; 
squnck,  Josselyn.  Chip,  shi-kaug,  she 
gog,  she  gang,  polecat  [related  to  chohkag, 
spotted  ?].  Abn.  segankS,  Rasies  [re¬ 
lated  to  segSdi,  pisser,  and  sagket,  El.], 
sky,  kesuk,  the  visible  heavens,  the  sky. 
See  sun.  polikok,  the  clear  sky  (lit. 
when  it  is  clear),  suppos.  inan.  from 
pohki,  it  is  clear:  pohkok  msqui,  the  sky 
is  red,  Matt.  16,  2,  3.  See  weather, 
slander,  kekomonau,  he  slanders  (him), 
lit.  he  talks  about  (him);  n.  agent. 
kekomwaen,  a  talebearer,  a  slanderer, 
slaughter,  nushaonk,  a  killing,  from  nu- 
shau,  he  kills. 

sleep,  koueu,  kouweu,  he  sleeps;  nuk- 
kouem  ( nukkdueem ,  C. ),  I  sleep;  infin. 
kouenat  ( kauenat ,  C. ;  Del.  gauwin, 
Zeisb. );  suppos.  noh  kail,  kawit  (Del. 
gawit,  Zeisb. ),  he  who  sleeps;  pi.  neg 
kaecheg  ( Del.  gewitshik,  Zeisb. ) ;  kaean , 
when  thou  sleepest  (go  cowish,  sleep 
thou  here,  ‘do  lodge  here’;  kukkowS- 
tous,  ‘I  will  lodge  with  you’,  R.  W. ); 
vbl.  n.  koueonk  (kadeonk,  C. ),  sleep;  n. 
agent,  koueuen-in,  a  sleeper;  kussuk- 
koueu,  he  sleeps  soundly,  he  is  fast 
asleep  [qussuk-koueu  (?) ,  he  sleeps  like 
a  stone].  See  soul. 

sleepy,  kodtukquomunat,  to  be  sleepy, 
C.  (Del.  n’gatungwan,  I  am  sleepy, 
Hk  w. ) ;  ef.  unnukquominneat,  to  dream, 
slide,  slip,  tconequsheu,  tamukqusheu,  he 
slips:  nusseet  tconequsliin,  my  foot  slips; 
suppos.  inan.  toonukqushik,  when  it  slips. 
From  tconeque,  it  is  slippery,  with  ’sh  of 
derogation,  ossdepdsu,  he  slips  or  slides 
backward;  adj.  ossoepdsue,  assoeposue, 
backsliding.  Cf.  ass6ush.au,  be  goes 
backward. 

sling,  scowampdguneheg,  pi.  -j-  ash ; scowam- 
pdgunahham,  he  slings  (it);  n.  agent. 
smwompagunahhamwaen,  a  slinger. 
slip.  See  slide. 

slippery,  tameque,  (it  is)  slippery;  lame- 
quoliteau,  (it)  is  slippery. 


slothful,  sesegeneam,  sasegenam,  more 
rarely  segenam,  he  is  slothful,  sluggish, 
indolent:  ahque  sesegenammk,  ahque  sa- 
sagknedmcok,  be  not  slothful;  ahque  se- 
genamook,  be  not  remiss  or  idle  (in  a 
particular  matter;  the  freq.  sese-  or 
sasa-  denotes  general  or  habitual  sloth¬ 
fulness);  vbl.  n.  sesegeneamooonk,  sasag- 
( sdsekeneamwonk ,  C. ),  slothfulness,  in¬ 
dolence;  n.  agent,  sesegenamwen,  an 
indolent  or  slothful  person.  See  slow. 

slow,  clieke,  eheclieke:  checMke  kum-mus- 
quantum,  thou  art  slow  to  anger;  clieke 
kukkoueneau,  ‘you  sit  up  late’,  Ps.  127, 2, 
i.  e.  you  are  slow  to  sleep,  manunnu, 
manunneu,  (he  is)  slow,  moderate,  pa¬ 
tient,  quiet,  gentle  ( maninne ,  gently, 
C. );  mdnunappu,  he  is  (and  remains) 
quiet,  slow,  etc.;  manunnism,  he  acts 
slowly,  he  is  slow  (in  action)  ( mandn - 
shesh,  go  slowly,  R.  W.);  n.  agent. 
manunneyeuen,  one  who  is  slow,  pa¬ 
tient,  gentle,  etc.  (cf.  manunne  nuitcon, 
‘slow  of  (my)  speech’,  Ex.  4,  10,  and 
clieke  ketetcohkonch,  ‘let-  him  be  slow  to 
speak’,  James  1,  19).  sassciqushduog, 
they  are  slow;  cussdsaqus,  you  are  slow, 
R.  W. 

small,  pScheau,  he  makes  (him)  small; 
pass,  he  is  made  small;  peuh,  ‘bring 
thou  him  low’,  make  him  small,  Job 
40, 12  [cans.  an.  from  peawe,  peaeu,  it  is 
small].  See  little. 

smell,  munnontam,  manontam,  he  smells 
(it)  ( nummindntam ,  I  smell,  C. ;  nquilt- 
mauntash,  smell  thou,  R.W. ).;  vbl.  n. 
munnontamaxmk,  smell,  ussumunquodt, 
asumungquot,  he  smells  of,  has  the  odor 
of:  ussumungquodtash  myrre,  they  (inan. 
pi. )  smell  of  myrrh,  Ps.  45,  8;  asumung- 
quok  (when  it  smells  of),  smell,  odor, 
of  inan.  obj.;  asumwngqussu,  he  smells 
of,  emits  an  odor  of;  vbl.  n.  asumungqus- 
suonk,  smell,  odor,  of  an.  obj.  matclie- 
mungquot,  it  smells  badly;  malchemung- 
quok,  a  bad  smell  ( machumonquat ,  a 
stink,  C. ).  ireetimungquot,  it  smells 
sweetly;  weetimungquok,  a  sweet  smell 
(wetimunkquaUor  iveechirnooquat,  C. ). 

smelt,  moamitteaug,  ‘a  little  sort  of  fish, 
half  as  big  as  sprats,  plentiful  in  win¬ 
ter’,  R.  W.  This  was  probably  the 
smelt  (Osmerus  eperlanus);  but  the 
corrupted  name  ‘mummychog’  has 


324 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


smelt — continued. 

been  transferred  to  another  species. 
From  mohmdeog,  pass,  and  recipr.  moh- 
moitte&og,  they  are  gathered  together, 
smoke,  pukut,  pukit  {puck,  R.  W.);  pn- 
kittauco,  (it)  smokes;  pukiitaucoash,  they 
(inan.pl.)  smoke  {kek  pukkuttauo,  your 
house  smokes,  C. ) ;  adj.  and  adv.  pukut- 
tde,  smoking,  of  smoke;  dimin.  pukkut- 
taemes,  vapor,  fog.  Of.  pukquee,  ashes, 
mire;  puhquohke,  a  clod  of  earth, 
smooth,  mcosti,  moose,  moosiyeu,  mcoseu,  (it 
is)  smooth,  bare  ( moosi ,  bald,  C. );  pi. 
mcosiyeuash,  they  are  smooth ;  but  mcose 
qussukquanesash,  smooth  small  stones, 
1  Sam.  17, 40;  moosompsk,  a  smooth  stone 
[ mcosi-ompsk] .  See  bald,  vicosum,  he 
smooths,  hence  he  shaves  his  head,  cuts 
his  hair.  See  shave,  mooswau  [for  mco- 
sehhuau,  caus.  an.],  he  makes  smooth, 
an.  obj.,  hence  he  shears  or  shaves. 
mmsumwa'ehquok,  that  which  makes 
smooth,  a  razor, 
snail,  askequttum,  Lev.  11,  30. 
snake,  askook  ( askiig,  R.  W.;  ascowke, 
Morton,  N.  E.  Canaan;  Peq.  skoogs, 
Stiles;  askook,  C. ;  Del.  achgook,  Hkw.; 
moaskug  [ mcoi ,  black],  a  black  snake, 
R.  W. ;  Del.  suckachgook,  Hkw.);  pi. 
-\-og;  dimin.  askookse,  a  small  snake,  a 
worm,  sesekq,  sesegk,  pi.  sesequaog,  a 
poisonous  snake,  ‘adder’,  ‘viper’  (s6- 
sek,  rattlesnake,  R.  W. )  [sesekw,  he  rat¬ 
tles,  makes  a  noise  (?),  ‘he  peeped’, 
Is.  10,  14;  sahsciuag,  when  it  tinkles, 
‘tinkling’,  1  Cor.  13,  1].  Cf.  oohk,  oohq 
{oohke,  C. ),  a  worm. 

snare,  appeh,  ahpeh,  appehhnn,  a  snare, 
gin,  or  trap.  See  catch;  trap  (n.). 
sneeze,  wushikco,  he  sneezes  ( sanneg - 
kcoonk,  sneezing,  C. ;  annuonk,  sneezing, 
ibid.),  paopaotaudonk,  sneezing  (vio¬ 
lent  blowing,  blast  of  air), 
snow,  kcon  {c6ne,  R.W.;  Del.  gun,  guhn, 
Hkw.) .  sdchepo,  R.  AY. ;  Peq.  souch’pmi, 
Stiles;  sdchepwutch,  when  it  snows,  R. 
AY.  muhpcotvi,  it  snows;  sun  maohpu, 
does  it  snow?;  matta  mcohpinnoo,  it  does 
not  snow,  C. ;  muhpaoe  kernkod,  a  snowy 
day,  El.,  1  Chr.  11,  22  (cf.  toohpu,  frost). 
Cree  mispoon. 
so.  See  as;  like;  such, 
sob,  nohtimwinneat,  to  sob  or  sigh;  nun- 
nohtumup,  I  sob  or  sigh,  C. 


so  far  as,  noohqueu,  noohque,  unnoohqueu. 
See  far. 

soft,  noohki,  ncokiyeu  ( noohkie ,  C. ),  it  is 
soft;  an.  noohkem,  he  is  soft  or  tender; 
caus.  inan.  nookohleau,  he  softens  (it), 
makes  it  soft,  saupdeu,  sab&eu,  it  is 
soft,  i.  e.  it  is  made  soft,  perhaps  pri¬ 
marily  softened  by  water:  saupde  ma- 
nconsk,  softened  clay,  ‘mortar’,  Gen. 
11,  3,  etc.;  hence,  suppos.  inan.  sdbaheg, 
sobaheg,  pottage,  that  which  is  soft  or 
thinned,  and  nasdump,  R.  AY.,  ‘a  kind 
of  meal  pottage,  unparched.  From  this 
the  English  call  their  samp.’  Dutch 
sappaen  (suppawn,  sepawn,  sepon,  AVeb- 
ster),  ‘the  crushed  corn,  boiled  to  a 
pap’,  Descr.  of  N.  Netherl.,  1671;  fur¬ 
ther  corrupted  to  pone  (Abn.  ntsan- 
bahn,  sagamite,  Rasies ) .  See  drink  ( v. ) . 

softly,  manunne.  See  slow. 

soldier,  matwau,  an  enemy  (in  arms), 
a  soldier  {malwauog,  soldiers,  R.  AV. ; 
cf.  matwadonck,  a  battle,  ibid.).  See 
enemy. 

solitary,  touwushin,  touishin,  it  is  solitary, 
desolate,  deserted:  ohke  pish  touishin, 
the  land  shall  be  desolate;  suppos.  nek 
ne  tauuhshik,  my  house  that  is  waste, 
Hagg.  1,9;  as  adj.  touwushinne,  solitary, 
desolate.  See  alone. 

so  long  as,  nisohke,  ne  sohke,  tohsahke,  so 
long  as,  while.  Cf.  nesdhteag,  the  length 
of. 

some,  nawhutche,  nawutche(nowhitche,  C.) , 
a  part  of,  some  of  (it)  [na  wuiche,  there¬ 
from,  as  a  less  taken  from  or  out  of  a 
greater],  paushe,  R.  AV.  See  half. 

somebody,  howan;  pi.  howanig.  See 
any. 

sometimes,  momanch,  moomansh  ( m6m& - 
nish,  C.),  sometimes,  now  and  then,  at 
times. 

son,  vmn-naumon-uh,  his  son,  the  son  of; 
nunnaumon,  my  son;  pi.  nunnaumonog, 
my  sons;  nunnaumon  wunnaumonuli,  my 
son’s  son;  kenaumon  (kendmon,  C.),  thy 
son;  wunnaumoniin,  a  son,  i.  e.  the  son 
of  any,  any  son;  n.  collect,  wun-nau- 
monunk,  sons;  warm  nunnaumonunk,  all 
my  sons,  nummuckiese,  nummuckqud- 
chucks,  my  son,  R.  AV .  See  boy ;  younger 
son. 

son-in-law,  wusstnum,  he  is  the  son-in- 
law  (daughter’s  husband)  of:  pish  ken 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


325 


son-in-law — continued. 

waseenumukqueh,  thou  shalt  be  my  son- 
in-law,  1  Sam.  18,  21 ;  suppos.  part. 
■wasenumukqutche ,  a  son-in-law  ( nosene- 
muck ,  he  is  my  son-in-law,  R.  W. ). 
soon,  teanuk.  quenau,  quende,  as  soon  as 
( kittummai ,  kittumyai,  R.  W.).  See  im¬ 
mediately, 
soot,  penoht,  C.  (?). 

sore,  kehkechai  (it  is  sore),  a  sore;  an. 
kehkecMm,  (he  is)  sore;  vbl.  n.  kehke- 
chesuonk,  kehchesuonk,  soreness,  a  sore 
(n’  clihammam,  n’  chesammattam,  I  am 
in  pain;  nchesammam  n’sete,  my  foot  is 
sore,  R.  W. ). 

sorrowful,  neuantam,  he  is  sorrowful,  he 
grieves;  v.  i.  and  v.  t.  inan.  he  grieves, 
he  grieves  for  (it);  vbl.  n.  neuantamw- 
onk,  sorrowing,  sorrow.  See  grieve, 
sorry,  aiuskoiantam,  he  is  sorry;  v.  t.  he 
is  sorry  for  (it).  See  repent, 
so  soon  as,  quenau,  quende,  as  soon  as, 
scarcely. 

soul,  ketedhogkou,  (he  is  or  it  is)  a  living 
creature,  a  living  self  [keteae-hogk~\ . 
This  word  is  used  by  Eliot  for  ‘soul’, 
(living)  ‘creature’,  a  human  being, 
etc.  It  is  doubtful  if  it  was  known  to 
the  language  before  he  employed  it. 
Cotton,  however,  has  keteahogkau,  soul. 
cowwiwonck  [ =koueonk ],  the  soul,  “  be¬ 
cause  they  say  it  works  and  operates 
when  the  body  sleeps  [koueid] .  micha- 
chunck,  the  soul  in  a  higher  notion, 
which  is  of  affinity  with  a  word  signi¬ 
fying  a  looking-glass  or  clear  resem- 
semblance,  so  that  it  hath  its  name 
from  a  clear  sight  or  discerning.” — 
R.  W.  nashauonk,  the  spirit  of  man, 
lit.  breath,  tcvev/jlx.  See  spirit, 
sound.  See  voice. 

sour,  see,  (it  is)  sour;  suppos.  s'eog  (when 
it  is  sour),  that  which  is  sour:  see petuk- 
qunnunk,  leavened  bread;  ste  'wine, 
‘vinegar’;  adj.  sedne  \_see-unne,  sour- 
like],  sour:  seane  uienom,  sour  (unripe) 
grape,  Is.  18,  5.  Cf.  siogke,  hard,  diffi¬ 
cult. 

south,  sowandyeu,  sdanaiyeu,  southward, 
to  or  at  the  south,  but  ( sowwainiii )  ac¬ 
cording  to  R.  Williams,  ‘the  South¬ 
west’,  where  ‘the  Gods  chiefly  dwell’. 
scnvanohke,  the  south  country, 
southeast  wind,  nandckquttin,  R.  W. 


south  wind,  sowansh,  sowanshin,  there  is 
a  south  wind,  the  south  wind  blows 
( sovnuanishew ,  the  southwest  wind;  tou- 
wuttin,  the  south  wind,  R.  W. ). 

sow,  ohketeau,  he  sows  or  plants.  See 
plant. 

span,  dmskinausu.  See  measures  of 
length. 

sparrow,  mameesashques  is  used  for 
‘swallow’  and  ‘sparrow’;  mameshash- 
quish,  Ps.  102,  7  ( mamessashquas ,  Mass. 
Ps.). 

speak,  kuttoo,  he  speaks,  he  utters 
speech;  vbl.  n.  kuttooonk,  kuttoowonk, 
speech  (a  word,  C. ;  the  Word,  6  Xoyoz) ; 
with  k'  progressive  ketcokau,  he  talks, 
goes  on  speaking;  ketmkash  ( kuttdkash , 
R.  W. ),  speak  thou  (noh  wunne  keketao- 
kau,  he  speaks  well  or  is  fair-spoken; 
nukketetaokom,  I  speak,  C. ).  annaonau, 
anncowau,  unncowau,  he  speaks  to  (as 
a  superior  to  an  inferior),  he  tells  or 
commands  (him);  unnok,  speak  ye  to 
(them);  noh  anont,  he  who  speaks  to 
or  commands;  dnon,  when  I  speak  to 
(him)  ( nut-annconuk ,  he  commands 
me;  unncowonat,  to  say,  C. ).  See  say; 
think,  kenconau,  he  speaks  to  (him), 
he  talks  with  (him);  kenconwk,  speak 
ye  to  (them);  kenoos,  speak  thou  to 
(them) ;  suffix  kuk-kenconsh,  1  talk  with 
you,  I  speak  to  you  (as  a  superior  to  an 
inferior) ;  n.  agent,  kenconuaen-in,  a  coun¬ 
selor. 

spear,  qunuhtug,  pi.  -\-quash  \_qunni- 
uhtugk,  long  stick] ;  anneganuhtuk,  a 
fish  spear,  Job  41,  7  (Del.  notameshican, 
Hkw.]. 

species.  See  kind  (n. ). 

speckled,  mom  one,  ‘freckled’,  Lev.  13, 
39;  nwmonesu,  (he  or  an.  obj.  is)  speckled 
( momonesein ,  Gen.  30,  33) ;  suppos.  part, 
pi.  neg  rndmdnesitcheg,  they  which  are 
speckled.  See  sp.ot. 

speech,  kuttoowonk,  speech,  utterance; 
vbl.  n.  from  kuttoo,  he  speaks;  keketco- 
kauonk,  continued  speech,  talk;  vbl.  n. 
from  keketookau,  he  goes  on  speaking; 
hettoowonk,  unnontooivaonk,  speech,  lan¬ 
guage.  See  language. 

spider,  mamunapit,  mamunappeht. 

spill,  quoiishau,  quoashau,  it  is  spilled, 
Luke  5,  37;  Mark  2,  22;  nequouhteaw.uk, 
that  which  is  spilled,  2  Sam.  14,  14. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


326 


spin,  tupjienohteau,  taluppenohteau,  ( lie) 
spins,  twists.  See  string;  twist, 
spirit,  nashauonk,  breath,  the  spirit  of 
man  {itvsvptx,  spiritus).  Apparently 
a  verbal  from  iia.sha.ue,  it  is  between, 
medium;  because  intermediate  to  the 
material  and  immaterial  or  to  animate 
and  inanimate  existence,  a  ‘tertium 
quid’?.  See  soul. 

Spirit  of  God,  wun-naslumaniloomoh  C iod, 
Gen.  1,  1  (cf.  Dan.  4,  8,  9;  5,  18);  nash- 
auanit,  Matt.  4, 1  (cf.  mattanit,  the  devil, 
ibid.). 

spit,  suhkou,  he  spits  ( eskauousinneat,  to 
spit,  to  be  spiteful,  C. ;  nutteeskduom,  I 
spit;  rmrnke,  I  am  spiteful,  C. );  scokq, 
sohq,  spittle. 

spoil  (n., booty),  sequttahhamoomk  [vbl.  n. 

from  sequttah ham,  he  leaves  (it)behind]. 
spoil  (v.).  See  hurt;  rob. 
spontaneously,  nehemvonche,  of  himself, 
of  itself,  sua  sponte. 

spoon,  wutlattamwaitch,  pi.  -{-Hash  (but 
nootattamiuaetch,  my  cup,  C. )  From 
wuttattamwaehheau,  -weheau  [caus.  from 
wuttattam],  it  makes  him  drink,  enables 
him  to  drink  (?).  kundm ,  pi.  -\-mdvog, 
R.  W.;  kunndm,  quonnam ,  and  kuhpoh- 
honk,  spoon  or  ladle,  C. 
spot,  chohkag,  chogq,  a  small  bit,  a  trifle, 
a  spot,  a  jot:  wompi  chohkag,  a  white 
spot;  freq.  chohchohkag  (suppos.  inan., 
when  it  is  spotted  or  has  many  spots), 
that  which  is  spotted;  an.  chohkesu, 
chohchohkesu,  (he  is)  spotted;  suppos.  ; 
chohchohkesit,  when  he  is  spotted;  pi. 
neg  chohcholikesitcheg,  the  spotted  (ani¬ 
mals).  vwmooechohkesu,  (he is)  spotted; 
neg  mdmcoecliohkesUcheg ,  they  (animals) 
which  are  spotted  [ mcoi-chohkem ,  having 
dark  or  black  spots  ?].  See  speckled, 
spread  about,  pendekinnu,  it  spreads 
about  (as  a  vine),  Ezek.  17,  6.  From 
panneau ,  it  goes  astray, 
spread  out,  sepagenum,  sepakinnum,  he 
spreads  (it)  out;  suppos.  inan.  part. 
sepagkemcouk,  spread  out;  inan.  subj. 
sepagemco,  sepakemw,  it  is  spread  out,  it  j 
spreads  itself;  v.  i.  an.  sepakeog,  they 
spread  themselves.  See  sail  (n.). 
spring-  (a  season).  See  seasons, 
spring-  (of  water),  lohkekom,  a  spring,  a 
fountain,  pi.  -\-muash;  tohkekoinmupog , 
springs  of  water,  running  water,  Num. 
19,  17;  Josh.  15,  19. 


spring  up  (as  a  plant),  sonkin,  sonkiin, 
it  springs  up:  teanuk  sonkenash,  (these) 
spring  up  quickly,  Matt.  18,  5;  suppos. 
part,  sonkuk:  kutche  sonkuk,  ‘  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  shooting  up’,  Amos  7,  1 ; 
caus.  inan.  sonkenwahtean,  he  makes  it 
spring  up.  xonkehteau,  it  springs  forth, 
puts  out  (as  a  bud  from  a  plant). 

sprinkle.  See  scatter. 

square,  yauen&i  (four-cornered),  square. 
See  angle;  corner. 

squash,  “ askutasquasli,  their  vine-apple, 
which  the  English  from  them  call 
squashes”,  R.  W.  “ Isquouter squashes 
is  their  best  bread  in  summer  when  their 
corn  is  spent”,  Wood,  N.  E.  Prospect 
“Squashes,  but  more  truly  squonter 
squashes”,  Josselyn,  N.  E.  Rar.  57 
Eliot  gives  askootasq,  pi.  askcotasquash, 
cucumbers,  Num.  11,  5;  monaskootas- 
quash,  melons;  quoncoasq,  a  gourd,  etc. 
Cotton  derives  this  asq  from  aske,  raw: 
m amosketdmuk,  ‘cucumbers  or  a  raw 
thing’,  and  this  etymology  is  estab¬ 
lished  by  Rasies’  Abn.  eskita.mek  Sa’saSe, 
pi.  eskitameghir,  ‘melon  d’eau,  i.  e. 
qu’on  ne  fait  pas  cuire’  ( skit‘ ,  crud). 
See  raw.  It  was  probably  a  general 
name  for  the  Cucurbitaceie  or  melon¬ 
like  plants,  derived  either  from  aske, 
raw,  i.  e.  which  may  be  eaten  uncooked, 
or  from  the  kindred  word  askeht,  oskeht, 
that  which  is  green.  Cf.  ivame  ashkash- 
quosh,‘  all  the  green  grass’,  Rev.  8,  7. 
askutasq  (pi.  ashUasquash )  is  perhaps 
compounded  from  askcok,  snake,  and 
asq,  snake-like  plant;  perhaps  from 
askeht-asq,  green  melon-like  plant.  The 
English  adopted  the  plural  asquash 
as  a  singular  and  formed  a  new  plural 
squashes. 

squeteague  (Labrus  squeteague  Mitch.) 
is  supposed  to  be  an  Indian  name  of  a 
species  of  fish  common  on  the  coast  of 
New  England,  but  I  have  not  found  it 
in  aiiy  early  writer.  The  same  species 
is  in  some  places  known  as  checout  or 
chequit. 

squint-eyed,  pdnikqud,  C.  [panne-nuh- 
quaeu,  he  looks  astray  or  wrong] . 

squirrel,  anequs,  a  little  colored  squirrel; 
pi.  anequussuck,  R.  W. ;  the  chipmunk  or 
striped  squirrel,  Sciurus  striatus  [ anog - 
keen ,  he  is  painted],  rnf kite,  G-ureuil; 
anikSsess,  suisse,  Rasies.  “The  Suisse 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


327 


squirrel — continued, 
squirrels  are  little  animals  resembling 
rats.  The  epithet  of  Suisse  is  bestow’d 
upon  ’em  in  regard  that  the  hair  which 
covers  their  body  is  streak’d  with  black 
and  white  and  resembles  a  Suisse’ s  doub¬ 
let,  and  that  these  streaks  make  a  ring 
on  each  thigh  which  bears  a  great  deal  of 
resemblance  to  a  Suisse’ s cap.  ”  — Lahon- 
tan  x,  235-236  (ed.  1703).  mishdnneke, 
R.  W.;  mishannek,  pi.  -\-wog,  C. ;  m’ush- 
dnneege  and  shenneague,  a  squirrel,  Stiles 
[ mishe-anequs ,  great  squirrel]. 

staff,  amvohhou  ( wut-dnho ,  R.  W.) ,  a  walk¬ 
ing  staff  (cf.  anwuhsin,  he  rests),  qun- 
nuhtug,  an  upright  staff,  stick,  or  pole 
[ qunni-tugk ,  long  stick]. 

stagger,  chanisshau,  he  staggers,  as  a 
drunken  man,  C. ;  vbl.  n.  chachahissha- 
onk  and  chanehchashauonk,  staggering 
or  reeling,  ibid,  kehkepshau,  quehqueh- 
ckikau,  he  staggers. 

stand,  neepau,  he  stands,  he  rises  up 
(erect);  nunneepoh,  I  stand;  nepaush, 
stand  thou  (‘up’  Judg.  8,  20);  ne- 
paitch,  let  him  stand;  suppos.  noh  ne- 
pauit,  he  who  stands  ( nunnepco ,  I  stand, 
C. ;  yd  neepousli,  stay  or  stand  here, 
R.W. ) ;  inan.  subj.  neepaumao ,  neepomw, 
it  stands;  nish  neep>6ma>ash ,  these  things 
stand;  inan.  caus.  nepadtau,  uepattau , 
he  makes  (it)  stand,  he  stands  (it)  up, 
and  with  inan.  subj.  it  stands  (i.  e.  it  is 
made  to  stand  up) :  matta  pish  nepad- 
taucoash,  they  (inan.)  shall  not  stand 
up,  Is.  27,  9;  hence  nepattuhquonk,  a 
post,  a  stake. 

kompau,  he  stands  erect,  as  a  man 
stands.  This  verb,  related  to  omp,  man, 
is  not  found  except  in  compounds,  of 
which  there  are  a  considerable  number. 
Heckewelder  observes  that  in  the  Del¬ 
aware  ‘ap  or  ape,  for  walking  in  an 
erect  posture’,  is  one  of  the  regular 
terminations  of  the  names  of  animals; 
‘hence  lenape,  man’,  Corresp.  411. 
sampwkompau  \_sampice,  straight,  up¬ 
right],  he  stands  upright,  quenikovi- 
pau,  quesikompau,  he  stands  upon  (it): 
pish  kukquesikompdu  qussuk,  thou  shalt 
stand  upon  a  rock,  Ex.  33,  21.  ohpik- 
kompau  wusseetash,  he  stands  upon  his 
feet,  Dan.  7,  4;  cf.  ohpantu,  he  walks 
or  treads  upon,  Job  9,  8.  chequnikom- 


stand — continued. 

pan,  he  stands  still,  Josh.  10,  13.  og- 
quekompauog,  they  stand  like  or  in  the 
manner  of,  Job  38, 14.  pumikompauog, 
-poog  (they  stand  in  a  row),  a  row  of 
men  or  animals;  cf.  pumohtaash  (they 
are  in  a  row),  a  row  of  inan.  objects. 
nauwakompau,  nawdsikompau  [ lumwaeu , 
nauwdsu,  he  bends  or  stoops],  he  stands 
bent  or  stooping,  waeenikompattauog, 
they  stood  round  about  (it);  weinne- 
kompattauog,  Gen.  37,  7  [waeenu,  it  is 
round  about,  around] .  quinnuppekom- 
pau  [ quinnuppu ,  he  turns  about],  he 
stands  turned  about;  hence  ‘he  is  con¬ 
verted’,  and  quinnuppekompauaen,  ‘a 
convert’. 

quenohteau,  it  stands  (is  supported) 
on;  suppos.  inan.  quenohtag,  a  founda¬ 
tion. 

star,  cmogqs  ( anockqus ,  pi.  andckmck, 
R.  W.;  anogqs,  C.);  pi.  anogqsog;  mish- 
dnogqus  ( mishdnnock ,  R.  W.),  the 
morning  star  [ mishe-anoqs ]. 
starve,  paskdnontam ,  he  suffers  extreme 
hunger,  he  starves:  noh  nahen  nuppcoe 
paskdnontam,  he  is  like  to  die  with 
hunger,  Jer.  38,  9;  vbl.  n.  paskdnonta- 
mooonk,  starvation,  extreme  hunger, 
stay,  appu,  he  stays  or  remains.  See  sit. 
togkogku,  togkogqshau,  it  is  stayed,  is 
stopped:  enninneaonk  togkogqshau,  the 
plague  was  stayed,  Kum.  16,  48,  50, 
=togkogqushoma>,  Num.  25,  8. 
steal,  kommmto,  kummmto,  he  steals; 
suppos.  part.  pass,  kommcotomuk,  (that 
which  is)  stolen;  neg.  imperat.  kom- 
mootuhkon,  thou  shalt  not  steal  (nuk- 
kummcot,  I  steal,  C. ;  wepe  cukkummcot, 
you  have  stole,  R.  W.) ;  vbl.  n.  komma>- 
toivonk,  stealing,  theft;  n.  agent,  kom- 
mootowaen-in,  a  thief, 
steel,  memihkequog,  missehchuog.  See 
iron. 

sterile,  mehcheu,  mehcheyeu,  (it  is)  sterile, 
barren,  empty.  See  empty, 
stick  (n. ).  See  rod;  wood, 
stick  (v.),  pissogqusheau,  pissogqsheau,  it 
cleaveth,  sticketh,  it  is  adhesive  or 
sticky;  adj.  pissagquane,  miry,  sticky. 
mosogque,  it  adheres,  sticks  close;  rnosog- 
quohleau,  it  adheres  to  (it),  sticks  close 
to  (it);  inan.  pi.  mosogquohtaasli,  they 
stick  together,  adhere  ( nummosogque - 


328 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  '25 


stick  (v.) — continued. 
tarn,  I  cleave  to  or  stick  to,  C. );  from 
rnussumim,  he  touches  (it), 
still  (adj.),  chequnappu,  he  is  still,  he 
remains  quiet.  See  silent,  chequnussu, 
he  is  still  (inaction),  he  does  or  acts 
quietly,  ahiotapagodtut  (?),  ‘beside the 
still  waters’,  Ps.  23,  2,  =rnanunmhae 
nippeit,  Mass.  Ps. 
still  (adv. ) .  See  yet. 
sting,  vbl.  n.  chohkonvaonk,  a  stinging 
[chogq,  a  spot,  a  very  small  thing,  and 
k6,  sharp  ?]  ( chohkuhhco ,  a  sting,  C.) . 
stir,  momontunnum,  nui-,  he  stirs,  moves, 
causes  motion  in  (it):  momontunnum 
nippeash,  he  troubled  the  waters,  John 
5,  4;  mamontonuk  wussissittconash,  when 
he  moved  his  lips,  Prov.  16,  30. 
mamonchu,  he  stirs,  he  moves;  mamon- 
rhemoo,  it  stirs,  ontahtea u,  ontohteau,  it 
stirs,  it  is  moved  from  its  place. 
wogkauunau,  he  stirs  up,  incites,  sets 
in  motion  (him);  wogkouunum,  he  stirs 
(it)  up,  sets  (it)  in  motion;  inan. 
subj.  otan  wogkouwemcu,  the  city  was 
moved  (excited),  Acts  21,  28;  nippe 
-wogkouemrouk,  when  the  water  is  trou¬ 
bled,  stirred,  John  5,  7;  vbl.  n.  wogkoue- 
onk,  stir,  commotion.  See  move, 
stockings,  caukdanash,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  cun- 
gowuntch,  a  stocking,  Stiles.  See  leg¬ 
gings. 

stomach,  muppcochlnau,  C.  See  bosom, 
stone,  qussuk,  a  rock,  pi.  qussukquanash 
( qussdck ,  a  stone,  R.  W. ;  qussuk,  rock, 
C. ).  hassun,  a  stone,  pi.  -{-ash;  dimin. 
hasmnemes  (so  El.  Gr.  10,  12;  but  the 
distinction  is  not  uniformly  observed 
in  his  translation),  qmmkquanlhtu, 
among  the  rocks;  qussukquaneutunk 
( quissukquannutonk ,  C. ),  a  wall  (Del. 
rneechek  achsinink,  at  the  big  rock, 
Hkw.;  qussdcqun,  it  is  heavy,  R.  W.). 
hassunnegk,  a  cave;  hassunneutunk,  a 
stone  wall,  ompsk,  ompsq,  in  com¬ 
pound  words,  an  upright  rock,  a  stone 
(not  found  separately  in  Eliot’s  Bible; 
but  missitche  ompsqut,  ‘a  great  rock’, 
occurs  in  Samp.  Quinnup.,  p.  156): 
kenompsq,  a  sharp  stone  [keneh-ompsk] ; 
wanashquompsk,  the  top  of  a  rock 
[wanashque-ompskl  ;  togwonkan- 
ompsk,  a  mill  stone,  etc.  chepiskq,  chip- 


stone — continued. 

pipsk,  in  compound  words,  a  rock  [a 
detached,  separate  ( chippi )  rock?]; 
woskechepisk,  the  top  of  a  rock,  2  Chr. 
25,  12;  Ezek.  24,  7;  ut  chippipsqut,  ‘on 
the  rocks’  (on  a  rock),  Acts  27,  29 
(rnacMpscat,  a  stony  path,  R.W.,  =may- 
chippiskquft).  pumipsk,  pumupsq,  pi. 
pumipsquash,  a  rock,  rocks;  kenugke 
pumipsquehtu,  among  the  rocks,  Job 
28,  10;  pi.  pumupsquehtuash  (?),  1  K. 
19,  11. 

stoop,  sukoshkodtaeu,  sukoshkodtassun 
onatuh  qunnonou,  ‘he  stooped  down, 
he  couched  as  a  lion’,  Gen.  49,  9;  wish- 
quossun,  he  couched  (as  a  lion),  Num. 
24,  9.  See  bend  one’s  self;  bow  down, 
storm,  mishehtashin  (it  storms),  a  storm 
of  wind,  a  tempest  ( mishitdshin ,  there 
is  a  storm,  a  storm,  R.  W. ;  mishetashin, 
winds,  C. ) :  wacibin  mishsliehtash,  there 
arose  a  tempestuous  wind,  Acts  27,  14; 
suppos.  mishehtashinit,  when  it  storms: 
wutche  mishe  tahshinit,  from  the  storm, 
Is.  25,  4  [ mishe-tahshin ,  it  is  greatly 
lifted  up,  there  is  a  great  uplifting]. 
nashquttin  (it  destroys,  it  rages  with 
violence),  a  violent  and  destructive 
tempest  ( nashqittin ,  uhqudhquat,  a 
northerly  storm  or  a  tempest,  C. ) ;  sup¬ 
pos.  nashquit ;  cf.  nashquttag,  fire;  squtta, 
R.  W. 

story,  unnehtongquat,  a  story;  pi.  -{-ash, 
C. 

straight,  sampim.  See  right- 
strange,  pencowe,  different,  unlike,  for¬ 
eign;  pencDwohkomuk,  a  strange  place. 
See  different;  foreign, 
stranger,  penmwohteau,  he  is  strange  or 
a  stranger,  he  is  different,  unlike;  con¬ 
tract.  pencowoht,  penuwot ,  a  stranger 
( pencoivohtea ,  C. );  pi.  penanvohtedog, 
strangers,  ‘the  heathen’,  Ezek.  36,3,4 
( nippenowdntawem ,  I  am  of  another 
language;  penouiantowawhetttiock,  they 
are  of  a  divers  language,  R.  W.). 
strawberry,  wuttahminneoh,  C. ;  pi.,  u~ul-  - 
tdhimneash,  R.  W. 

street,  taumaog,  taucomaog;  en  taucorndog- 
quehtu,  into  the  streets, 
strength.  See  strong, 
stretch  out,  summagunum,  samogkin- 
num  ( sumrndgkinum ,  C.),  he  stretches 


tritmbull] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


329 


stretch  out — continued, 
out  (his  hand,  a  staff,  etc.);  suppos. 
summagunuk  wunnutcheg,  when  he 
stretched  out  his  hand;  ne  samogkinu- 
muk,  that  which  is  stretched  out;  sum- 
magohteau,  it  stretches  out  or  is 
stretched  out,  extended  ( summogguissin - 
nunnat,  to  lie  along,  C.,  i.  e.  to  stretch 
one’s  self;  nussummogqussin,  I  lie  along, 
ibid. )  [ soh-magun ,  he  offers  or  presents 
it  forth],  sesekeu  (?) ,  he  stretches  him¬ 
self.  sesepdea,  he  stretches  himself,  lies 
at  full  length;  suppos.  part.  pi.  neg  sese- 
pauecheg,  they  who  stretch  themselves, 
Amos  6,  7  [from  sepe,  sese-appu,  extend¬ 
ed,  at  length].  See  spread  out. 

strife,  penu&nittuonk,  contention,  strife; 
vbl.  n.  recipr.  from penuanumau,  he  has 
a  difference  with  (him).  See  conten¬ 
tion. 

strike,  togku,  he  strikes.  This,  the  pri¬ 
mary  intransitiveverb,  is  rarely  found  in 
use.  The  infinitive  togkoncit,  ‘  to  hurl  ’ 
(stones),  occurs  in  1  Chr.  12,  2,  i.  e.  to  j 
strike  with,  whence  the  suppos.  inan. 
togkunk,  an  ax,  an  instrument  to  strike  i 
with  (or  to  be  hurled?),  and  vbl.  n.  tog- 
wonk,  togguhwhonk  [=togkuonk~\,  a  mor¬ 
tar  for  pounding  corn,  lit,  a  striking. 
togkomau,  he  strikes  (him);  nuttogkom, 

I  strike,  El.  and  C. ;  suppos.  part,  noli 
togkomont,  he  who  strikes;  intrans.  noli 
togkomit,  he  who  strikes  or  smites  (with 
a  rod,  etc. ) ,  Is.  30,  31 ;  freq.  tattagkomau, 
he  strikes  (him)  repeatedly,  he  beats 
(him);  suffix  wuttattagkomouh,  they 
beat  him  ( nuttattdgkom ,  I  beat,  C. );  j 
vbl.  n.  act.  iogkomanvaonk,  a  blow;  pass. 
togkomitteaonk,  a  blow  received,  tog- 
kodtam,  he  strikes  (it);  suppos.  part. 
noh  logkodtog,  he  who  strikes;  freq.  noh  I 
tohtogkodtog,  he  who  strikes  often,  who 
beats;  suppos.  inan.  togkodteg,  that 
which  strikes,  when  it  strikes,  a  sword; 
vbl.  n.  togkodtuonk,  a  blow,  a  stroke;  tat- 
togkodtuonk,  a  beating  ( tattagkodtuongash , 
stripes,  Ind.  Laws),  tatteohtinat  menut- 
rheg,  to  strike  with  the  hand;  pish  tud- 
teadt ,  he  will  smite  with  (it),  Is.  3, 17. 
See  shake. 

string,  pemunneoht,  pemunneat,  a  cord,  a 
string  ( peminneaht  ome,  a  fishing  line; 
pedmenyaht,  a  cable,  C. );  pi.  -\-ash, 


string — continued. 
onash.  tuttuppun,  tatuppm,  a  (spun 
or  twisted)  thread:  rnsqui  tuttuppin,  a 
scarlet  thread,  Josh.  2,  21;  aclj.  tuttup- 
punae,  twined  or  spun, 
strip,  poskin.au,  he  strips  (him),  uncovers 
(him).  See  naked,  mukkwkinau,  he 
strips,  plunders,  robs  (him).  See  rob. 
strive,  mekonau,  he  strives,  contends, 
quarrels  with  (him)  ( nut-chekeayeuil - 
team,  I  strive,  C. );  recipr.  from  clieke- 
heau,  he  uses  force.  See  fight;  quarrel, 
strive  after,  ahchu,  he  strives,  exerts 
himself,  is  diligent:  ahchue,  ‘do  thy 
diligence’,  exert  thyself,  2  Tim.  4,  9; 
ahchue  tapaekon,  ‘  labor  not  to  comfort 
me’,  Is.  22,  4.  See  hunt, 
strong,  menuhki,  menuhkeu  ( munnulike , 
Exp.  Mayhew),  it  is  strong,  firm,  hard; 
an.  menuhkesu  ( miniMsu ,  R.  W.),  he  is 
strong;  n.  agent,  menuhkesuen-in,  a 
strong  man,  ‘mighty  man  of  valor’,  2 
Chr.  32,  21;  vbl.  n.  menuhkesuonk,  ani¬ 
mate  strength,  might  (dimin.  minio- 
quesu,  weak,  R.W.,  i.e.  a  little  strong), 
strong  drink,  onkuppe,  onkup;  menuhke 
wuttattamdonk. 
stronghold.  See  fort, 
stuff,  cheetham-unat,  to  stuff,  C. ;  cf. 

chetimau,  he  compels  (him), 
stufnble,  togkusittassun,  he  stumbles 
( nuttogkissildssm ,  I  stumble,  C.);  togk- 
ussittassunehettit,  when  they  stumble 
[togku-’  seetash,  he  strikes  with  his 
feet?  Cf.  togkishkom,  he  kicks  at], 
stump,  wehquanunkq,  the  stump  of  (a 
tree);  cf.  wehque,  as  far  as;  wehqshik, 
the  end  of. 

sturgeon,  kauposh,  pi.  -\-auog,  R.  W. ; 
kdpposh  and  kaskdhat,  C. ;  Abn.  kabasse, 
pi.  -sak,  Rasies. 

substitute,  nompateau,  he  substitutes 
(it) ,  puts  it  in  the  place  of  something 
else.  From  nornpe,  again,  instead  of. 
succotash,  msickquatash,  R.  W.  (who 
translates  it  ‘boiled  corn  whole’.  Its 
etymology,  however,  proves  that  the 
Indian  m’ sickquatash,  like  the  modern, 
was  made  from  shelled  corn  or  corn 
separated  from  the  cob:  m’sukqutlah- 
hash,  the beaten-to-pieces  (corn),  inan. 
pi.  from  sukquttahham ,  he  beats  it  to 
pieces  or  beats  it  small). 


330 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


such.,  so. 

[Note. — Definition  not  completed.  S ccanmhque; 
dunay;  naj:  nan;  wane;  nemehkuh;  ne  nnj;  nut- 
tiniin;  onk;  unnay;  unnaiinneat;  vmttinnn;  yen 
unite.] 

suck,  nconontam,  lie  sucks  (it),  he  takes 
by  sucking,  he  sucks  up  ( inukkoies 
naondnlam,  a  child  sucks,  C. ;  nconinneat, 
to  suck,  ibid.);  an.  nconau,  he  sucks; 
pass,  she  is  sucked,  she  suckles  or 
nurses  at  the  breast) ;  pish  kenoon  sog- 
kodtunk,  thou  shalt  suck  the  milk;  part. 
ncononutche,  one  who  sucks,  a  sucking 
child;  pass,  suffix  wunoonuh,  she  suckled 
him,  gave  him  suck,  1  Sam.  1,  23;  sup- 
pos.  nconuk,  when  he  sucks  or  is  suckled, 
a  suckling;  adj.  noonukde,  sucking  ( no - 
ndnnis,  neons  u,  a  sucking  child;  mun- 
nunnug  [ m’ nconuk ],  milk;  wunnunno- 
ganash,  breasts,  R.  W. ;  Narr.  nunnese 
[ nmnau-ussu ],  a  baby,  Stiles;  Peq.  nii- 
zaus,  ‘sucklings  of  men  and  beast’, 
ibid.). 

suddenly,  teanuk.  See  immediately. 
tiadchu,  tiadche,  unexpectedly  [matta- 
adchue,  not  sought  for] . 
suffer,  nutchequnehtam  wuttanehpunnaonk, 
I  suffer  affliction,  C. ;  nutchequineehtam, 
I  suffer,  ibid,  unkquamowciu,  unkqu- 
anumau,  he  suffers  pain ;  nutongquomom, 
I  suffer  jiain,  I  am  in  pain.  See  pain, 
suffice,  sufficient.  See  enough, 
summer,  nepun,  sequan.  See  seasons, 
sun,  nepduz,  (1)  the  sun,  (2)  a  month; 
pi.  -\-saog  (nippadus,  nippawus,  npadus, 
R.  W.)  [nepau,  he  rises  up?].  Kesuck- 
quand,  the  sun  as  a  god,  R.  W.  [ kesuk - 
unit,  the  god  of  day],  munndnnock,  a 
name  of  the  sun  and  moon,  R.  W. 
Peq.  meeun,  sun;  weyhan,  moon,  Stiles. 
See  day. 

sunrise,  nepduz  pashpishau,  the  sun  rises 
( pdshisha ,  it  is  sunrise,  R.  W. ) ;  suppos. 
pashpishont, paspishont  (when  he  rises), 
sunrising:  waj  pashpishont  onk  yeu  pajeh 
wayont,  from  sunrise  to  sunset,  Ps.  50,  1 
( upposhpishaonk  nepaz,  sunrising,  C. ). 
From  peshau,  freq.  paspeshau,  he  bursts 
forth,  he  blooms;  pishpeshauau,  it  blos¬ 
soms,  Is.  27,  6;  35,  1. 
sunset,  wayont  [ =  irdonit !,  when  he  goes 
out  of  the  way  or  is  lost,  suppos.  from 
wdonu,  wauonu ];  wayau,  it  is  sunset 
( wayadwi,  the  sun  is  set,  R.  W. ;  cowaya- 


sunset — continued. 
onk  nepaz ,  sunsetting,  C. ) ;  ash  vwiong- 
knp,  before  it  was  sunset,  Judg.  14,  18. 
sup,  nummuhquaeu,  he  sups  (it)  up 
( nummoohquonat ,  to  sup  up  pottage, 
etc.,  C. ). 

superior.  See  chief;  more, 
supplicate,  irehquetum.au,  he  asks  (him) 
for  (it).  See  ask.  nanopassttm.au,  nan- 
umpassumau,  he  entreats,  supplicates 
(him);  nunnanumpassum  Wutooshimau, 
‘I  will  pray  to  the  Father',  John  14, 
16;  suffix  unmnanopassumduh,  they  en¬ 
treated  him  ( kennanndmpassumush ,  I 
pray  or  entreat  you,  G.).  cowaunkam- 
ish  and  cuckquenamish,  I  pray  your  fa¬ 
vor,  my  service  to  you,  R.  W. 
suppose,  unnantam,  he  wills,  thinks, 
supposes.  See  think, 
surface,  woskiche,  on  the  top,  on  the 
surface,  on  the  face  of  ( woskiche,  R.  W. ) : 
ut  woskeche  ohkeit,  on  the  face  of  the 
earth;  suppos.  wosket,  weskit;  noli  wesket 
ohtag,  that  which  was  uppermost,  Gen. 
40,  17 ;  wosketohkeit,  on  the  face  of  the 
earth.  From  wuske,  new,  at  beginning; 
cf.  wuskesuk,  face.  See  outside;  without, 
surround,  waeenu,  (it  is)  round  about, 
it  surrounds ;  waenuhkamvaog,  they  en¬ 
camp  round  about  (them),  Ps.  34,  7; 
weenuhkom,  he  encamps  around  (it), 
besieges,  surrounds  it. 
swallow  (n.,  a  bird),  rriamesashques,  a 
swallow,  a  sparrow;  papaskhas,  swal¬ 
low,  Ps.  84,  3,  elsewhere  partridge 
( Tnamessashquus ,  sparrow;  wapunnuk- 
quas,  swallow,  Mass.  Ps. ).  See  sparrow, 
swallow  (v. ),  qussecishka),  quosseashkou, 
qmhashkco,  he  swallows;  kukquosseash- 
kumwoo,  you  swallow;  misseashkat,  mis- 
lieashkco,  he  swallows  it  up,  swallows 
(it)  completely  or  entirely;  suppos. 
inan.  ne  maseashqut,  that  which  is 
swallowed. 

swan,  wequasli  ( wequash ,  pi.  -\-auog,  and 
wdmpatuck,  pi.  -j -quaog,  R.W.;  wompdh- 
tuk,  a  goose,  C. ).  From  wequai,  light, 
bright:  wequassus,  wequai-oaas,  bright 
creature. 

sweat,  kussittanamwe,  ‘in  the  sweat  of 
the  face’,  Gen.  3,  19;  uk-kissUtom,  his 
sweat,  Luke,  22,  44;  kussitteau,  it  is 
hot  (kissittashonat,  to  sweat;  nukkissit- 
tdshom,  I  sweat,  C. ).  pesuppatiog,  they 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


331 


sweat — continued. 

are  sweating,  R.  AY.,  i.  e.  they  are  tak¬ 
ing  a  sweat  in  the  pemponck,  ‘  hot 
house’  for  vapor  baths, 
sweep,  chekham,  he  sweeps  (it);  an. 
act.  chekhausu,  chekhosu,  he  sweeps,  is 
sweeping,  and  pass,  it  is  swept;  suppos. 
inan.  chekhikunk  ( when  it  sweeps),  a 
broom. 

sweet,  wekon,  weekon,  (it  is)  sweet;  pi. 
ivekonash. 

swell,  mogquen,  viogqueen,  it  swells,  rises 
up,  protuberates,  i.  e.  it  becomes  rela¬ 
tively  great,  from  mogki,  it  is  rela¬ 
tively  great;  mogquenuco,  it  became  a 
boil,  Ex.  9,  10  (an.  mocquSsui,  he  is 
swelled:  wdine  wuhock  mockqu&sui,  all 
his  body  is  swelled;  nummdckquese,  I 
have  a  swelling,  R.  W. ;  nurpmokques,  I 


swell — continued. 

swell,  C. ).  paotoemoo,  it  swells.  See 
boil;  heel. 

swift,  kenupshau,  intens.  kakenupshnu,  he 
makes  great  haste,  goes  very  swiftly; 
adj.  inan.  kenupshae,  konupshae,  swift; 
suppos.  part,  voh  kenupsliont,  kakermp- 
shont,  one  who  goes  swiftly;  pi.  veg 
kakenupshonclieg,  the  swift  ( muckquitu, 
swift;  kummummuckquete,  you  are  swift, 
R.  W. ).  See  hasten, 
swim,  neg  woh  oosoowecheg,  they  who 
can  swim,  Acts  27,  43.  pdmooscoeau, 
pdmosoaweau, pumds-, pamwdsco-,  etc.,  he 
swims  ( nup-pumosabweem ,  I  swim;  sun 
woh  kup-pumdsanvemwao,  can  you  swim? 
C. ).  Lit.  he  swims  in  the  sea  ( pum - 
moh )? 

sword,  togkodteg.  See  strike. 


T 


tail,  wussi'tkqun,  (his  or  its)  tail,  El.  and 
R.  W.  [ ctmhkau ,  it  follows  after], 
take,  nemunum,  he  takes  (it);  nemu- 
nush,  take  it;  nemunitch,  let  him  take  it 
(sun  kenemunumun-asf  did  you  take  it? 
C. ) ;  suppos.  nemunuk,  when  or  if  he 
takes,  attamunum,  attumunnum,  he 
takes  (it),  i.  e.  he  receives  (opposed  to 
anninnum,  he  gives,  presents,  bestows, 
and  nemunum,  he  takes,  i.  e. performs  an 
act  of  taking,  takes  up,  takes  hold  of); 
ahquompi  ne  ahhut  attumunumuk,  a  time 
for  receiving,  2  K.  5,  26.  am&unum,  he 
takes  (it)  away;  an.  amaunumau,  he 
takes  (it)  away  from  (him);  amcLunsh, 
take  it  away,  El.  and  R.  W. ;  nutamau- 
numun,  I  take  it  away  [rnn&i,  it  goes 
away],  annun,  wutannun,  he  takes 
hold  and  holds  an  an.  obj.:  wuttannun 
vmsseetash,  she  held  him  by  the  feet, 
2  K.  4,  27;  suppos.  noh  anumwoh  anun- 
ont  wehtauogut,  he  who  takes  a  dog  by 
the  ears,  Prov.  26,  17;  mutual  annin- 
nittuog,  they  take  hold  of  one  another. 
tohqunum,  he  takes  hold  of  violently, 
seizes,  catches.  See  catch,  ncokinum, 
he  takes  (it)  down  [ ncokeu ,  it  goes 
down],  kodtinum,  he  takes  (it)  off  or 
out:  kodtinnum  ummokis,  he  drew  off 
his  shoe  Ruth  4,  8.  See  draw  out. 


talebearer,  kehkomxvaen-in,  n.  agent, 
from  kekomau,  he  talks  of,  he  slanders. 

talk,  ketcokau,  he  talks,  he  goes  on 
speaking;  freq.  keketcokau  ( noh  vmnne 
keketcbkau ,  he  speaks  well  or  is  fair- 
spoken,  C. ;  kekultokaunta,  let  us  speak 
together,  R.  W. );  n.  agent,  kehketcoh- 
kaen-in,  a  talker;  vbl.  n.  keketcokaonk, 
kehketcohkaonk,  talk,  much  speaking; 
pi.  ongash,  ‘babblings’,  1  Tim.  6,  20. 
See  speak. 

tall,  qunnunkqussu,  (he  is)  tall  ( qunnau - 
qussu,  R.  W.);  suppos.  noh  qunnunk- 
qussit,  one  who  is  tall  (pi.  qunnauqussit- 
chik,  the  tall,  R.  W.). 

talons.  See  claws. 

taste  (n.),  spuhquodt,  the  taste  or  flavor 
of  anything;  suppos.  dshpukquok ,  spuh- 
quok,  when  it  tastes  of  anything  ( ten - 
qua  aspuckquat?  what  does  it  taste  of? 
R.W.). 

taste  (v.),  qutchehtam,  qutchtam,  he  tastes 
(it),  lit.  he  tries  it,  makes  trial  of  it; 
suppos.  qutchehtamon  petukqunneg,  if  I 
taste  bread;  quadjtog,  quajtog,  if  or 
when  he  tastes  (it);  vbl.  n.  kutchehta- 
mcoonk,  tasting,  taste,  C.  See  try. 

tautog,  taut,  pi.  tautauog,  ‘  sheepsheads  ’ , 
R.W.  (Peq.  tautauge, black  fish,  Stiles); 
the  name  of  a  fish  the  plural  of  which 


332 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


tautog — continued. 

has  been  retained  for  the  singular 
and  has  given  a  name  to  the  species 
Labrus  tau toga  Mitchell  (Labrus  amer- 
icanus  Bloch).  Dr  J.  V.  C.  Smith 
says  1 1  tautog  is  a  Mohegan  word  mean¬ 
ing  black”  !  (Fishes  of  Mass.  255) . 

teach,  kuhkootam,  he  shows  (it),  makes 
it  known;  an.  kuhkaotamau,  he  makes 
(it)  known  to  (him)  (caus.  inan.  kuh- 
kcotumwehteau,  he  teaches,  C. ;  nuk- 
kuhkmtumwehteam,  I  teach,  ibid.);  n. 
agent,  kuhkcotomwehteden,  a  teacher; 
vbl.  n.  kuhkaotomwehteaonk,  teaching, 
instruction.  See  inform;  show. 

tear  (n.,  lacrymal  secretion),  mussippeg- 
ivash,  mussuppequash  (pi.);  wussippe- 
quash,  his  tears  [ m’sipuk ,  that  which 
flows  or  drops  down  (?)].  See  water. 

te  ar  ( v. ) ,  nehnekinum,  nenekunum  he  tears 
(it)  ( nunnegunum ,  I  tear,  C. );  nehnek- 
shaeu,  it  is  torn;  as  n.  a  rent;  with 
’k  progressive  nehnekikkom,  he  tears 
(it)  in  pieces,  i.  e.  goes  on  tearing  it; 
v.  i.  an.  subj.  nehnekikdsu,  he  tears 
to  pieces  (as  a  wild  beast,  etc.),  and 
pass,  it  is  torn  in  pieces;  suppos.  ne 
nehnegikausik,  that  which  is  torn  (ne- 
nehkissdsu,  cutting,  cut,  C.);  an.  suffix 
wunnehnekukkauoh ,  he  tears  him  in 
pieces,  sohqshadtau,  sdkshadtau,  sohk- 
vmshadtau,  he  tears  (it)  in  pieces,  vio¬ 
lently  or  as  a  wild  beast  tears  its  prey; 
suppos.  sohqshadtunk,  when  he  tears; 
v.  i.  an.  sohquhkausu,  sookuhkausu,  he 
tears,  pass,  it  is  torn  ( sokshau ,  it  is  torn, 
1  K.  13,  5);  suppos.  ne  soohquhkausik, 
that  which  is  torn  in  pieces  (by  wild 
beasts),  Lev.  17,  15;  22,  8;  v.  t.  an. 
sohqshanau,  scokshanau,  he  tears  (him); 
an.  progr.  sohquhkauau,  scoquhkauau,  he 
goes  on  tearing  (him).  The  root  is  suk- 
quieu,  sohquiyeu,  it  is  in  small  pieces. 
See  fine,  tannogldnnum,  he  tears  (a 
garment,  a  skin,  cloth,  etc.)  ( tanocki , 
tandcksha,  it  is  torn  or  rent,  R.  W. ; 
kum-mahche-tannakunamous,  I  have  torn 
it  off  for  you,  ibid. ) ;  tannogsheau,  tan- 
nogkusheau,  it  is  torn  (by  violence  or 
by  mischance). 

teats  (ubera),  sogkodtungash.  See  milk. 

tell.  See  command;  inform;  news; 
speak. 

tempest.  See  storm. 


temples,  wuttahtukquosh,  his  temples, 
tempt.  See  try. 

ten,  piuk,  piog;  adj.  piukque,  piogque,  the 
tenth;  piogqut  nornpe,  ten  times,  i.  e.  to 
the  tenth  repetition;  piogque  chippag,  a 
tenth  part;  pi.  an.  piukqussuog,  inan. 
piukqmsuash,  piukquttash  ( piuck ,  pi. 
piucksuog,  pkickquatash,  R.  W. ;  Peq. 
piugg,  Stiles;  L.  I.  payac,  paunk,  Wood ) . 
See  chief. 

tender.  See  weak. 

tent,  uppdhquds,  obohquos,  abohquos,  a  cov¬ 
ering,  an  awning,  a  tent:  abohquos  soka- 
non,  ‘  a  covert  from  rain  ’ ,  Is.  4,  6.  wetu, 
a  dwelling,  a  house.  See  house, 
terrible,  unkqueneunkqussu,  onkqueneunk- 
qus,  (he  is)  terrible,  an  object  of  terror 
\_unkqueneunkque,  grievous,  cruel,  se¬ 
vere,  from  unkque,  sore,  sorrowful], 
testes,  wunnussuog.  From  neesuog,  a 
pair  (?). 

testimony,  wauwaonk,  witnessing,  bear¬ 
ing  witness.  From  loauwau,  he  testi¬ 
fies. 

than,  onk:  missi  onk,  greater  than, 
thank,  tabuttantam,  he  is  thankful,  he 
gives  thanks;  an.  tabuttantamauau,  he 
gives  thanks  to  (him),  thanks  (him) 
( kuttabotomish ,  I  thank  you,  C. ;  ta(ihot- 
neanawayean,  I  thank  you,  R.W.);  vbl. 
n.  tabuttantamoonk ,  thanksgiving,  thank¬ 
fulness.  From  tdpi,  taupu,  sufficient, 
and  -antam,  verb  of  mental  condition: 
he  is  satisfied  in  mind, 
that,  ne,  that  (thing);  noh,  that  (man); 
pi.  inan.  rush,  these;  with  reference  to 
place  or  time,  na:  naut,  na  ut,  there¬ 
upon,  on  that;  na  vmtche,  hence,  from 
that  time;  ne  imtche, because,  therefore, 
from  that  (thing);  ne  naj,  ‘  even  so’,  let 
that  be  so;  ne  teag,  that  thing,  any¬ 
thing. 

thaw,  michokat,  a  thaw  ( michokatch ,  when 
it  thaws,  R.  W.  J. 

then,  next  [ ne-ut  or  ne  with  form  of  sup¬ 
positive,  upon  that,  when  that] . 
thence,  ncoche,  na  ooeh  (proceeding  from 
that),  thenceforth,  therefrom.  See  be¬ 
gin. 

there,  na,  at  that  place,  at  that  time 
( nekus ,  there,  C.?) ;  adv.  of  place,  naut, 
therein,  thereon,  thereat,  El.  Gr.  21. 
See  that. 

therefore,  neumtche,  ne  vmtche,  from  that. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


333 


they,  neg,  nag  ( nahoh ,  nagoh,  El.  Gr.  7; 
nag,  na.hog,  or  nagumau,  C. ),  they  who; 
nagoli,  them  who,  them, 
thick,  knppi,  (it  is)  thick,  close,  dense 
( cuppi-machaug ,  thick  wood,  a  swamp, 
R.  IV.);  kuppahtu,  in  or  among  that 
which  is  thick  or  close,  ‘ in  thickets  ’ , 
‘in  covert’;  kuppohquodt  ( kuppaquat , 
R.AAh),  thick  or  cloudy  weather;  Jcup- 
pogki  (kohpoghi,  C. ;  koppocki,  R.  W.), 
thick,  dense.  See  close, 
thicket,  kuppohkomuk  (a  place  shut  in  or 
inclosed  or  a  place  where  trees  are  thick 
or  close).  Cf.  kuppahtu,  ‘in  thickets’, 
thief,  kommaotowaen,  -in,  n.  agent,  from 
kommooto,  he  steals.  See  steal, 
thigh,  mehquau,  meehquau;  neehquau,  my 
thigh;  cf.  mobpn,  the  hip.  apdme,  pi. 
apdmash,  the  thigh,  thighs,  R.  AY. 
thin,  saupae,  sabde,  thin,  not  hard  or 
dense,  in  a  liquid  or  semiliquid  state, 
soft.  See  soft.  ivossabpe,wosappe(wus- 
sdppi,  C. ;  vxiss&ppi,  R.  AY.),  thin;  ivos- 
sappehteau  (inan.  caus. ),  he  makes  it 
thin;  pass,  it  is  made  thin, 
thing,  tedg;  ne  tedg  .  .  .  matta  tedg, 
matteag,  something  .  .  .  nothing  ( ted - 
qua,  what  thing,  R.  AV. ) ;  pi.  tedguash, 
teauguash,  ‘money’,  movable  prop¬ 
erty.  teaguas,  a  matter  or  thing  not 
material  or  tangible;  pi.  teaguassinish, 
things,  matters,  res;  with  redupl.  wame 
teanteaguassinish ,  all  matters,  all  things, 
Gen.  24,  1  [ teag  and  ussu,  a  thing  re¬ 
lated  to  or  dependent  on  animate  ac¬ 
tion]. 

think,  anantam,  undntam,  he  thinks, 
purposes,  wills,  supposes,  has  in  mind ; 
nuttenantam,  I  think;  nuttenantamun,  I 
think  it,  I  will  it;  ne  anantamup,  that 
which  I  did  think;  matta  ne  anantam 
nen,  qut  ken  ne  anantaman  (suppos. ), 
‘not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt’,  Matt. 
26,  39;  ne  anonlog,  what  he  may  think 
or  may  will,  ‘according  to  his  will’, 
John  5,  21.  In  form  this  word  is  a 
frequentative  or  intensive  from  an  ear¬ 
lier  form,  antam,  which  is  not  found  in 
Eliot.  Roger  YYilliams  has  n’tunnantam 
or  ne&ntarn,  I  think  (Chip,  inendam, 
he  thinks,  Bar.,  q.  v. ).  This  primary 
verb,  which  may  be  translated  ‘he  is 
minded’  or  ‘he  has  in  mind’,  is  used 
in  composition  of  all  verbs  which  ex- 


think — continued. 

press  mental  states,  conditions,  and 
operations,  the  passions,  emotions,  etc., 
and  denotes  mental  activity,  as  ussu 
denotes  physical  activity.  The  animate 
active  form  of  anantam  or  undntam 
would  be  an  a  nan,  he  wills  (him), 
nearly  corresponding  with  andnau,  un- 
nunau,  he  commands  (him);  and  a  cor¬ 
responding  relationship  appears  to  exist 
between  ussu,  he  acts,  ussen,  he  does 
it,  and  vmssin,  he  says,  missantam, 
mussantam  [ missi-antam ],  he  thinks 
much  or  habitually,  he  is  minded  or 
disposed  ( missdntam ,  he  aims  at,  C. ). 
third.  See  three. 

thirst,  kohketam,  kuhkuttoon,  he  is 
thirsty;  nukkohkuttoon,  I  thirst  (niccdw- 
katone,  I  am  thirsty,  R.  AAr. ;  nukkoliklt- 
toon,  C.);  suppos.  kohkuttcog,  when  he 
thirsts;  noli  kohkuttcog,  one  who  thirsts; 
pi.  neg  kohkuttcogig,  they  who  thirst,  the 
thirsty;vbl.  n.  kohkuttconooonk,  konkuttoo- 
ncoonk,  thirst.  From  kohnkan,  Icunkan, 
(it  is)  dry,  and  toon,  mouth, 
thirty,  nishwinchag  ( shuincheck ,  R.  AV. ; 
nishwinnechak,  pi.  -suog,  C. ;  Peq.  neezun- 
chaug  naubut  piaugg  (twenty-ten)  and 
swunchaug,  Stiles);  an.  pi.  -\-kodtog; 
inan.  pi.  -\-kodtash. 

this,  yen,  this  (thing);  an.  yeuoh,  this 
(man);  pi.  inan.  yeush,  an.  yeug  (yd, 
R.  AAr. ) :  yeu  nepauz,  this  month ;  ye u 
kesukok,  this  day,  to-day;  yeu  unne,  yeu 
in  ( yeuunni ,  C. ),  thus,  in  this  manner; 
yeu  waj,  for  this  cause;  yeu  or  yeuyeu, 
at  this  time,  now;  yeu,  at  this  place, 
here;  yeu  nogque  (toward  this),  hither 
(yd  weque,  thus  far;  yoiva,  thus;  yd 
nowekin,  I  dwell  here;  yd  wuche,  from 
hence,  R.  AV. ).  Cf.  ne,  that, 
thistle,  kogkbunogohquohhou.  Cf.  kdnuk- 
kehtahwhau,  he  pricks  or  pierces, 
thither,  yean,  yaen  [yd  en,  to  yonder] : 
yeu  nogque  in  hah  yd  in,  hither  and 
thither;  monchish  yeu  wutch,  yaaush,  go 
hence  [go]  to  yonderplace,  Matt.  17,  20. 
See  yonder. 

thorn,  kdus,  a  thorn,  briar,  bramble; 
asinnekous,  assunnekous  [hassune-kous, 
stony  (very  hard)  briar],  a  thorn, 
thorn  bush.  Ci.m’ukqs,  an  awl;  m’uh- 
kos,  a  nail;  kouhquodt,  an  arrow. 


334 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


thoroughly,  panuppe,  papanuppe,  whol-  j 
]y,  thoroughly.  See  through,  pakod- 
che,  papogkodche  ( paucMche ,  paugcdtche, 
R.  \V. ),  completely,  to  the  full,  entirely, 
thoroughly,  papaquanne,  utterly,  thor¬ 
oughly,  completely. 

thou,  ken  (kekn);  (inseparable)  A'’;  kuh- 
hog,  thyself;  kuttinne,  thou  thyself,  tu 
ipse,  such  as  thou  (see  kind,  n. );  kut- 
taihe,  it  is  thine,  it  belongs  to  thee, 
thousand,  muttannung,  mixttannunk;  pi. 
an.  muttannonganog-kodtog,  - kussuog , 
inan.  -kodtash,  - kussuash :  nequt  mut- 
tanong  muttanonganogkussuog,  a  thou¬ 
sand  thousand  (men)  ( nquitte  mittd/n- 
nug,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  piuggshepauzue,  ten 
hundred,  Stiles).  For  muttaanooog,  a 
very  great  number,  very  many.  See  ; 
multitude. 

thread,  tuttuppun.  See  string, 
threaten,  quogwohtdou,  quogquohtdou,  he 
threatens;  suppos.  noli  quogquohtdadt, 
he  who  threatens  ( nuk-quogquohtowam , 

I  threaten;  quogquohtoadt,  ‘if  he  make 
threatening  speeches’,  Ind.  Laws) ;  vbl. 
n.  quogquohtomudonk,  a  threat, 
three,  nishive,  nishweu(nish,  El.  Gr. ;  n'ish, 
pi.  an.  shuog,  inan.  shwinash,  R.  W.; 
nish,  nishive,  three;  nishwe,  third,  C.; 
Peq.  shweh,  Stiles;  Del.  nacha,  Zeisb. ); 
pi.  an.  nishuog,  inan.  rdshwinash,  shwin- 
ash;  nishivunnuoog,  nashwenucog,  nash- 
wunnucok,  the  third  (when  it  is  third, 
suppos.  inan. ) ;  nashcout,  ncisheucot,  nish- 
ivudt,  the  third  (when  he  is  third,  sup¬ 
pos.  an.). 

thresh,  pogguhham,  pogoham,  he 
threshes  (corn  or  grain),  he  beats  (it) 
out  ( pockh.6mm.in ,  to  thresh  or  beat  out 
corn,  R.  W.)  [ =pohqu.etuhhuni ,  he  j 

breaks  it  in  pieces  ?]. 
threshing-floor,  tanuppogguhhcmicoonk 
(?)• 

throat,  mukquttunk,  m'quttunk  ( qutiuck , 
R.  W.);  ukquttunk,  his  throat  [from  qut- 
taeu,  it  sinks  down],  munnaonk,  nash- 
donk,  a  throat,  C.  (?). 
through,  pannuppu,  panuppe,  (it  is) 
through,  throughout:  panuppu  wame, 
(he)  is  through  all,  Eph.  4,  6;  pannnp- 
pu  wame  muttaohkut,  throughout  all  the 
world,  Rom.  1,  8.  pannupshau,  pan-  j 
nupwushau,  he  goes  through  or  through- 


through — continued, 
out;  pannupwushavg  otanash,  they  went 
through  the  cities  ( pauiiupehonat  kehtoh 
koh  alike,  to  compass  sea  and  land,C. ). 
throw,  paketam,  he  throws  away;  nup- 
pdketam,  I  throwaway;  nhqiie pahketash, 
don’t  throw,  C.  See  castaway, 
thrust  through,  pajiashpehtawhau  .  .  . 
■nl  vmttahliut,  he  thrust  (it)  through 
(him)  to  the  heart,  2  Sam.  18,  14. 
thumb,  kehtequdnutch,  kehtcoqudnitch,  pi. 

-\-eash[kehte-uhquae-nutch,  great  finger], 
thunder,  padtohquohhan  (it  thunders) 
(padtohquohhan,  thunder;  pattohquohdii- 
ni,  it  thunders,  C. ;  Etch.  paUakeak; 
Muh.  pautquauhan;  L.  I.  patuyuahamoc, 
Wood;  Del.  peelhdcquon,  it  thunders, 
Hkw.;  Abn.  pedang  hiagS,  il  tonne, 
Rasies):  rnishe  padahquolihan,  great 
thunder,  1  Sam.  7,  10.  neimpduog, 
thunder;  neimp&ug peskliomwock,  thun¬ 
derbolts  are  shot,  R.  W. ;  nirnbau, 
thunder,  C. ;  nimpanickhikanuh,  ‘the 
place  of  thunder  clefts’,  Exp.  Mayhew. 
thus ,  yen  unne  ( yeu  unni,  C. ) ,  in  this  man¬ 
ner.  See  this, 
thy.  See  thou. 

tide,  tomogkon,  tommogkon,  (there  is)  a 
flood  ( tam6ccon ,  flood  tide;  taumacoks, 
upon  the  flood  tide;  keesaqdshin,  high 
water,  i.  e.  it  has  reached  its  full  height, 
is  full  grown  (kesukun) ;  nanashowe  ta- 
rndccon,  half  flood,  R.W.;  Abn.  tamA- 
gan,  elle  monte,  Rasies),  skdt and mau- 
chetan,  ebb  tide;  mittdeskat,  a  low  ebb, 
R.  W.  (Abn.  Ssikkal,  it  falls,  Rasies; 
Jdsekat,  low  tide). 

tie,  kidipinnum,  he  ties  (it);  v.  i.  act. 
kishpissu,  he  ties,  is  tying,  and  pass,  it 
is  tied.  See  bind;  fasten, 
time,  ahquompi,  (it  is)  time,  period,  sea¬ 
son:  milch  uttoocheeu  kali  ahquompi,  ‘for 
a  season  and  a  time’,  Dan.  7,  12;  pi. 
-)- yeuash  ( kexukkdttae  ahquompi,  day¬ 
time,  0.;  oggosohquompi  [=ogguhse  ah¬ 
quompi],  a  little  time,  0.  252);  suppos. 
aquompak,  when  it  is  time,  at  the  time 
when;  ne  aquompak,  at  that  time.  See 
long  time  ago. 

tire,  sauunum,  he  is  tired,  weary,  faint: 
matta  sauunumco,  he  is  not  weaned 
( nissoivanis ,  nissowanish  kattmen,  nsow- 
ivushkdicmen,  I  am  weary,  R.  W.;  pog- 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


335 


tire — continued. 

kodche  nussoutinum,  I  am  very  weary, 
C. ) ;  suppos.  noh  sauunuk,  he  who  is 
weary;  an.  sauunumau,  he  tires  (him) ; 
caus.  sauunnumwahhuau,  he  causes 
(him)  to  be  weary,  makes  (him)  tired, 
to,  after  verbs  of  motion,  is  expressed 
by  tlie  directive  and  locative  suffix  ’t 
(-at,  -at,  -it)  when  the  object  is  inani¬ 
mate,  and  by  -oh,  -uh  when  it  is  ani¬ 
mate,  though  -ut  sometimes  takes  the 
place  of  -oh.  en  is  used  after  a  verb 
of  motion  or  an  active  verb  the  activity 
of  which  is  directed  toward,  and  not 
immediately  upon,  the  object:  annoos  en 
Joppa,  send  to  Joppa,  Acts  10,  5.  yean 
(yd  en,  to  yonder),  to,  as  far  as:  wutch 
.  .  .  yean,  from  ...  to. 
toad,  tinnogkohteas,  C. ;  Abn.  maskeke; 
cf.  Chip,  omakiki,  a  toad;  omamakiv, 
‘he  has  the  smallpox’,  Bar.  See  frog, 
tobacco,  ivuttamduug,  R.  W.;  wuttam- 
mdsim ,  give  me  tobacco;  wultdmmagov, 
a  pipe,  ibid. ;  Peq.  wuttummunc,  a  pipe, 
Stiles;  'ivuttoolipoannweonish,  tobacco,  C. 
(cf.  wuttmhuppau,  he  draws  water) ; 
Abn.  Sd’aman;  Micmac.  lomahouee  and 
tomakan,  a  pipe.  See  pipe, 
toe,  pahchaseet  ( cf.  pohchanutcheg ,  tinger ) ; 

kehtequaseet,  the  great  toe. 
together,  moeu,  moae,  miyae,  moe  (ma.ywe, 
C. ),  lit.  there  is  a  gathering  or  assem¬ 
bling.  See  assemble;  gather, 
tomorrow,  saup  (sauoj),  R.  TV. ;  a  saw 
upp,  Wood).  See  morrow, 
tongue,  menan,  El.  and  C. ;  pi.  -\-ash; 
wenan,  his  tongue  ( weenat ,  R.  TV. ;  Del. 
wilano,  Hkw.;  Miami  wehlanelr,  Sauk 
nenraneweh,  Keating) . 
too,  too  much.,  wussa time  (vmssdmme,  C. ), 
very  greatly,  extremely,  too:  v/ussaume 
noolik,  ‘if  the  way  be  too  long’,  if  the 
place  be  too  far  off,  Deut.  14,  24;  wus- 
saume  qjeasin,  it  is  too  small  (mismume 
kusdpita,  too  hot;  cosaume  sokenumrnis, 
you  have  poured  out  too  much,  R.  W. ). 
tooth,  meepit,  El.  and  C. ;  neepit,  my 
tooth  (Peq.  neehut,  Stiles);  weepit,  his 
tooth  (wepit,  R.  W.);  pi.  -\-teash.  From 
appm,  he  eats;  mutual  inan.  uppitteaxh, 
they  eat  together.  See  eat. 
toothache,  pummaumpitetmck,  ‘which 
is  the  onely  paine  will  force  their  stout 


toothache — continued. 

hearts  to  cry’,  R.  W.;  Del.  n’nipitine, 
I  have  the  toothache,  Hkw. 
top,  tvanashque,  on  the  top;  vbl.  n.  wan- 
ashquonk,  the  top  or  summit:  wanashque 
wutamvohhou,  on  the  top  of  his  staff; 
wanashquodtmnu  wadch  u  at ,  (when) 
upon  the  top  of  the  mountain,  Ezek. 
6, 13 ;  wanachikomuk  \wanashque-komuk\ , 
the  chimney.  Lit.  at  the  end  of;  see 
end.  woskeche,  on  the  surface  of:  wos- 
kechepiskq,  on  the  top  of  a  rock,  Ezek. 
24,  7;  see  surface,  kodtuhkde  [ kodtuh - 
koeu ],  in  a  high  place,  on  the  summit  of 
(a  mountain  or  hill ) :  iirkodtuhkde  wad- 
chuut,  on  the  top  of  the  mountain;  sup- 
pos.  kodtuhkoag,  koduhkdag,  kodohkdag, 
(when  it  is  at)  the  top,  a  high  place;  see 
high  place,  kuhkuhquag,  kohkuhquag 
[suppos.  inan.  from  kuhkuhqueu,  he  goes 
up] ,  the  top  or  summit,  also,  a  heap, 
torment,  onkapunanau,  he  torments 
(him);  ahque  onkapunaneh,  do  not  tor¬ 
ment  me,  Luke  18,  28;  pass,  onkapu- 
nandog,  they  were  tortured,  Heb.  11,  35; 
vbl.  n  act.  onkapunndonk,  tormenting, 
torment  inflicted;  pass,  onkapunanittu- 
onk,  being  tormented,  torment  endured. 
dwakompanau,  he  suffers  torment, 
is  tormented;  act,  he  torments  (him); 
vbl.  n.  auwakompandonk,  torment;  v.  i. 
act.  dwakompannasu,  he  inflicts  torture, 
torments, 
torn.  See  tear. 

tortoise,  tmnuppasog,  Lev.  11,  29.  See 
turtle. 

torture.  See  torment, 
totem.  This  word  is  a  corruption  from 
wutohtae,  wutohtu.  See  icut.-. 
touch,  mussinmi,  musunum,  mussunum 
(mistinum,  G. ),  he  touches  (it);  num- 
mussinum,  I  touch;  ahqtue  musdnumook, 
do  not  touch  (it),  touch  ye  (it)  not; 
suppos.  noli  masunuk,  he  who  touches 
(it);  an.  mussunau,  he  touches  (him); 
suppos.  noh  masunont,  he  who  touches 
(him)  (vbl.  n.  niinsinumobonk,  touch, 
C.). 

tow,  hashabp  (ash&ppog,  R.  W. ).  See 

flax. 

toward,  nogque:  nr  nogque,  ‘toward  that 
way’,  El.  tir.  21;  yen  nogque,  hither; 
nuttinuhquain  nogque,  I  looked  toward 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


336 


toward — continued. 

(it).  From  nuhquaeu,  he  looks  or  turns 
his  face  to.  See  look, 
towel,  chiskhenitchohhou.  From  chiskham, 
jiskham,  he  wipes,  and  nutch,  hand, 
town,  otan,  pi.  otanash  ( otdn ,  R.  W. ;  otnn- 
ick,  to  the  town,  ibid. ;  Del.  otmink,  to 
the  town,  Hkw. );  dimin.  otanemes,  a 
small  town,  a  village, 
trade,  kodtauwompasu,  kodtauompasu,  he 
sells,  barters,  trades.  See  sell,  anaqu- 
shau,  he  trades;  anaqushdheUich,  letthem 
trade  ( anaqushhito ,  let  us  trade;  anaqu- 
shauog  (they  trade),  traders;  mouanaqu- 
shauog,  chapmen,  R.  W. ) ;  cf.  anaquesu, 
it  is  joined,  he  makes  a  joint,  nuttom- 
mattimun,  we  bargain ;  num-mahttommat- 
timun,  we  have  bargained,  C. ;  cf.  nut- 
tottowam,  I  buy,  ibid. ;  adtoau,  he  buys 
of  (him),  El. 

trap  (n. ),  cippeh,  alipeh,  appehhan,  a  snare, 
a  trap  ( apbhana ,  traps;  vmskapehana, 
new  traps;  eataubana,  old  traps,  R.  W. ) ; 
pi.  appelihanog,  appeheonog.  From  pah- 
heau,  up-paheau,  he  waits  for  (him); 
suppos.  noh  pahhit,  he  who  waits  for; 
nuppaih,  I  wait  for  (him),  sunnuckhig, 
a  falling  trap  for  wolves,  R.  W.  143. 
trap  (v. ),  puttahham,  he  is  taken  in  a 
snare,  he  goes  into  a  snare  or  trap 
[petau,  he  puts  in,  he  is  put  in,  and  j 
-com,  he  goes  (verb  of  motion)] ;  puttah- 
hamwog,  they  are  ensnared  or  caught, 
Job  34,  30;  an.  puttahwhau,  he  traps  ] 
(him),  ensnares  (him),  and  pass,  he  is 
entrapped;  puttahwwhoog,  they  are 
caught  in  snares,  are  entrapped;  noh 
puttuhkuk,  he  who  is  ensnared,  trapped; 
vbl.  n.  puttahhamooonk,  entrapping, 
catching  in  a  trap, 
travail.  See  bear  children, 
travel.  See  walk. 

tray,  vmnnonk,  a  dish,  ‘platter’  ( wun - 
ndug,  tray;  pi.  -\-dnash,  R.  IV.);  wun- 
nonganit,  in  the  dish.  Cf.  wdnogq,  a 
hole;  owonogku,  he  digs  a  hole  (hollows 
out?). 

treachery.  See  betray, 
tread  on,  taskuhkom,  freq.  tattaskuhkom, 
he  treads  on  (it);  suppos.  taskuhkog, 
tattashkukog,  when  he  treads  on  (it); 
an.  taskuhkauau,  he  treads  on  (him) 
(noh  wuttahtdskuhkauuh,  he  treads  on 


tread  on — continued. 

him,  C. ).  ohpantu,  he  treads  on,  sets 
his  feet  on  (it),  walks  on  (it), 
treasure,  nompakou,  a  precious  thing,  a 
treasure,  a  ‘jewel’;  pi.  -\-unash. 
tree,  mehtug,  mehtugq,  matug  (rnlntuck, 
R.  W. ;  mehtuk,  C. ;  Peq.  a’tucksh,  Stiles; 
Del.  liittuck,  Hkw.);  pi.  mehtug quaxh , 
matugquash;  dimin.  meldugques,  mehtug- 
quemes,  a  small  tree  ( muhtookoomes ,  a 
stick,  C. );  pi.  mehtugkcomesash,  twigs, 
‘rods’,  Gen.  30,  37.  The  radical  is  ’h’tug 
or  ’h’tuk  (the  initial  m’  being  the  indefi¬ 
nite  particle),  as  is  apparent  in  the 
compounds,  where  ‘tree’  or  ‘wood’  is 
expressed  by  -uhtug,  and  sometimes 
(terminally)  by  -unk  or  -uhnk:  mis- 
soounk,  mussaounk,  a  dry  tree,  Ezek.  17, 
24;  20,  47  [mussoo,  it  is  dried]  (Abn. 
mesakS  abdsi,  arbre  sec,  Rasies) ;  as- 
kunkq,  ashkulmk,  a  green  tree  [askq,  ash- 
kosh,  green]  (Abn.  aresksakS,  Rasies); 
agwonk,  under  a  tree,  1  Sam.  31,  13 
[agwe,  below];  and  ut  kishkunk,  under 
[kUshke,  beside,  near  to?]  a  tree,  Gen. 
18,  4,  8.  See  ash  tree;  oak  tree;  pine 
tree;  poplar  tree;  sassafras  tree;  walnut 
tree;  willow  tree. 

tremble,  nunnukkusha.u,  nunnukshau,  he 
trembles  ( nunnukMshom ,  I  tremble, 
C. );  suppos.  noh  nanukshont,  he  who 
trembles;  vbl.  n.  nunnukshdonk,  trem¬ 
bling.  From  nunnukkunum,  he  shakes 
(it),  with  ’sh  of  derogation, 
tribe,  chippancoonk,  chippanoowonk.  From 
chippanau,  he  separates  or  divides 
(them);  vbl.  n.  chippanooonk,  a  divid¬ 
ing,  division,  or  separation,  chippissuog 
(they  separate  themselves,  they  are  sep¬ 
arated  ) ,  a  people,  a  tribe, 
tribute,  ompwunnau,  he  pays  tribute  to, 
he  is  tributary  to  (him);  suffix  wutom- 
pvrunuh,  he  paid  him  tribute,  he  ‘gave 
him  presents’,  2  K.  17,  3;  vbl.  n.  omp- 
vmnndonk  and  ompehtedonk,  ompwetea- 
onk  ( ompehteaonk ,  C. ),  tribute;  n.  agent. 
ompweteaen,  ompeteaen  -hi,  a  tributary, 
a  payer  of  tribute;  mdunumdonk,  mou- 
unummonk  (vbl.  n.  from  mounnum,  he 
gathers),  a  gathering  or  collecting 
custom,  toll,  or  tribute,  1  K.  9,  21; 
Matt.  17,  25.  ptimpom,  ‘a  tribute  skin 
.  .  .  carried  to  the  sachem  or  prince,’ 
R.  W.  See  offer. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


337 


trifle,  chogq.  See  spot, 
trouble,  VMttamantam,  he  is  troubled, 
disturbed,  he  has  care  or  trouble;  nco- 
tamantam,  I  am  troubled  (net op,  notani- 
mduntam,  ‘friend,  I  am  busy’,  R.  W. ); 
caus.  an.  wuttamehhean,  he  troubles, 
disturbs  (him),  he  gives  him  trouble, 
makes  him  trouble  (nmtamehhuwam,  I 
hinder,  C. ;  kotammish,  I  hinder  you; 
cotamme,  cotammume,  you  trouble  me, 
R.  W.);  caus.  inan.  wuttamehteau,  he 
troubles  (it),  makes  (it)  trouble  or  dis¬ 
turbance;  wutamehpunaonk,  trouble, 
trout,  mishquskou,  C. 
true,  truth,  wunnomwau,  he  speaks 
truth;  noonomwam,  I  speak  truth,  1  Tim. 
2,  7;  suppos.  u'unnomw&eeycm ,  if  I  speak 
truth  (vmnnaumwdyean,  if  he  say  true; 
wunn&umwash,  speak  thou  the  truth; 
wunndumwaw  ewd,  he  speaks  true,  R. 
W.);  vbl.  n.  wunnomwdyeuonk,  a  truth; 
vMnnamvJikuteyev.uk,  truthfulness  ( when 
it  is  true);  adv.  wunnamuliqut,  truly, 
verily ;  wunnamuhqutteyeuco,  (it)  is  true; 
pi.  -yeuash,-( they)  are  true;  vbl.  n.  wun- 
namuhqutteyeuonk,  truth  (abstract), 
trust,  pdbahtantam,  paubuhtantam,  he 
trusts,  he  trusts  in  (it);  uppabahtan- 
tamun,  he  trusts  in  it  (papahtantam&ruit, 
to  trust,  C.);  an.  pcibahtanumau,  he 
trusts  in  (him). 

try,  qutchehtam,  he  tries,  he  tastes  (it); 
caus.  an.  qutchehheau,  he  makes  trial 
of  (him),  he  tempts  or  proves  him; 
caus.  inan.  qutchehteau,  he  makes  trial 
of  (it),  he  proves  it;  vbl.  n.  qutclieh- 
teaonk  ( qutcheheteoonk ,  pi.  -ongash,  trials 
or  attempts,  C.) .  See  prove,  kodussu, 
he  tries,  makes  an  attempt, 
tumult,  wogkoueonk,  tumult,  stir,  com¬ 
motion.  See  stir. 

turkey,  neyhom,  pi.  neyhommduog,  R.W. ; 
N.  E.  nahenan,  L.  I.,  nahiam,  Wood; 
Abn.  nahame;  Del.  tshikenum. 
turn  aside  or  about,  quinnuppu,  he 
turns:  meshehtash  .  .  .  quinnuppu,  the 
wind  turns  about,  changes  its  direc¬ 
tion,  Eccl.  1,  6  ( nukquinuppem ,  I  turn, 
C. );  suppos.  noli  quinnupit,  he  who 
turns;  quinnupeit,  when  it  turns  (as  a 
door  on  its  hinges,  Prov.  26,  14);  v.  t. 
quinnuppenum,  he  turns  (it);  suppos. 

B.  A.  E.,  Bull.  25- 


turn  aside  or  about — continued. 

noli  quimuppinuk  wuhtauog,  he  who 
turns  away  his  ear,  Prov.  28,  9;  an. 
quinnuppunau,  he  turns  (him),  makes 
him  turn;  vbl.  n.  quinnuppeonk,  turning, 
turn  back,  qushkeu,  he  turns  back.  See 
return. 

turn  one’s  self  about,  quinnuppekom- 
pau,  he  turns  about,  lit.  he  stands 
turned  about.  See  stand, 
turn  upside  down,  wunnumuhkinum, 
he  turns  (it)  upside  down;  conumuh- 
kinum-un,  he  turns  it  upside  down,  he 
overturns  it. 

turtle,  Abn.  tSrebe,  Rasies  (cf.  tconup- 
pcisog,  tortoise,  Lev.  11,  29);  amike- 
nak8,  ‘son  f-caille’;  cf.  Chip,  mik  e  nok, 
me  ke  nok,  turtle,  tortoise, 
twenty,  neesneechag,  nesnechag,  pi.  an. 
-\-kodtog,  inan.  -\-kodtash  ( neem&ecliick , 
R.  W. ;  Peq.  neezuncliage  or  piugg  nau- 
but  piugg  (ten  plus  ten),  Stiles;  Del. 
nischinakhki;  Abn.  nisineski). 
twice,  neesit  ( when  there  are  two) :  pasuk- 
qut  asuh  neesit,  once  or  twice;  neescowudt 
neesit  nompe,  when  it  was  doubled  twice, 
Gen.  41,  32;  neese  tahshe,  suppos.  neesit 
tahshin,  twice  as  much, 
twins,  tagwosu  weechau,  ‘twins  were  in 
her  womb’,  she  bore  twins,  Gen.  38, 
27;  togquonsuooog,  there  were  twins, 
Gen.  25,  24  ( togquos ,  ogquos,  a  twin, 
pi.  -\-mog,  C. ;  tackquiuwock,  twins,  R. 
W.) 

twist,  tuppinohteau,  freq.  tuttuppennoh- 
teau,  he  spins  or  twists,  caus.  inan.  from 
tattuppunau,  tatuppineau,  it  is  twisted 
(turned  or  rolled  around) ;  tuttuppun, 
tatuppin  (spun,  twisted),  a  twisted 
thread  or  string;  sometimes  tuttuppuno- 
ahtog,  that  w'hich  is  twisted  or  made  to 
twist.  From  tatuppe,  equal,  alike; 
tatuppehteau,  he  makes  it  equal,  equal¬ 
izes  it,  Ps.  33,  15.  Cf.  icttuppequanum, 
he  rolls  (it). 

twisted  (tortuous),  pepemsque  ( pemis - 
qudi,  crooked  or  winding,  R.  W. ).  See 
crooked. 

two,  neese,  nee: s,  pi.  an.  neesuog,  inan.  nee- 
sinash  ( neisse ,  neese,  nees,  pi.  an.  neeswock, 
inan.  neenash,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  nafa,  neese, 
Stiles).  See  twice. 


-22 


338 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[bulletin  25 


l 


unable,  nconum,  noonanum,  I  am  unable, 
I  can  not,  and  he  is  unable,  he  can  not; 
ncononumumun,  we  are  not  able  ( nond - 
num,  nodnshem,  I  can  not,  R.  W. ;  nomat, 
to  be  wanting  or  defective,  C.  )•  Cf. 
noochumvri,  weak;  mattanum,  he  is  un¬ 
worthy,  Mark  1,  7.  Cinheau,  he  could 
not,  Judg.  1,  19.  matta  tapenum,  he  is 
not  able,  he  can  not;  matta  tapenumao,  it 
can  not,  it  is  unable;  from  tdpi,  taupi, 
enough,  sufficient;  tapenum,  he  suffices 
for,  can. 

unbind,  ompeneau,  he  unbinds  (him). 
See  loose. 

uncle,  wussisses,  wussusses,  his  uncle 
( coshesin ,  an  uncle,  C. ;  wussese,  R.  W.); 
noosusses,  my  uncle;  ummittamwussoh 
ooshesoh,  the  wife  of  his  uncle  (Muh. 
nsase,  (my)  uncle  by  the  father’s  side; 
nuchehque,  (my)  uncle  by  the  mother’s 
side,  Edw.). 

unclean,  nishkeneunkque,  suppos.  nish- 
keneunkquodt,  when  it  is  unclean;  an. 
nishkeneunkqussu,  (he  is)  unclean;  vbl. 
n.  nishkeneunkqussuonk,  (the  doing  of) 
uncleanness;  caus.  inan.  nishketeau,  he 
makes  (it)  unclean,  defiles  it. 
uncover,  wolishinum,  he  uncovers 
(opens),  posldnum,  he  lays  bare, 
under,  agwu,  agwe,  it  is  below,  under¬ 
neath.  See  below. 

understand,  wahteou,  he  understands. 
See  know. 

undesignedly,  pehcheu  (‘unawares’, 
Num.  35,  11;  Gal.  2,  4). 
unexpectedly,  tiadchu.  See  suddenly, 
unless,  kuttumma  ( Jdttumma ,  C. ;  kottume, 
kuttumma,  C.  Mather), 
until,  pajeh;  yen  pajeh,  until  now;  no 
pajeh,  toll  pajeh  (n6  pajeh,  ndpaj,  C. ), 
until  that,  until. 


unto  (as  far  as),  vehque  (yd  weque,  thus 
far,  R.  W. )  [wdhktieu,  at  the  end  of]. 
See  end. 

up.  See  go;  lift  up;  spring  up. 
upper,  kuhkukque,  above,  upper.  See 
ascend;  go. 

upper  part,  woskeche.  See  surface;  top. 
upright, mmpwe.  Seeerect;  right;  stand, 
upward,  paamu,  upward,  more  than  (in 
time) :  ivutch  .  .  .  kah  paamu,  from 
(one  month  old)  and  upward,  Num. 
26,  2,  4.  See  above;  go. 
urge,  chetimuau,  he  urges;  chetimuonat, 
to  urge,  C.  See  compel, 
urinate,  suppos.  noh  sdgketog,  riohsagkeet, 
he  who  urinates.  Cf.  sokinnum,  he 
pours  out. 

urine,  ninyeu,  punneyeu;  umnnunneyeu, 
their  urine,  Is.  36,  12. 
use,  auwoliteau,  auwahteau,  he  uses  (it), 
makes  use  of  (it)  ( nuttauohteam ,  I 

use,  C. ):  auwohteaog  muttinnohkou,  they 
use  the  right  hand;  auwohteaog  yeu 
siogkcowaonk,  they  use  this  proverb, 
Ezek.  18,  2;  suppos.  noh  auwohteadt,  he 
who  uses;  vbl.  n.  pi.  auwohteaongash, 
weapons,  John  18,  3  (utensils?),  au- 
wohkon,  it  is  used,  habitually  made  use 
of  ( auwohkdnat ,  ompattamunat,  to  wear 
clothes  out,  C. ).  nohtdnum,  nehtdnum, 
he  makes  habitual  use  of,  knows  how 
to  use,  is  skilled  in  the  use  of;  suppos. 
noh  nohtonuk,  he  who  uses;  pi.  negnoh- 
tonukeg,  they  who  handle  or  are  accus¬ 
tomed  to  the  use  of  (spears,  shields, 
etc.),  1  Chr.  12,  8;  2  Chr.  25,  5. 
uselessly,  tahnmche,  in  vain,  causelessly 
[matta-nwcheT] . 

usually,  yoyatrhe,  always  (usually,  C., 
and  wameyeue,  usually,  ibid. ) . 
utterly,  papaquanne.  See  thoroughly. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


339 


vainly,  tahnooche. 

valiant,  kenompde,  valiant,  valiantly;  ke- 
nompdonk,  valor;  kenompdnunkqussuunk, 
boldness,  0.  Cf.  kenomp,  a  captain, 
John  18,  12;  keenomp  and  rmlckquomp, 
a  captain  or  valiant  man,  R.  W.  See 
captain,  menuhkesu,  menuhke  ussu,  he 
does  valiantly  (he  is  strong,  powerful, 
in  action);  menuhkesuen,  a  “mighty 
man  of  valor’,  2  Chr.  32,  21.  wuttco- 
nantamoonk,  ‘valor’,  Man.  Pom.  86. 

valley,  cououhkoi,  conduohkoi ,  mamdkoiyeu 
(i oonouwohkoai ,  pi.  -j -yeuash,  C. ):  en 
cououhkoi  yene ,  into  the  valley,  into  the 
low  country  [condi-ohke,  deep  or  low 
land] . 

value,  wunaoham,  he  values,  fixes  the 
value  of  (it);  conoohamun,  he  values  it; 
an.  wunaohau ,  he  values  him,  estimates 
his  value  (for  ransom);  vbl.  n.  vmnoo- 
hamcoouk,  a  valuing,  valuation,  esti¬ 
mated  value.  See  ransom. 

vanish,  mohtupohteau,  mohtuppaeu,  it 
vanishes,  passes  away.  See  consume; 
fade;  pass  away. 

vapor,  omnan,  mist,  vapor,  nishkenon, 
collect,  uishkenunk,  mist,  fog,  fine  rain. 
pukkuttaemes  [dimin.  from  pukkut, 
smoke],  vapor,  mist. 

vast.  See  great. 

veil,  oukquequohhou,  -hoo,  a  veil  ( onkqueek - 
hco,  a  hat,  C. );  vbl.  n.  caus.  from  onk- 
whau,  he  covers  (him),  he  is  covered: 
onquequohhou,  ‘he  covered  his  face’ 
(with  it),  Is.  6,  2.  puttogquequ&hhou, 
vbl.  n.  caus.  from.puttagioh.au,  puttaggvh- 
wau,  lie  hides  or  covers  over,  ydne- 
quohhoo,  vbl.  n.  caus.  from  ydnunciu,  he 
shuts  up,  makes  close. 

venereal  disease  (?),  mamaskishaui,  he 
hath  the  pox;  mamaskishaumitch,  the 
last  pox,  R.  W. 

venison,  weyaus  (flesh,  meat),  venison 
(  ncdttiteam  weeyous,  I  long  for  venison, 
R.  W. ).  See  flesh. 

very,  ahche,  very  much,  exceedingly; 
muttae,  mcocheke,  much,  very  much; 
u'ussaume,  too  much,  too,  very  ( nanpeh , 
very;  nanpeh peawag ,  least,  very  small; 
ahche  and  p eh tuh,  very,  C. ). 


vessel,  iriskq,  wisq,  wishq  ( weaskq ,  C. ),  a 
dish,  pot,  or  vessel:  wishquie pumrnee,  a 
pot  of  oil;  nukkonishquadt,  ‘in  old  bot¬ 
tles’  (when  the  vessel  is  old).  Gf.ohkuk, 
earthen  pot,  kettle;  qudncoask  [ qunni - 
wiskq,  long  vessel],  bottle,  wiskq  or 
weaskq  was  the  name  for  any  dish  or 
vessel  made  from  a  gourd  or  other 
of  the  Cucurbitacese,  asq,  asquash.  See 
gourd;  squash. 

vessel  (boat).  See  boat;  shallop;  ship, 
vex,  mcosqueheau,  moosqhf.au,  he  vexes 
him.  Caus.  an.  from  musquanurnau,  he 
is  angry  with  (him)  (?).  See  provoke, 
victory,  sohkauau,  he  prevailsover  (him), 
he  obtains  the  victory;  v.  i.  an.  sohkosu, 
he  conquers,  he  has  the  victory;  sup- 
pos.  noh  sohkausit,  he  who  is  victorious; 
vbl.  n.  sohkdhsuonk,  sohkausuonk,  vic¬ 
tory.  See  prevail  over, 
view,  kulikinneam,  kohkinnum,  he  ob¬ 
serves,  notices,  marks  (it);  kuhkinneasu, 
he  marks  it  ( nukkeehkZneam ,  I  view; 
kuhkinassinneat,  to  take  a  view,  C. )  See 
mark,  u'ussaumpatdmmin,  to  view  or 
look  about;  wussaumpatdinoonek,  a  pros¬ 
pect,  R.  W. 

village,  otanemes,  small  town;  dimin. 
from  otdn. 

vine,  wenomis,  wcnomwussipog,  icenomesip- 
pog;  pi.  -j-uash  or  quash  ( wenomin ,  we- 
nom,  a  grape;  pi.  wenominueash) . 
violence,  woskehuwaonk  (vbl.  n.  act., 
doing  hurt) ;  woskehittuonk  (vbl.  n.  pass. , 
receiving  hurt).  See  hurt,  chekeeneh- 
t iconic  (vbl.  n.  pass.),  suffering  force; 
chekeheau,  he  uses  force  or  violence  (to). 
See  compel;  force;  rob. 
violently,  chekee  ( chekewde ,  forcibly,  C. ): 

chekee  usseonk,  an  act  of  violence, 
virgin,  penomp,  pi.  -\-aog  (keegsquaw,  keh- 
tuckquaw,  R.  W.  Edwards  gives  Muh. 
penumpausoo,  pi.  -| -uk,  a  boy,  boys. 
Peq.  quausses,  a  virgin  girl,  Stiles,  for 
squasese,  squauhses,  a  girl  (?),  dimin.  of 
squa). 

vision,  monomansuonk,  a  vision.  Cf.  mo- 
neam,  monunaum,  he  looks  upon,  be¬ 
holds  (it). 


340 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


voice,  wadtauatonkqussuonk  vmttauatonh-  voice— continued. 

qimuonk  (the  making  a  sound),  a  voice,  ,  small  noise,  has  a  low  voice;  manunne 
noise,  sound;  mwa dtaaatonkqi tssu onk,  peantoovmnoo,  there  was  a  still,  small 

his  voice,  put  for  the  noise  of  the  sea,  voice,  1  K.  19,  12  ( tanne  .  ■  .  onto- 

Is.  17,  12;  the  sound  of  wheels,  Ezek.  wdonk,  a  hoarse  voice,  C). 

3,  13,  etc.  mishontoowau,  he  makes  a  vomit,  menadtam  ( menattam ,  C. ),  he 
loud  noise,  lifts  up  his  voice,  shouts;  vomits  ( n’ munn&dtommin ,  I  vomit,  R. 
adj.  and  adv.  mishontcowde,  with  a  loud  .  W.);  vbl.  n.  menadtamcoonk ,  vomiting, 

voice,  loud -sounding  [ mishontoo ,  there  is  voyage,  pumohhamcoonk,  Acts  27, 10;  vbl. 
a  loud  noise],  peantoowau,  he  makes  a  n.  from  pvmmohham,  he  goes  by  sea. 

w 


wade,  toudhpeu,  he  walks  into  the  water; 
suppos.  tauohpit,  when  he  walked  into 
the  water  ( tocekeketuck ,  let  us  wade; 
wut-tofJkemin,  to  wade,  R.  W. ) . 
wagon,  tatuppequanumuk  [suppos.  part, 
inan.  from  tatuppequanum,  he  rolls  (it) : 
when  it  is  rolled], a  wagon,  ‘chariot’, 
wait  for,  pahheau,  he  waits  for  (him); 
nuppaih,  I  wait  for  (him);  suppos. 
noh  pahhit,  he  who  waits  for;  inan. 
pahtau-un,  he  waits  for  it:  vmssepe pah- 
tauun,  he  waits  long,  ‘has  long  pa¬ 
tience’,  James  5,  7;  pahto,  he  waits  for 
(it),  ibid.;  v.  i.  an.  act.  pahtussu,  he 
waits,  is  waiting;  suppos.  noh  pahtsit, 
he  who  waits  ( pahiscnog ,  they  wait; 
pahtsit  wunnenchhudnat,  ready  to  do 
good;  nuppahtis  monchenat,  I  am  ready 
to  go,  C. ) ;  vbl.  n.  pahtsuonk,  waiting, 
forbearance,  Rom.  2,  4. 
wake,  tcokeu,  he  wakes;  nuttcokep,  I 
did  wake;  tmkish,  wake  thou  ( tokish , 
R.  W.);  an.  tookinav,  he  wakes  (him); 
suffix  nuttookinuk,  he  wakes  me;  tcolx- 
kinmk,  wake  ye  (him)  ( tokinish ,  wake 
him,  R.  W. ) ;  with  ’sh  of  sudden  or  vi¬ 
olent  activity,  tookshau,  he  wakes  sud¬ 
denly. 

walk,  pomushau,  paumushau,  (1)  he 
walks,  (2)  he  goes  a  journey,  he  travels, 
(3)  with  inan.  subj.  pomsheau, pomshau, 
it  passes,  goes  by;  freq.  popomushau, 
papaurnshau,  he  walks  much,  continues 
to  walk,  travels  ( nuppumwdsham ,  I 
walk;  noowekontam  piln  unis  hem,  I  have 
a  mind  to  travel;  cuttinneapummi- 
shem?  will  you  pass  by?;  aspummbvi, 
he  is  not  gone  by;  aspummewock,  they 
are  not  gone  by,  R.  W. ) ;  suppos.  noh 
pomushadt,  pamwushadt,  he  who  walks; 


walk — continued. 

inan.  subj.  kesukod  paumnshomumco, 
‘day  goeth  away’,  is  passing,  Jer.  6,  4; 
vbl.  n.  pomushaonk  (walking),  a  jour¬ 
ney;  n.  agent,  pomusliaen,  a  walker,  a 
traveler;  pi.  -\-uog.  The  primary  sig¬ 
nification,  or  rather  that  of  the  radical, 
appears  to  be  to  pass,  to  go  by.  Gf.  pa- 
memoo,  it  passed  (away),  Ps.  18,  12;  ash 
jmmmadt,  ‘while  he  was  yet  speaking’ 
(going  on,  before  he  had  passed  by  or 
gone),  Jobl,  16,  17;  ashyeu pumappedg, 
‘if  ye  will  still  abide  here’,  Jer.  42, 
10;  ut  pametshik  squontamut,  ‘on  the 
threshold’  (where  it  goes  by  or  passes 
the  door),  Judg.  19,  27;  ash pdme  (and 
ashpummeu)  kesukok,  while  day  lasts, 
while  it  is  yet  day,  2  Sam.  3,  35;  pummu, 
he  shoots;  pummunau,  he  flies;  pamom- 
pageu,  he  creeps;  pamontam,  pomantam, 
he  lives;  nish  }mmohtaash,  neg  pumik- 
kompaog,  they  are  in  a  row;  pummeeche 
mayut,  in  a  cross  way,  Obad.  14;  jmm- 
meneutunk,  a  wall;  pumrnukaonk^  a 
dance,  etc.  See  sea  ( pummoh ). 

wall.  See  fence. 

walnut  tree,  vmssoquat,  R.  W.  ( wusswa- 
quatdmineug,  walnuts;  “of  these  they 
make  an  excellent  oil  .  .  .  for  their 
anointing  of  their  heads”,  ibid.;  vrus- 
swhquattomis  and  -onitnash,  C. ;  Peq. 
v’ishquuts,  walnut  tree,  Stiles).  Cf. 
simeqeu,  he  anoints. 

wampum,  wompam,  ‘which  signifies 
white’  (R.  W. ),  from  wompi,  was  the 
collective  name  of  the  white  beads  or 
peag  used  as  cuirency,  as  mckauhock 
[ sucki-hogk ,  black  or  dark  shell]  was  of 
the  dark-colored  and  more  precious 
kind.  Both  kinds  were  known  to  the 


< 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


341 


wampum,  wompam — continued. 

English,  by  the  name  wampum  or  wam- 
pumpeage.  wompam,  the  white  beads 
‘which  they  make  of  the  stem  .  .  . 
or  stock  of  the  periwinkle  [Pyrula 
carica  or  P.  canaliculata  Say]  which 
they  call  meteadhock  when  all  the 
shell  is  broken  off’,  R.  W.  128: 
waudmpeg  or  wauompisichick-mesirri, 
give  me  white  (money),  ibid.  “A 
kind  of  beads  .  .  .  which  they  call 
wampam-peak  ...  of  two  sorts  .  .  . 
white  and  ...  of  a  violet  colour”, 
Morton,  N.  E.  Canaan.  Abn.  8an- 
banbi,  pi.  -biak,  white  beads;  segan- 
bi,  -Mak,  black  beads;  8anblgan,  -nak, 
‘canon  de  poreelaine’,  Rasies.  The 
primitive  ompeag  or  ompek,  ‘that  which 
pays  tribute’,  may  be  traced  in  Eliot’s 
translation  in  such  compounds  as  ne- 
mompdai  [ nemunum-ompai ],  ‘he  hath 
taken  a  bag  of  money’,  Prov.  7,  20; 
osmwunnornpacheg,  ‘money  changers’, 
Matt.  21,  12,  etc.  suckauhock  ( mow - 
hackas,  Wood),  ‘their  black  [money], 
sdcki  signifying  black ’ ,  R.  W. ;  suckau¬ 
hock,  nausakesachick,  ‘  the  blackmoney  ’ ; 
suckauanadsuck,  the  black  shells;  suck- 
auaskeesaquash  [sucki-wuskesukquasK], 
‘  the  black  eyes  or  that  part  of  the  shell¬ 
fish  called  poquciuhock  (or  hens)  [ qua - 
haug,  round  clam,  Venus  mercenaria], 
broken  out  near  the  eyes,  of  which 
they  make  the  black  [or  rather  dark- 
colored,  purple,  ‘black  inclining  to 
blue’]  money’,  ibid,  nqu-htdmpeg , 
‘  one  fathom  of  their  stringed  money  ’ ; 
nees-aumpaugatuck,  two  fathoms,  etc.; 
enomphommin,  ‘to  thread  or  string’, 
‘  thread  or  string  these  ’ ;  natouw&mpitea, 
'  a  coiner  or  minter  ’  ( a  maker  of  wamp¬ 
um);  natouwompitees,  ‘  make  money  or 
coin’,  R.W.  See  scatter. 

wander,  nanwiyeu,  he  wanders,  goes 
astray  ( noli  nanwusshau,  he  wanders, 
C.) ,  i.  e.  he  goes  at  large  (cf.  nan  we, 
general,  Lin y,  common) ,  he  loses  him¬ 
self.  waudnu,  wddnu,  wdonu,  he  goes 
astray;  neg  wauonitcheg,  they  who  go 
astray  ( wdwdnchick ,  wandering,  C. ;  wa- 
ironnuog,  they  wander,  ibid.).  Cf.  reaee- 
nu,  round  about. 

want,  quenauat  or  naonat,  ‘to  be  wanting 
or  defective’ ;  quenauadte,  necessarily 


want — continued. 

(suppos.,  when  it  is  wanting),  C.;  que- 
nauet,  ‘impers.  verb,  it  is  necessary’, 
Exp.  Mayhew.  An. pasuk quenauwussu, 
one  ( man )  is  lacking;  wanne  quenauwus- 
suh  pasuk,  not  one  (man)  islacking,Xum. 
31,  49;  quenauwehik,  quenailihukquoh, 
quenahuk,  quenauwdhik,  he  lacks,  is  in 
need  or  want  of  ( it) :  wanne  quenauwdlvi- 
kco,  he  had  no  lack,  2  Cor.  8,  15;  pasuk 
kukquenauMk,  one  thing  thou  lackest, 
Mark  10,  21;  Luke  18,  22;  kukquenahi- 
kumicco,  ye  lack  (it),  Phil.  4,  10  ( nuk - 
quenauwehhik,  I  want,  C. ;  matta  nickque- 
hick,  I  want  it  not,  R.  W.);  suppos. 
quenauhikquit,  if  he  lack  (it);  quenahuk- 
quehettit,  when  they  were  in  want  of, 
when  they  lacked  (it),  John  2, 3;  vbl.  n. 
quenauwehikcoonk,  quendhikcoonk,  a  lack¬ 
ing,  wanting,  lack  of  (cf.  matta  teag 
nukquentamwmun,  we  missed  nothing, 
1  Sam. 25, 15;  mo  teag  quentamm,  nothing 
was  missed,  1  Sam.  25,  21;  quencowau, 
he  denies  (him) ;  quencowantam,  he 
denies(it) ;  quenowd/uog,  they  complain, 
R.W. ;  tAwhitch  quenairdyean?  ivhy  com¬ 
plain  you?  ibid.).  Freq.  quequenauanu- 
mau,  he  is  in  great  want,  need,  or  diffi¬ 
culty:  quequenauanumoog,  ‘they  were 
in  a  strait’,  ‘were  distressed’,  1  Sam. 
13,  6;  vbl.  n.  quequanaudnumdonk,  diffi¬ 
culty,  ‘distress’,  Neh.  2,  17. 

war,  ayeuuhteAu,  ayeuwutteau,  he  makes 
war,  engages  in  war,  fights;  pish  kuta- 
yeuwehteam,  thou  shalt  make  war; 
ayeuhteahuash,  make  thou  war,  Prov. 
20,  18  ( jdhetteke ,  fight  ye;  jdhettittea,  let 
us  fight,  R.  W.);  n.  agent,  ayeuteaen-in, 
one  who  makes  war,  a  fighter,  a  ‘  man 
of  war’,  Josh.  17, 1;  vbl.  n.  ayeuteaonk, 
ayeuwuttdonk,  warring,  fighting,  war. 
See  fight.  ayeuulikonau,  he,  wars 
against,  makes  war  on  (him);  mut. 
ayeuuhkonittuog  (they  are  mutually  op¬ 
posed),  they  make  war  on  each  other; 
suppos.  neg  ayeuqueagig ,  they  who  are 
opposed,  adversaries.  See  opposite. 
ayeuteaontcowaoitk  [noise  of  war,  ayeuuh- 
iede-ontcowaonk\,  an  alarm  of  war,  Jer. 
4,  19  (icamchaCitovxnvanawat,  ‘  ’ tis  an 
alarm’,  R.  W.). 

warm.  See  hot. 

wash,  kutchissittau,  he  washes  (it); 
kv.tchiss&ttaush  kusseetash,  wash  thy  feet; 


342 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[mi.i.ktin  26 


wash — continued. 

vbl.  n.  kutchissittoonk,  washing  (of  inan. 
obj . ) ;  an.  kutchismmau  (-moo),  he 
washes  (himself  or  another  person); 
nuk-kutchissum,  I  wash  myself  ( nukkiti - 
mm,  I  wash,  C. ) ;  kutchissumvmsh  ( kit - 
tissumwish,  C. ),  wash  thyself;  vbl.  n. 
kutchissurndonk,  washing  (of  an.  obj.). 

waste.  See  barren;  empty;  fade. 

watch,  askuhhum,  he  watches  or  waits 
for  (it);  askuhhum i rug,  they  watch  or 
wait  for  (it);  v.  i.  askuhwehteau,  as- 
kuhwheteau,  he  watches,  waits;  askuh- 
wheteagk,  watch  ye;  nutaskweteam,  I 
watch,  Ps.  102,  7;  n.  agent,  askuhwhete- 
aen-in,  a  watchman;  vbl.  n.  askuhwhe- 
taonk,  watching,  a  watch;  adj.  arid 
adv.  askuhwheteae  kontuk,  watch  tower. 
Caus.  from  askun,  it  is  not  yet.  See 
raw. 

water,  nippe,  nuppe;  pi.  nippeash  (nip, 
R.  W. ;  nupp,  nupph,  Stiles;  mannip- 
pHnof  have  you  no  water?  R.  W. ;  Muh. 
nbej,  Edw. ;  Chip,  nebbi,  Edw. ;  neebi, 
Sch.;  nipi,  Keating;  Abn.  vein);  matta 
nippeno,  wanne  nuppeno,  there  is  no  wa¬ 
ter;  yen  nippe,  ‘here  is  water’,  Acts  8, 
36;  nuppe wutchnippekontu,  ‘water from 
[among  the]  water’,  Gen.  1,  6;  dimin. 
nippisse,  nips  (niphrese,  R.  W.;  nippis, 
Mass.  Ps. ),  a  small  quantity  or  body  of 
water,  a  pond  or  small  lake:  nuppisse 
nippe,  ‘water  of  the  pool  ’,  Is.  22, 11;  pi. 
nuppesash,  ponds;  double  dimin.  nip- 
peemes,  nippemes,  a  little  water  (as  for 
drinking).  The  radical  is  ’ pe  or  ’jm, 
to  which  is  prefixed  the  n’  demonstra¬ 
tive,  n’pe,  or,  as  Edwards  gives  it(  for 
the  Mohegan ) ,  nbey.  This  root  is  iden¬ 
tical  with  or  related  to  appu,  he  sits, 
stays,  remains,  and  distinguishes  water 
at  rest,  standing  water,  or  placed  water, 
n’pe,  suppos.  n’pog  (see  pog,  below), 
from  sokenon  ( water  when  poured),  rain; 
kussitchuwan  (water  when  proceeding 
onward),  a  stream;  tohkekom  (when  it 
comesforth  continuously) ,  a  spring;  tuk 
( when  it  beats  about  or  is  disturbed),  a 
wave  or  rough- watered  river,  etc.  Sup¬ 
pos.  pog  (n’pog),  water  when  at  rest, 
standing  water,  and  in  some  com¬ 
pounds  not  distinguishable  in  significa¬ 
tion  from  the  absolute  (indicative)  n’pe 
(the  prefixed);’  isdiscarded  in  all  corn- 


water — continued. 

pounds):  kehtahhannuppog,  the  waters 
of  the  sea,  Ex.  14,  21;  mishippag,  much 
water,  John  3,  23;  tohkekomeupog,  ‘run¬ 
ning  water’,  spring  water  (i.  e.  water 
after  it  is  taken  from  a  spring),  Num. 
19, 17;  woskeche  sepupog-v/ut,  on  the  sur¬ 
face  of  the  water  of  the  river,  Dan. 
12,  6  (=sepue  nippe -it,  v.  7);  nuppis- 
sepog,  nippissipag,  (the  water  of)  a 
pond  or  small  lake;  pi.  -(-wash;  son- 
kipog,  sonkuppog,  cold  water  (saunqui 
nip?  is  the  water  cool?;  saunkopaugot, 
cool  water,  R.  W. )  [sonkqui,  it  is  cold]; 
nunnippog,  fresh  water,  James  3,  12; 
seipog,  salt  water,  James  3,  12  [see, 
bitter].  See  cast  into  the  water;  draw 
water. 

waterfall,  Narr.  patuck,  pawtuck;  Abn. 

panntekS,  chute  d’eau,  Rasies, 
waves,  tukkcog.  See  river.  Abn.  teg8, 
pi.  tegSak,  Rasies. 

we,  neenavmn,  we  (exclusive  of  the  per¬ 
sons  addressed,  we  and  not  you) ;  keena- 
vmn,  we  (inclusive  of  the  persons  ad¬ 
dressed,  we  all,  we  and  you)  (nenau- 
wun,  nenawun,  neanauun,  we,  us,  C. ; 
Muh.  neaunuh,  Edw.;  Del.  nUuna,  kilu- 
na,  Hwk. ;  Chip,  neenahwind,  keena.h- 
wind,  Sch.):  nanasliaue nenawun kahken, 
between  us  and  thee,  Luke  16,  26;  nu- 
shaue  kenawun,  between  us,  i.  e.  between 
you  and  ourselves,  Judg.  11,10;  kenawun 
waive,  all  of  us,  2  Cor.  3,  18;  James 
5,  17. 

weak,  nooehumwi,  naochumwiyeu,  it  is 
weak,  feeble,  tender  (primarily  weak, 
because  in  its  beginning  [nmche~\  or 
early  growth):  noochumwe  wunnepog, 
the  tender  leaf  (ncocMmwe,  maimed; 
nooehumwi,  tender;  nmehimate,  weak, 
C. );  an.  ncochumwem,  he  is  weak,  he  is 
tender;  suppos.  noh  noochumwesit,  he 
who  is  weak  (nooehumwesue,  weakly, 
C. ) ;  vbl.  n.  noochumwesuonk,  tenderness, 
weakness.  See  wound, 
weapons,  auwohteaongash  ( ompategash, 
Mass.  Ps. );  nutauwohteaongash ,  my 
weapons.  From auwohteau,  heuses(it). 
wear  clothes,  kogkoo,  ogkao,  he  is  clothed, 
he  wears  clothes.  See  clothe, 
wear  out,  ornpattamunat,  to  wear  clothes 
out;  nummahche  ompattam,  I  did  wear; 
inaht-ompattamhnat ,  to  wear  out,  C. 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


343 


weary,  sauunitm ,  he  is  weary,  tired.  See 
tire. 

weasel,  Peq.  a’mucksh,  Stiles.  See  fisher; 
marten. 

weather,  wunnohquodt,  (when  it  is)  fair 
weather  (wunnohquat,  pleasant  weather, 
C. )  [ wunne ,  good],  wekineauqfiat,  fair 
weather;  wekinnduquocks,  when  it  is  fair 
weather,  R.  TV.;  wekeneankquat,  warm 
weather,  C.  pohkohquodt,  (when  it  is) 
clear,  in  a  clear  day  [ pohkok ,  the  clear 
sky]  ( pduqui ,  pduquaquat,  ‘it  holds  up’, 
the  weather  clears,  R.W. ).  tohkokquok, 
(when  it  is)  cold  ( lahki ,  tatakki,  cold 
weather;  taukocks,  cold  weather,  R.  W. ). 
matohquodt,,  (when  it  is)  cloudy  weather 
( mdttaquat  or  kuppaquat,  it  is  overcast, 
R.W. ) ;  matohquokish,  ‘  in  a  day  of  rain’, 
Ezek.  1,  28  [ matokqs ,  a  cloud] .  onkquoh- 
quodt,  ‘lowering’,  Matt.  16,  3  ( onnoh - 
quat,  raining,  C. ;  dnaquat,  rain,  R.  W. ) . 
u’uttapdhquot,  wet  (weather),  C.;  cf. 
vmttogld,  moisture,  michokat,  a  thaw; 
ndchokateh ,  when  it  thaws,  R.  W.  See 
cold;  hot;  wet. 

weave,  monakeneheau,  monakeneliteau,  he 
weaves,  lit.  he  makes  cloth  [caus.  inan. 
from  monak,  cloth]  ( monagkeneehkonal , 
to  weave,  C. ) ;  n.  agent,  monakenehteaen- 
in,  a  weaver. 

wedding,  vmssentamdonk,  vbl.  n.  from 
wussentam,  he  marries, 
weed,  monasktinnernun,  R.  \V.  See  hoe. 
weep.  See  cry;  mourn, 
weigh,  qutlompaghcotau,  he  weighs  (it) 
( noh  quttompaghootco  nashpe  quttooheg, 
he  weighs  by  the  pound,  C. ) ;  suppos. 
inan.  quttompaghooteg ,  when  it  weighs,  a 
balance,  ‘weights’,  Deut.  25, 13  (vbl.  n. 
quttompaghcotdonk,  weighing,  C. ) .  From 
quttaueu,  it  sinks  down(?).  Cf.  quttuh- 
ham,  he  measures, 
weighty,  tohkequn.  See  heavy, 
welcome,  kmnepeam,  (thou  art)  wel¬ 
come,  C. 

well  (adj.),  kongketeciu,  he  is  well;  asq- 
kongketeauf  is  he  yet  well?  ( kongkee - 
tedug,  they  are  well,  R.  W.;  sun  wun- 
nuhketeaonkannuf  is  it  a  healthy  time?; 
nuttanukkd  vmnnikket&am ,  I  am  pretty 
well;  toll  kuttinukkei&am?  how  do  you 
do?  C.). 

well  (adv.),  wunne,  winne,  (it  is)  well; 
vmnnesu  [ivunne-usm],  he  acts  or  does 


well — continued. 

well;  wunneneheau,  he  does  well  to 
(him),  treats  (him)  well  (caus.  an., 
makes  it  well  to  him).  See  conduct 
one’s  self;  good. 

well  (n. ),  wuttahhamonk,  a  well;  ootha- 
monk,  his  well.  See  wet- 
west.  See  northwest, 
west  wind,  papdnetin,  R.  W. ;  cf.  papone, 
popon,  winter.  See  northwest, 
wet,  wuttogki,  •  (it  is  wet)  ‘moisture’, 
Luke  8,  6  ( wuttapdhquot ,  wet  (weather) ; 
an.  nwtdgkes,  I  am  wet;  wuttagkesinneat, 
to  be  wet,  C. ;  Peq.  wuttuggio  eyew  keezuk 
weenugh,  wet  today,  very,  Stiles),  og- 
qushki,  (it  is)  wet,  moist;  ogqushkaj,  let 
it  be  wet,  Dan.  4,  15. 
whale,  pcotdop,  pootab,  pdtab  ( pootab ,  ('.; 
potop,  R.  W. ;  Peq.  podumbaug,  pudum- 
baug,  Stiles;  Del.  m’bidk,  Hkw.)  [ poo - 
tau,  he  blows.  “There  she  blows!”  as 
a  modern  whaler  cries] . 
whalebone,  waskeke,  R.  W. 
what  (interrog. ),  chagwas,  chaugwas  ( tea - 
gua;  toll,  teagua  kuttindntamf  what  do 
you  think?;  toll  kittinnanvamf  what  do 
you  say?  C. ). 

whelp,  wuskoshim,  wuskoshimwus,  a 
whelp,  cub,  the  young  of  an  animal, 
when,  ahquompcik,  El.  Gr.  21  [suppos. 
inan.  of  ahquompi,  there  is  time;  na  ut 
aquompag,  ne  aquompak,  at  that  time], 
uttuhaunaoh,  vMuhhunooh,  C. 
whence,  toll  noli,  whence,  whither  (ton- 
noh,  where,  whither,  C. ;  tunna  kowdum? 
whence  come  you?;  tunnock  kuttbrnef 
whither  do  you  go?  R.  W. ;  tonnoh- 
whitch,  whence,  C.). 

where,  uttiyeu;  uttiyeu  ane,  wherever 
( tuckiu ,  tiyu,  where;  tuckiu  sdchim? 
where  is  the  sachem?  R.  W. ;  tonnoh, 
where,  whither,  C. ). 
wherefore,  yowutche,  yeu  waj,  for  this 
cause,  because  of  this, 
whet.  See  sharpen, 
whether,  uttoh  asuh  matta,  whether  or 
no,  C. 

whetstone,  cauompsk,  R.  IV. 
which,  relat.  ne,  that  which;  interrog. 
uttiyeu,  pi.  uttiyeuash;  an.  uttiyeug, 
whom,  Luke  6,  13  ( uttuh ,  uttiyeu,  pi. 
uttiyeush,  which,  C. ). 
while,  nisohke,  ne  sohke,  tohsahke,  whilst, 
so  long  as,  all  the  while  that:  nisohke 


344 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


while — continued. 

pomantog,  ‘all  the  days  of  his  life’,  so 
long  as  he  may  live,  2  K.  25,  30.  ash 
(‘adv.  of  continuation’,  ‘still’,  El.  Gr. 
21),  while,  during  the  continuance  of: 
ash  pdme,  ashpummeu,  while  yet,  before 
the  completion  or  termination  of  ( as - 
pummhm,  he  is  not  gone  by,  R.  W. ) . 
See  walk. 

whippoorwill,  Peq.  muckko-wheesce, 
Stiles. 

whirl,  pepemsqushau,  he  oritwhirlsabout 
(of  the  wind,  Eccl.  1,  6);  freq.  from 
pemsquai,  it  is  crooked  or  tortuous, 
whirlwind,  pemsqvoh,  it  twists  about,  it 
whirls.  See  whirl. 

white,  wompi,  (there  is)  white;  pi.  wom- 
piyeuash,  white  (things);  wompiyeuco,  it 
is  white,  El.  Gr.  16;  v.  i.  an.  w ompesu, 
(he  is)  white;  nancompes,  I  am  white 
( wdmpi ,  R.  W.  and  C. ;  Peq.  wumbimu, 
Stiles;  Del.  wape,  Hkw.;  Alg.  wabi; 
Abn.  wapiyo;  L.  I.  wampayo;  dimin. 
wompishocki,  gray  (whitish);  wompe- 
kisheeae,  pale,  C.);  suppos.  inan.  wom- 
pag,  when  it  is  white,  (that  which  is) 
white;  brightness,  bright  daylight:  ne 
wompag  w66u,  the  white  of  an  egg. 
whither,  toll  noh;  uttoh,  to  what,  where- 
unto,  whither,  how;  toh  nogqueu,  Ps. 
139,  7.  See  whence. 

who,  relat.  noh,  he  who;  interrog.  howan. 

\_ewo-unni,  any  he.  ]  See  any. 
wholly,  papanuppe;  papaquanne,  utterly, 
completely;  see  thoroughly,  wame 
(omnino);  see  all.  m&vwsse  (ex  to  to; 
rnarnmseyeue,  wholly,  C.). 
whortleberry,  attitaash  (pi.),  R.  W. ; 

sautaash,  ibid.  (?). 
why  (interrog.),  toh  wutche,  toh  waj. 
wicked,  matchetou  [ matche-ohtau ],  he  is 
wicked,  inherently  bad;  matchesu  [mat- 
clie-ussu ] ,  he  is  wicked,  acts  badly.  See 
bad. 

wide,  mishonogod,  mishonogok,  (when  it 
is)  wide,  broad,  Matt.  7,  13  (?). 
widow,  sekousq,  pi.  sekousquaog  ( segous - 
quaw,  R.  W. ;  sekduishq,  C. ).  From 
sequnau,  he  remains  behind,  is  left, 
or  asuhkau,  he  goes  after,  and  squa, 
woman. 

widower,  segatio,  R.  W.  [asvhkauau  ?] ; 
mohkodtaen-in,  C. 

width,  ne  koshkag,  the  width  or  breadth 
of  it.  See  breadth. 


wife,  mittamvns,  mitlamu'ussis,  a  woman, 
a  wife  (mulier,  uxor);  nummittamuns, 
my  wife;  kummittamwus,  thy  wife;  um- 
mittamwussoh,  his  wife,  the  wife  of  (rnit- 
tainus,  R.  W. ;  kommUtamus  or  koweeu-o, 
your  wife;  nummittamus  or  nulldgana, 
my  wife,  ibid.;  kummittiimus,  your  wife, 
C. );  suppos.  mittamwussit,  if  she  be,  or 
when  she  is,  the  wife  of;  indef.  ummit- 
tamwussin,  a  wife,  any  wife,  1  Cor.  7, 
10;  v.  act.  ummittamumssu,  ummittamwus- 
sissu,  he  takes  to  wife,  takes  as  a  wife 
(cf.  noh  vrusso,  she  is  a  man’s  wife, 
Gen.  20,  3;  icnssentam,  he  marries,  R. 
W. ;  wuskittamn'vs,  a  young  woman 
[wuske,  young]),  nequt  mkauau,  he  has 
one  wife,  1  Tim.  3,  2  (see  Rasies,  s.  v. 
homme).  weiwo,  a  wife;  noweewo,  my 
wife,  R.  W.  Narr.  nehyewgh,  my  wife; 
wenygh,  woman,  Stiles.  Abn.  phai- 
nem*,  femme,  Rasies. 

[♦Compiler’s  note. — “  Can  this  be  a  corrup 
tion  of  the  French?”] 

wild,  chachepissu,  (he  is)  fierce,  R.  W., 
wild,  C.  See  fierce,  sassakussue  .  .  . 
puppinashimwog,  wild  beasts,  Mass.  Ps. , 
Ps.  50,  11;  touohkomukque  puppinashi in, 
wild  beast,  i.  e.  beast  of  the  wilderness, 
El. 

wildcat,  pussoiighfU.  W. ;  pessow,  Judd, 
Gen.  Reg.  xi,  219. 

wilderness,  touohkomuk  (deserted  or  soli¬ 
tary  place).  See  forest, 
will  (auxil. ),  pish,  (pitch,  R.  \V. )  ‘aword 
signifying  futurity’,  El.  Gr.  20,  which 
is  prefixed  to  verbs  in  the  indicative  to 
form  the  simple  future  tense.  Strictly 
regarded,  it  is  a  unipersonal  or  defec¬ 
tive  verb,  signifying  ‘there  will  be’. 
Cf.  pd,  ‘let  me  be’;  paj,  pajeh,  until; 
peyaush  (imperat. ),  come  thou;  as,  pd 
noowaantam,  let  me  be  wise,  El.  Gr.  25; 
pish  ncowaantarn,  I  will  be  wise;  pajeh 
ncowaantam,  until  I  am  (will  be)  wise, 
will  (v. ),  unndntarn,  andntam,  he  wills, 
purposes,  intends,  etc.  See  think, 
willingly,  unnantamwe. 
willow  tree,  anumwussukuppe,  anumwus- 
sikkup  (anumussukuppe,  Mass.  Ps.). 
win  (v.),  tumnmhhov/rnat,  ‘to  obtain’,  1 
Cor.  9,  25  (?).  Cf.  attumunum,  he  re¬ 
ceives  (it).  See  earn, 
wind,  vahan  (wdpan,  C. ;  uiadpi,  pi. 
wdupanash,  R.  W.;  Peq.  vmttun,  Stiles; 
Old  Alg.  lootin,  Lahontan;  Chip,  no- 


TRUMBULL] 


ENGLISH-NATICK  DICTIONARY 


345 


wind — continued . 

tine,  McK. ).  Cf.  wadbeu,  wadpu,  it  rises 
up;  woppinnok,  air,  C.  mishdupan 
[mishe-xvdpaii],  a  great  wind,  R.  TV. 
mishaowepin,  a  great  calm;  auwepin,  the 
wind  ceased,  Mark  4,  39  [co-waban  or 
woodban  (the  neg.  form),  there  was  no 
wind],  wunndgehan  or  wunnigin waupi, 
(there  is)  a  fair  wind;  wunnegitch  wut- 
tin,  when  the  wind  is  fair,  R.  W.  mat- 
tdgehan,  a  cross  wind;  mattdgehatch, 
when  the  wind  is  cross,  ibid.  See 
driven  by  the  wind;  east;  north; 
northeast  wind;  northwest;  southeast 
wind;  south  wind;  west  wind. 

wind  about,  woweaushin,  it  winds  about, 
a  winding  about,  Ezek.  41,  7.  See 
around. 

window,  kenogkoneg ,  kenogkeneg  { kenag - 
klnneg,  a  glass  window;  kunnatequa- 
nick,  C. ). 

wing,  wunnuppoh,  (his)  wing,  the  wing 
or  wings  of:  pasuk  wunnuppoh,  one  wing 
of  {wunnuppoh,  pi.  -\-whunash,  C. ;  wun- 
nup,  pi.  -\-pash,  R.  W. ) ;  also  wunnup- 
pohwhunoh,  wunnupwhunoh,  the  wing  or 
wings  of:  pasuk  wunnuppoliwhunoh,  one 
wing  of;  wunnuppuhivhunduli,  their 
wings,  the  wings  of  (them);  nuppoh- 
vmnau  (he  has  wings),  ‘having  wings’, 
Is.  6, 2;  yauinnepuhivliunau,  having  four 
wings,  Ezek.  1,  6.  From  neepoh,  nee- 
pa  u,  he  rises  up;  caus.  inan.,  it  makes 
rise  up;  wunnuppuhwhunduh,  for  wun- 
neep-uhhauun-ouli,  they  cause  them  to 
rise  (‘their  wings’). 

winter,  popon  ( papdne ,  R.  W. ;  Abn. 
pebSn;  Old.  Alg.  pipoon,  Lahontan;  Ot¬ 
tawa,  pipov;  Chip,  peebdn, pipoon;  Muh. 
hpoon,  Edw. ).  See  seasons. 

wipe,  chiskham,  jiskham,  he  wipes  (it); 
inan.  pi.  wutchiskhamunash,  she  wiped 
them,  Luke  7,  28  ( nut-jeeskham ,  I  wipe, 
C. ).  From  chekham,  he  sweeps.  See 
towel. 

wise,  waantam,  he  is  wise  ( waudntam ,  a 
wise  man  or  counselor;  suppos.  pi. 
waudntakick,  wise  men,  R.  W. );  noo- 
waantam,  I  am  wise;  waantash,  be  thou 
wise;  waantaj,  let  him  be  wise;  suppos. 
waantog,  if  he  be  wise;  noh  waantog,  he 
who  is  wise;  vbl.  n.  wadntammonk,  wis¬ 
dom,  being  wise.  From  waheuh,  wah- 
eau,  he  knows,  and  anantam,  he  has  in 
mind,  is  minded]?),  taupowaw,  a  wise 


wise — continued. 

speaker;  pi.  taupowauog,  their  wise 
men,  R.  W.  See  priest, 
wish,  nontweantam,  he  wishes;  nun- 
nontivedntam ,  I  wish,  C.  kodtantam, 
he  wishes  for,  he  desires  (it).  See  de¬ 
sire;  would  that. 

witch,  kdsukquom,  Deut.  18, 10.  pauwau,  a 
wizard  or  witch,  a  sorcerer;  fern,  pau- 
wdsq,  witch,  ‘sorceress’,  Is.  57,  3;  see 
priest,  mamontam,  a  diviner,  a  wizard; 
monetuonk,  ‘divination’,  Deut.  18,  10; 
mamontumcoonk,  ‘enchantment’  {rriau- 
netu,  a  conjurer,  R.  W. ). 
with,  nashpe,  with,  by,  by  means  of  (an 
inan.  object)  {nashpe,  by,  C.).  weeche, 
with,  in  company  with  (a  person  or  an. 
object):  kco-weeche  wcomseunsh,  I  go 
down  with  thee,  Gen.  46,  4. 
wither,  ahpaoteau,  uhpaoteau,  it  withers; 
(dries  up?);  pi.  ahpcotaash,  uppcota- 
ash,  they  wither;  an.  uppcosuog,  they 
wither;  cf.  appcosu,  he  cooks,  he  is 
baked,  roasted  {apissumma,  warm  this 
for  me,  R.  IV.). 

withhold,  kogkounum,  he  withholds 
(it);  an.  kogkdunumau,  he  withholds 
(it)  from  (him).  See  hold, 
within,  andme  {unnommlyeu,  C. );  en 
anome,  en  ancomut,  in  the  inside  of,  in 
the  inner  part  of;  wuttinnomhog,  the  en¬ 
trails  or  inwards. 

without,  ivoskeche.  See  outside;  surface, 
poquadche,  without,  outside  of  (in 
the  open  air);  suppos.  pohguadchit, 
(when)  outside,  without,  in  open  air 
( puckquatchick,  R.  TV. ).  wanne,  with¬ 
out  (not  having,  destitute  of).  See  no. 
witness,  wauwau,  he  bears  witness, 
he  testifies;  wauwonaj,  let  it  be  a  wit¬ 
ness  or  a  testimony;  suppos.  neg  wau- 
wacheg,  they  who  bear  witness;  vbl.  n. 
wauwaonk,  witnessing,  testimony;  n. 
agent,  wauwaen-in,  a  witness  {wdwaenin, 
C. );  inan.  obj.  wauontam,  waiiw&ontam, 
he  bears  witness  to  (it),  he  testifies  to 
(it). 

wolf,  mukquoshim,  mummugquoshum 
{muckquashim,  R.  TV. ;  mukquisshum,  C. ; 
nattcohqussuog,  wolves,  ibid. ;  nattmh- 
qus,  Mass.  Ps.,  John  10,  12;  natoqus,  a 
wolf;  moattdqus,  a  black  wolf;  nato- 
quashunck,  a  wolf-skin  coat,  R.  W.; 
Peq.  mucks,  wolf,  Stiles)  [rnogke-oaas, 
great  animal].  Cf.  Muh.  mquoh,  bear. 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY 


[BULLETIN  25 


346 


woman,.' iqu&as,  aquas,  squ&us,  one  of  wom¬ 
ankind,  a  female  (femina)  [squao&ds, 
female  animal]  (eshqua,  C.;  tqudws,  pi. 
squawmck,  R.  W. ;  pahsuck  squdiv,  one 
woman,  ibid.;  dimin.  squasese,  a  little 
girl,  ibid. ;  Narr.  squauhses,  a  girl,  Stiles; 
Del.  ochqueu,  a  woman,  Hkw. ;  okhqueh, 
khqueu,  Zeisb. ;  ochquetschitsch,  a  girl, 
Hkw.).  See  female.  The  radical  aqua 
is  not  used  by  Eliot  except  in  compound 
words,  but  in  the  verb  form  ( squaiyeuco , 
she  is  female)  is  found  in  Gen.  6,  19. 
Eliot  has  in  Gen.  2,  23,  pish  hennou 
Ishah,  ‘she  shall  be  called  woman’, 
but  this  is  probably  transferred  from  the 
Hebrew,  nunksqua,  nunksq  ( nonkishq , 
C. ),  a  young  woman.  See  girl,  mitta- 
mwus,  mulier,  uxor.  See  wife. 

/omb,  dontomuk,  tdurdomuk,  utdmuk  (with 
two  nasals,  ‘as  one  would  pronounce 
o  with  the  mouth  close  shut’,  Exp. 
Mayhew)  ( vmttont6mukqut,  C.). 
wompam.  See  wampum, 
wonder,  rrionchanatam  ( monchantam ,  C. ), 
he  wonders  at  (it),  or  v.  i.  he 
wonders,  he  is  astonished;  vbl.  n.  mun- 
chanatamooonk ,  wonder,  astonishment, 
and  sometimes  for  the  caus.  monchana- 
tamwahhuwaonk,  (causing  wonder),  a 
wonder,  a  marvel,  ‘a  miracle’;  adv. 
monchanatarmve ,  wonderfully :  kummon- 
chanatarnwe  ussern,  ‘  thou  hast  done  won¬ 
derful  things’,  Is.  25,  1. 
wood,  vmttuhqun,  wuttuliq,  wuttuk  ( wut - 
uhtug,  of  the  tree),  a  branch  or  bough, 
wood  for  fuel  ( wudtuckqun ,  a  piece  of 
wood;  wudtuckquanash,  lay  wood  on 
(the  fire),  R.  W.;  wuttoohqunash  or 
mishash  (?),  wood,  C. ).  See  forest, 
woodchuck,  ockqutchaun,  R.  W.  (?).  See 
hog. 

wooden,  mehtugque.  See  tree, 
wool,  weshagan  (?).  See  hair,  noohke- 
shakdnash,  soft  wool,  C. 
word,  kuttcowonk,  pi.  -ongash.  See  speak, 
work,  anakausu,  he  works,  he  la¬ 
bors  ( nuttandkous ,  I  labor;  elsewhere 
nuttann&kous,  I  work,  C. ) ;  imperat. 
anakausish,  labor  thou,  work;  suppos. 
noli  nnakausit,  he  who  works;  n.  agent. 
anakailsuen-in,  a  worker  ( anakausu ,  pi. 
anak&mitchick,  R.  W. ) ;  vbl.  n.  anakau- 
suonk,  work,  labor;  v.  t.  anakausim,  he 


work — continued. 

Works  or  labors  upon  (it),  he  does  or 
accomplishes  work  upon  (it), 
world,  muttaohke,  muttaok  [ muttae-ohke , 
‘exceeding  much’  land],  the  world, 
worm,  6hkq,  oohk,  pi.  -quaog  (oohke,  C. ); 
from  ohkeieu,  of  the  earth  (?);  but  cf. 
askook.  askcokse  (dimin.  of  askook, 
snake),  a  worm,  Is.  41,  14. 
worship,  nauwaehtam ,  he  bows  down 
to  (it),  he  worships  (it) ;  neg.  imperat. 
nawaehtauuhkon,  thou  shalt  not  bow 
down  to  (it),  Ex.  20,  5;  Deut.  5,  9;  v.  i. 
nauwaeu  ( he  bows  down ) ,  he  worships. 
wowusmm,  wowossum,  he  worships, 
prays  to;  an.  wowussumau  manitto,  he 
worships  a  god  ( wowusmm  God,  wor¬ 
ship  God,  C. );  suppos.  pi.  part,  neg 
waussumoncheg,  neg  wowussumoncheg, 
they  who  worship. 

would  that!  (utinam),  napehnont,  woi, 
‘adverbs  of  wishing’,  El.  Gr.  21, 
‘0  that  it  were!’  “The  adverb  toh  or 
napehnont  properly  signifieth  utinam,  I 
wish  it  were!”  and  is  annexed  to  the 
the  verb  in  forming  the  optative  mood, 
El.  Gr.  34. 

wound,  leoskehittuonk,  a  hurt,  a  wound 
(being hurt), vbl.  n.  pass,  from woskehhu- 
au,  he  hurts;  noochumwetancowaonk,  na>- 
cliumwehtahwhuttuonk,  a  wound  (being 
disabled  or  made  weak),  vbl.  n.  pass, 
from  noochumwehtahwhau,  the  caus. 
inan.  of  noochumwi,  he  is  weak, 
wrestle,  quogquadtinohkonau,  he  wrestles 
with  (him). 

wrists,  missippuskunriicheg,  C.;  cf.  mus- 
sipsk,  the  ankle. 

write,  v/usmkhom,  wus&ukhum,  he  writes; 
elsewhere,  in  caus.  form,  wussukkuhhum, 
he  writes  (it);  ncosukhum,  ncosukkuh- 
hum,  I  write,  I  write  ( it) ;  ahque  vmssuk- 
whush,  do  not  write  ( wusstickquash , 
write  a  letter’;  wusmckwheke,  vimssuck- 
whonck,  a  letter,  ‘from  nmssuckwhom- 
men,  to  paint,  for  having  no  letters, 
their  painting  comes  the  nearest’,  It. 
W. ;  wiowmhkhamiinat  vmssukquohhonk, 
to  write  a  book;  noosoohquohham,  I 
write,  C. );  v.  i.  act.  wusmkwhd.vi ,  he 
writes,  he  is  writing  ( wussuckhdsu ,  (he 
is)  painted,  R.  W. );  vbl.  n.  wussuk- 
whonk,  v'lmohquohu'onk,  writing,  a  letter, 


TRUMBULI,] 


ENGLISH— NATICK  DICTIONARY 


347 


write — continued. 

a  book,  etc.;  wussukwhdsuonk,  (the  act 
of)  writing. 

wrong,  panneu,  panneau,  he  is  out  of  the 
way,  perverse,  he  goes  wrong;  suppos. 
noli  panne  out,  he  who  goes  wrong; 
panneau ,  he  erreth,  Prov.  10,  17;  v.  i. 


wrong — continued, 
act.  panneussu,  he  does  wrong1  suppos. 
noli  panneseit,  noli  pannesit,  lie  who 
does  wrong;  vbl.  n . panneyeuonk,  wrong, 
error;  panneusseonk,  wrongdoing,  trans¬ 
gression.  See  astray;  perverse,  matche, 
matchit,  bad.  See  bad. 


V 


yawn,  toannehtau,  he  yawns  or  gapes  at; 
nuttdannehtounkquog,  they  gape  at  me, 
Job  16,  10  (infinit.  toanenat,  C. ;  nuttoi- 
wanneem,  I  gape,  ibid. ;  nuttddnemun,  we 
gape,  ibid.).  Cf.  toon,  m’taon,  mouth. 

yea.  See  yes. 

year,  kodtumco;  suppos.  kodtumcok,  kddtu- 
muk;  pi.  kodtumcoash  (kodtummd,  pi. 
-j -ash,  C.);  adv.  and  adj.  kodtumwae, 
yearly,  of  the  year;  kogkodtumwae, 
yearly,  year  after  year,  every  year;  yen 
kodtumcok,  this  year  ( kakod ,  this  year; 
neyanat,  last  year,  C. );  kodtumwohkom 
[kodtumco,  with  'k  progressive]  he  con¬ 
tinues  or  goes  on  for  .  .  .  years,  he  is 
.  .  .  years  old:  naboneese  kodtumwoh¬ 
kom,  she  was  twelve  years  of  age,  Mark 
5,  42  ( toll  kuttedshe  kodtumwohkom?  how 
many  years  old  are  you?  C. ;  nquitte  kaii- 
tummo,  one  year;  neese  kautdmmo,  two 
years;  tahshe  kautdmmo?  how  many 
years?  R.  W. ). 

yell,  conco,  he  yells;  he  howls;  m.aush 
kali  consh,  ‘cry  and  howl’,  Ezek.  21, 12; 
conwog,  they  yell,  Jer.  51,  38  (of  wild 
animals).  Cf.  anum,  a  dog. 

yellow,  weesoe  ( wesaui ,  R.  W.).  Cf.  wee- 
swe,  gall;  wesogkon,  bitter. 

yes,  yea,  6  or  66,  nasal;  “but  there  be¬ 
ing  another  Indian  word  of  the  same 
signification,  viz,  nux  .  .  .  the  former 
is  scarce  ever  used  in  writing”,  Exp. 
Mavhew.  nux,  yea,  yes,  verily,  El. 
Gr.  21  (Narr.  nuk,  Stiles;  nux,  which 
1  ‘  should  rather  be  nukkies,  in  two  syl¬ 
lables”,  Exp.  Mayhew):  nuxyeucoutch, 
let  it  be  yea,  James  5,  12. 

yesterday,  wunnonkou,  wunnonkoo  ( it  was 
evening).  See  evening;  day. 

yet,  onch,  yet,  notwithstanding;  ohnehi- 
koh,  but  yet.  qut,  but,  vet,  but  yet  (qut- 
onch,  but,  because,  yet  so,  but  also,  etc. , 
C. ) .  asquam,  asq,  ashq,  not  yet  ( asquam , 


yet — continued. 

not  yet,  R.  W. ;  asqhuttooche  [asq-ut- 
twche~\,  whilst,  C.);  cf.  askun,  it  is 
raw;  aske,  raw  (not  complete,  unfin¬ 
ished,  immature);  asq,  ashquosh,  grass; 
wuske,  young,  new. 

yield,  vbl.  n.  ncosweonk,  yielding,  sub¬ 
mission;  ncoswehtau,  he  serves,  submits, 
yields  to  ( nun-noosweem ,  I  yield;  infin. 
ncosivenat ;  nooswetah  nen,  yield  your¬ 
self  to  me,  C. ) .  See  obey, 
yield  (bear  fruit).  See  produce, 
yonder,  yo,  yd,  yonder,  that  way:  yen 
nogque  in  kali  yd  in,  hither  and  thither, 
to  this  side  and  that;  yd  nuttonan,  we 
will  go  yonder,  Gen.  22,  5.  Cf.  yen, 
this;  no,  afar  off. 
you,  kenauau  ( kenau ,  C. ). 
young,  ivuske,  weske,  (it  is)  new,  young: 
wuske  penomp,  a  young  virgin;  n.  agent. 
umsken-in  (wiiskenin,  C. ;  wuskene,  R.  W. ) , 
a  young  man;  wuskenu,  wuskenoo,  he  is 
young;  an.  adj.  (v.  i.  act.)  wuskenesu, 
he  is  a  young  man,  he  is  young;  vbl. 
n.  wuskenucoonk,  youth,  the  season  of 
youth.  See  new;  small,  wuskittaniwus 
[umske-m’  tamwus ] ,  a  young  woman .  See 
woman,  umskoskim,  wuskishim,  a  young 
animal  (other  than  man):  wushkoshim- 
wus,  a  whelp;  pi.  -\-sog,  Prov.  17,  2; 
Nah.  2,  12.  See  new.  Cf.  Abn.  8ski, 
de  nouveau;  skie,  creed, 
younger  brother  or  sister,  weesumus- 
s oli,  his  younger  brother  orsister  (Muh. 
ngheesum,  (my)  younger  brother  or  sis¬ 
ter,  Edw. ). 

younger  son  or  daughter,  mutt&sons, 

the  youngest  (son  or  daughter).  See 
brother. 

yours,  ne  kuttaiheu,  that  which  is  yours, 
which  belongs  to  you;  pi.  nish  kuttai- 
liPoash  ( kenayeu ,  yen  kenau,  thy,  thine, 
your,  yours,  C.).  See  belong  to. 


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS 


Page  4. 
8. 
16. 
19. 


25. 

26. 
29. 
35. 
45. 
77. 

107. 

112. 

227. 


agque.  See  ogque. 
anantam.  See  unnuntarnunat. 

asqueteahwh.au,  asquttahwhau.  See  sequttahwhau. 
aunchemcokau.  See  v nnau nchemookauonat. 
aune.  See  mine. 
auonat.  See  6ndt. 

dtannegen.  See  adtannegen;  tannegen. 

*eshtoh.  See  *stoh. 
howan.  See  unneu, 
ketasscDt.  See  tahsootam. 
kuttauweu.  See  quttaueu. 

*nanummatin.  See  *sunnddin. 
oncquomonat.  See  iinkquarndnal. 
cokos.  See  wuhkos. 

hoard.  This  word  is  preceded  by  an  asterisk  in  the  manuscript 


o 


349 


I 


* 


Date  Due 


Nat  ck  dictionary. 


w  I  'JKTJ 


0  1163  0221032  7 

TRENT  UNIVERSITY 


<• 


E51  . U6  no.  25 

Trumbull,  James  Hammond 

Natick  dictionary. 

- or-  4  i  - 

DATE  1  lsstei>XirJ 

85149 


3J 

in 


MO 

*1C 


